The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Deserter, by Charles King

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Deserter

Author: Charles King

Release Date: August 20, 2005 [EBook #16557]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DESERTER ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE DESERTER,

BY

CAPT. CHARLES KING, U.S.A.,

AUTHOR OF "THE COLONEL'S DAUGHTER," "MARION'S FAITH," "KITTY'S
CONQUEST," ETC., ETC.

Transcribers note
This e-book of The Deserter is based upon the edition found in The
Deserter, and From the Ranks. Two Novels, by Capt. Charles King.
Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company, 1890. From the Ranks is also
available as a Project Gutenberg e-book.

PHILADELPHIA: J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY.

1890

Copyright, 1887, by J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY.




THE DESERTER.




PRELUDE.


Far up in the Northwest, along the banks of the broad, winding stream
the Sioux call the Elk, a train of white-topped army-wagons is slowly
crawling eastward. The October sun is hot at noon-day, and the dust from
the loose soil rises like heavy smoke and powders every face and form in
the guarding battalion so that features are wellnigh indistinguishable.
Four companies of stalwart, sinewy infantry, with their brown rifles
slung over the shoulder, are striding along in dispersed order, covering
the exposed southern flank from sudden attack, while farther out along
the ridge-line, and far to the front and rear, cavalry skirmishers and
scouts are riding to and fro, searching every hollow and ravine, peering
cautiously over every "divide," and signalling "halt" or "forward" as
the indications warrant.

And yet not a hostile Indian has been seen; not one, even as distant
vedette, has appeared in range of the binoculars, since the scouts rode
in at daybreak to say that big bands were in the immediate neighborhood.
It has been a long, hard summer's work for the troops, and the Indians
have been, to all commands that boasted strength or swiftness, elusive
as the Irishman's flea of tradition. Only to those whose numbers were
weak or whose movements were hampered have they appeared in
fighting-trim. But combinations have been too much for them, and at last
they have been "herded" down to the Elk, have crossed, and are now
seeking to make their way, with women, children, tepees, dogs,
"travois," and the great pony herds, to the fastnesses of the Big Horn;
and now comes the opportunity for which an old Indian-fighter has been
anxiously waiting. In a big cantonment he has held the main body under
his command, while keeping out constant scouting-parties to the east and
north. He knows well that, true to their policy, the Indians will have
scattered into small bands capable of reassembling anywhere that signal
smokes may call them, and his orders are to watch all the crossings of
the Elk and nab them as they come into his district. He watches, despite
the fact that it is his profound conviction that the Indians will be no
such idiots as to come just where they are wanted, and he is in no wise
astonished when a courier comes in on jaded horse to tell him that they
have "doubled" on the other column and are now two or three days' march
away down stream, "making for the big bend." His own scouting-parties
are still out to the eastward: he can pick them up as he goes. He sends
the main body of his infantry, a regiment jocularly known as "The
Riflers," to push for a landing some fifty miles down-stream, scouting
the lower valley of the Sweet Root on the way. He sends his wagon-train,
guarded by four companies of foot and two of horsemen, by the only
practicable road to the bend, while he, with ten seasoned "troops" of
his pet regiment, the ----th Cavalry, starts forthwith on a long detour
in which he hopes to "round up" such bands as may have slipped away from
the general rush. Even as "boots and saddles" is sounding, other
couriers come riding in from Lieutenant Crane's party. He has struck the
trail of a big band.

When the morning sun dawns on the picturesque valley in which the
cantonment nestled but the day before, it illumines an almost deserted
village, and brings no joy to the souls of some twoscore of embittered
civilians who had arrived only the day previous, and whose unanimous
verdict is that the army is a fraud and ought to be abolished. For four
months or more some three regiments had been camping, scouting, roughing
it thereabouts, with not a cent of pay. Then came the wildly exciting
tidings that a boat was on the way up the Missouri with a satrap of the
pay department, vast store of shekels, and a strong guard, and as a
consequence there would be some two thousand men around the cantonment
with pockets full of money and no one to help them spend it, and nothing
suitable to spend it on. It was a duty all citizens owed to the
Territory to hasten to the scene and gather in for local circulation all
that was obtainable of that disbursement; otherwise the curse of the
army might get ahead of them and the boys would gamble it away among
themselves or spend it for vile whiskey manufactured for their sole
benefit. Gallatin Valley was emptied of its prominent practitioners in
the game of poker. The stream was black with "Mackinaw" boats and other
craft. There was a rush for the cantonment that rivalled the multitudes
of the mining days, but all too late. The command was already packing up
when the first contingent arrived, and the commanding officer,
recognizing the fraternity at a glance, warned them outside the limits
of camp that night, declined their services as volunteers on the
impending campaign, and treated them with such calmly courteous
recognition of their true character that the Eastern press was speedily
filled with sneering comment on the hopelessness of ever subduing the
savage tribes of the Northwest when the government intrusts the duty to
upstart officers of the regular service whose sole conception of their
functions is to treat with insult and contempt the hardy frontiersman
whose mere presence with the command would be of incalculable benefit.
"We have it from indisputable authority," says _The Miner's Light_ of
Brandy Gap, "that when our esteemed fellow-citizen Hank Mulligan and
twenty gallant shots and riders like himself went in a body to
General---- at the cantonment and offered their services as volunteers
against the Sioux now devastating the homesteads and settlements of the
Upper Missouri and Yellowstone valleys, they were treated with haughty
and contemptuous refusal by that bandbox caricature of a soldier and
threatened with arrest if they did not quit the camp. When _will_ the
United States learn that its frontiers can never be purged of the Indian
scourges of our civilization until the conduct of affairs in the field
is intrusted to other hands than these martinets of the drill-ground? It
is needless to remark in this connection that the expedition led by
General---- has proved a complete failure, and that the Indians easily
escaped his clumsily-led forces."

The gamblers, though baffled for the time being, of course "get square,"
and more too, with the unfortunate general in this sort of warfare, but
they are a disgusted lot as they hang about the wagon-train as last of
all it is being hitched-in to leave camp. Some victims, of course, they
have secured, and there are no devices of commanding officers which can
protect their men against those sharks of the prairies when the men
themselves are bound to tempt Providence and play. There are two
scowling faces in the cavalry escort that has been left back with the
train, and Captain Hull, the commanding officer, has reprimanded
Sergeants Clancy and Gower in stinging terms for their absence from the
command during the night. There is little question where they spent it,
and both have been "cleaned out." What makes it worse, both have lost
money that belonged to other men in the command, and they are in bad
odor accordingly.

The long day's march has tempered the joviality of the entire column. It
is near sundown, and still they keep plodding onward, making for a
grassy level on the river-bank a good mile farther.

"Old Hull seems bound to leave the sports as far behind as possible, if
he has to march us until midnight," growls the battalion adjutant to his
immediate commander. "By thunder! one would think he was afraid they
would get in a lick at his own pile."

"How much did you say he was carrying?" asks Captain Rayner, checking
his horse for a moment to look back over the valley at the long,
dust-enveloped column.

"Nearly three thousand dollars in one wad."

"How does he happen to have such a sum?"

"Why, Crane left his pay-accounts with him. He drew all that was due his
men who are off with Crane,--twenty of them,--for they had signed the
rolls before going, and were expected back to-day. Then he has some six
hundred dollars company fund; and the men of his troop asked him to take
care of a good deal besides. The old man has been with them so many
years they look upon him as a father and trust him as implicitly as they
would a savings-bank."

"That's all very well," answers Rayner; "but I wouldn't want to carry
any such sum with me."

"It's different with Hull's men, captain. They are ordered in through
the posts and settlements. They have a three weeks' march ahead of them
when they get through their scout, and they want their money on the way.
It was only after they had drawn it that the news came of the Indians'
crossing and of our having to jump for the warpath. Everybody thought
yesterday morning that the campaign was about over so far as we are
concerned. Halloo! here comes young Hayne. Now, what does _he_ want?"

Riding a quick, nervous little bay troop horse, a slim-built officer,
with boyish face, laughing blue eyes, and sunny hair, comes loping up
the long prairie wave; he shouts cheery greeting to one or two brother
subalterns who are plodding along beside their men, and exchanges some
merry chaff with Lieutenant Ross, who is prone to growl at the luck
which has kept him afoot and given to this favored youngster a "mount"
and a temporary staff position. The boy's spirits and fun seem to jar on
Rayner's nerves. He regards him blackly as he rides gracefully towards
the battalion commander, and with decidedly nonchalant ease of manner
and an "off-hand" salute that has an air about it of saying, "I do this
sort of thing because one has to, but it doesn't really mean anything,
you know," Mr. Hayne accosts his superior:

"Ah, good-evening, captain. I have just come back from the front, and
Captain Hull directed me to give you his compliments and say that we
would camp in the bend yonder, and he would like you to post strong
pickets and have a double guard to-night."

"Have _me_ post double guards! How the devil does he expect me to do
that after marching all day?"

"I did not inquire, sir: he might have told me 'twas none of my
business, don't you know?" And Mr. Hayne has the insufferable hardihood
to wink at the battalion adjutant,--a youth of two years' longer service
than his own.

"Well, Mr. Hayne, this is no matter for levity," says Rayner, angrily.
"What does Captain Hull mean to do with his own men, if I'm to do the
guard?"

"That is another point, Captain Rayner, which I had not the requisite
effrontery to inquire into. Now, _you_ might ask him, but I couldn't,
don't you know?" responds Hayne, smiling amiably the while into the
wrathful face of his superior. It serves only to make the indignant
captain more wrathful; and no wonder. There has been no love lost
between the two since Hayne joined the Riflers early the previous year.
He came in from civil life, a city-bred boy, fresh from college, full of
spirits, pranks, fun of every kind; a wonderfully keen hand with the
billiard-cue; a knowing one at cards and such games of chance as college
boys excel at; a musician of no mean pretensions, and an irrepressible
leader in all the frolics and frivolities of his comrades. He had leaped
to popularity from the start. He was full of courtesy and gentleness to
women, and became a pet in social circles. He was frank, free,
off-handed with his associates, spending lavishly, "treating" with
boyish ostentation on all occasions, living quite _en grand seigneur_,
for he seemed to have a little money outside his pay,--"a windfall from
a good old duffer of an uncle," as he had explained it. His father, a
scholarly man who had been summoned to an important under-office in the
State Department during the War of the Rebellion, had lived out his
honored life in Washington and died poor, as such men must ever die. It
was his wish that his handsome, spirited, brave-hearted boy should enter
the army, and long after the sod had hardened over the father's
peaceful grave the young fellow donned his first uniform and went out to
join "The Riflers." High-spirited, joyous, full of laughing fun, he was
"Pet" Hayne before he had been among them six months. But within the
year he had made one or two enemies. It could not be said of him that he
showed that deference to rank and station which was expected of a junior
officer; and among the seniors were several whom he speedily designated
"unconscionable old duffers" and treated with as little semblance of
respect as a second lieutenant could exhibit and be permitted to live.
Rayner prophesied of him that, as he had no balance and was burning his
candle at both ends, he would come to grief in short order. Hayne
retorted that the only balance that Rayner had any respect for was one
at the banker's, and that it was notorious in Washington that the
captain's father had made most of his money in government contracts, and
that the captain's original commission in the regulars was secured
through well-paid Congressional influence. The fact that Rayner had
developed into a good officer did not wipe out the recollection of these
facts; and he could have throttled Hayne for reviving them. It was "a
game of give and take," said the youngster; and he "behaved himself" to
those who were at all decent in their manner to him.

It was a thorn in Rayner's flesh, therefore, when Hayne joined from
leave of absence, after experiences not every officer would care to
encounter in getting back to his regiment, that Captain Hull should have
induced the general to detail him in place of the invalided field
quartermaster when the command was divided. Hayne would have been a
junior subaltern in Rayner's little battalion but for that detail, and
it annoyed the captain more seriously than he would confess.

"It is all an outrage and a blunder to pick out a boy like that," he
growls between his set teeth as Hayne canters blithely away. "Here he's
been away from the regiment all summer long, having a big time and
getting head over ears in debt, I hear, and the moment he rejoins they
put him in charge of the wagon-train as field quartermaster. It's
putting a premium on being young and cheeky,--besides absenteeism," he
continues, growing blacker every minute.

"Well, captain," answers his adjutant, injudiciously, "I think you don't
give Hayne credit for coming back on the jump the moment we were ordered
out. It was no fault of his he could not reach us. He took chances _I_
wouldn't take."

"Oh, yes! you kids all swear by Hayne because he's a good fellow and
sings a jolly song and plays the piano--and poker. One of these days
he'll swamp you all, sure as shooting. He's in debt _now_, and it'll
fetch him before you know it. What he needs is to be under a captain who
could discipline him a little. By Jove, I'd do it!" And Rayner's teeth
emphasize the assertion.

The young adjutant thinks it advisable to say nothing that may provoke
further vehemence. All the same, he remembers Rayner's bitterness of
manner, and has abundant cause to.

When the next morning breaks, chill and pallid, a change has come in the
aspect of affairs. During the earliest hour of the dawn the red light of
a light-draught river-boat startled the outlying pickets down-stream,
and the Far West, answering the muffled hail from shore, responded,
through the medium of a mate's stentorian tones, "News that'll rout you
fellows out." The sun is hardly peeping over the jagged outline of the
eastern hills when, with Rayner's entire battalion aboard, she is
steaming again down-stream, with orders to land at the mouth of the
Sweet Root. There the four companies will disembark in readiness to join
the rest of the regiment.

All day long again the wagon-train twists and wriggles through an ashen
section of Les Mauvaises Terres. It is a tedious, trying march for
Hull's little command of troopers,--all that is now left to guard the
train. The captain is constantly out on the exposed flank, eagerly
scanning the rough country to the south, and expectant any moment of an
attack from that direction. He and his men, as well as the horses,
mules, and teamsters, are fairly tired out when at nightfall they park
the wagons in a big semicircle, with the broad river forming a shining
chord to the arc of white canvas. All the live-stock are safely herded
within the enclosure; a few reliable soldiers are posted well out to the
south and east, to guard against surprise, and the veteran Sergeant
Clancy is put in command of the sentries. The captain gives strict
injunctions as to the importance of these duties; for he is far from
easy in his mind over the situation. The Riflers, he knows, are over in
the valley of the Sweet Root. The steamer with Rayner's men is tied up
at the bank some five miles below, around the bend. The ----th are far
off to the northward across the Elk, as ordered, and must be expecting
on the morrow to make for the old Indian "ferry" opposite Battle Butte.
The main body of the Sioux are reported farther down stream, but he
feels it in his bones that there are numbers of them within signal, and
he wishes with all his heart the ----th were here. Still, the general
was sure he would stir up war-parties on the other shore. Individually,
he has had very little luck in scouting during the summer, and he cannot
help wishing he were with the rest of the crowd instead of here,
train-guarding.

Presently Mr. Hayne appears, elastic and debonair as though he had not
been working like a horse all day. His voice sounds so full of cheer and
life that Hull looks up smilingly:

"Well, youngster, you seem to love this frontier life."

"Every bit of it, captain. I was cut out for the army, as father
thought."

"We used to talk it over a good deal in the old days when I was
stationed around Washington," answers Hull. "Your father was the warmest
friend I had in civil circles, and he made it very pleasant for me. How
little we thought it would be my luck to have you for quartermaster!"

"The fellows seemed struck all of a heap in the Riflers at the idea of
your applying for me, captain. I was ready to swear it was all on
father's account, and would have told them so, only Rayner happened to
be the first man to tackle me on the subject, and he was so crusty about
it I kept the whole thing to myself rather than give him any
satisfaction."

"Larry, my boy, I'm no preacher, but I want to be the friend to you your
father was to me. You are full of enthusiasm and life and spirits, and
you love the army ways and have made yourself very popular with the
youngsters, but I'm afraid you are too careless and independent where
the seniors are concerned. Rayner is a good soldier; and you show him
very scant respect, I'm told."

"Well, he's such an interfering fellow. They will all tell you I'm
respectful enough to--to the captains I like--"

"That's just it, Lawrence. So long as you like a man your manner is what
it should be. What a young soldier ought to learn is to be courteous and
respectful to senior officers whether he likes them or not. It costs an
effort sometimes, but it tells. You never know what trouble you are
laying up for yourself in the army by bucking against men you don't
like. They may not be in position to resent it at the time, but the time
is mighty apt to come when they _will_ be, and then you are helpless."

"Why, Captain Hull, I don't see it that way at all. It seems to me that
so long as an officer attends to his duty, minds his own business, and
behaves like a gentleman, no one can harm him; especially when all the
good fellows of the regiment are his friends, as they are mine, I think,
in the Riflers."

"Ah, Hayne, it is a hard thing to teach a youngster that--that there are
men who find it very easy to make their juniors' lives a burden to them,
and without overstepping a regulation. It is harder yet to say that
friends in the army are a good deal like friends out of it: one only has
to get into serious trouble to find how few they are. God grant you may
never have to learn it, my boy, as many another has had to, by sharp
experience! Now we must get a good night's rest. You sleep like a log, I
see, and I can only take cat-naps. Confound this money! How I wish I
could get rid of it!"

"Where do you keep it to-night?"

"Right here in my saddle-bags under my head. Nobody can touch them that
I do not wake; and my revolver is here under the blanket. Hold on! Let's
take a look and see if everything is all right." He holds a little
camp-lantern over the bags, opens the flap, and peers in. "Yes,--all
serene. I got a big hunk of green sealing-wax from the paymaster and
sealed it all up in one package with the memorandum-list inside. It's
all safe so far,--even to the hunk of sealing-wax.--What is it,
sergeant?"

A tall, soldierly, dark-eyed trooper appears at the door-way of the
little tent, and raises his gauntleted hand in salute. His language,
though couched in the phraseology of the soldier, tells both in choice
of words and in the intonation of every phrase that he is a man whose
antecedents have been far different from those of the majority of the
rank and file:

"Will the captain permit me to take my horse and those of three or four
more men outside the corral? Sergeant Clancy says he has no authority to
allow it. We have found a patch of excellent grass, sir, and there is
hardly any left inside. I will sleep by my picket-pin, and one of us
will keep awake all the time, if the captain will permit."

"How far away is it, sergeant?"

"Not seventy-five yards, sir,--close to the river-bank east of us."

"Very well. Send Sergeant Clancy here, and I'll give the necessary
orders."

The soldier quietly salutes, and disappears in the gathering darkness.

"That's what I like about that man Gower," says the captain, after a
moment's silence. "He is always looking out for his horse. If he were
not such a gambler and rake he would make a splendid first-sergeant.
Fine-looking fellow, isn't he?"

"Yes, sir. That is a face that one couldn't well forget. Who was the
other sergeant you overhauled for getting fleeced by those sharps at the
cantonment?"

"Clancy? He's on guard to-night. A very different character."

"I don't know him by sight as yet. Well, good-night, sir. I'll take
myself off and go to my own tent."

       *       *       *       *       *

Daybreak again, and far to the east the sky is all ablaze. The mist is
creeping from the silent shallows under the banks, but all is life and
vim along the shore. With cracking whip, tugging trace, sonorous
blasphemy, and ringing shout, the long train is whirling ahead almost at
the run. All is athrill with excitement, and bearded faces have a
strange, set look about the jaws, and eyes gleam with eager light and
peer searchingly from every rise far over to the southeast, where stands
a tumbling heap of hills against the lightening sky. "Off there, are
they?" says a burly trooper, dismounting hastily to tighten up the
"cinch" of his weather-beaten saddle. "We can make it quick enough, 's
soon as we get rid of these blasted wagons." And, swinging into saddle
again, he goes cantering down the slope, his charger snorting with
exhilaration in the keen morning air.

Before dawn a courier has galloped into camp, bearing a despatch from
the commanding officer of the Riflers. It says but few words, but they
are full of meaning: "We have found a big party of hostiles. They are in
strong position, and have us at disadvantage. Rayner with his four
companies is hurrying to us. Leave all wagons with the boat under guard,
and come with every horse and man you can bring."

Before seven o'clock the wagons are parked close along the bank beside
the Far West, and Hull, with all the men he can muster,--some fifty,--is
trotting ahead on the trail of Rayner's battalion. With him rides Mr.
Hayne, eager and enthusiastic. Before ten o'clock, far up along the
slopes they see the blue line of skirmishers, and the knots of reserves
farther down, all at a stand. In ten minutes they ride with foaming
reins in behind a low ridge on which, flat on their faces and cautiously
peering over the crest, some hundred infantrymen are disposed. Others,
officers and file-closers, are moving to and fro in rear. They are of
Rayner's battalion. Farther back, down in a ravine a dozen forms are
outstretched upon the turf, and others are bending over them,
ministering to the needs of those who are not past help already. Several
officers crowd around the leading horsemen, and Hull orders, "Halt,
dismount, and loosen girths." The grave faces show that the infantry has
had poor luck, and the situation is summarized in few words. The Indians
are in force occupying the ravines and ridges opposite them and
confronting the six companies farther over to the west. Two attacks have
been made, but the Indian fire swept every approach, and both were
unsuccessful. Several soldiers were shot dead, others severely wounded.
Lieutenant Warren's leg is shattered below the knee; Captain Blount is
killed.

"Where's Rayner?" asks Hull, with grave face.

"Just gone off with the chief to look at things over on the other front.
The colonel is hopping. He is bound to have those Indians out of there
or drop a-trying. They'll be back in a minute. The general had a rousing
fight with Dull Knife's people down the river last evening. You missed
it again, Hull: all the ----th were there but F and K,--and of course
old Firewater wants to make as big a hit here."

"The ----th fighting down the river last night?" asks Hull, in amaze.

"Yes,--swept clean round them and ran 'em into the stream, they say. I
wish we had them where we could see 'em at all. You don't get the
glimpse of a head, even; but all those rocks are lined with the beggars.
Damn them!" says the adjutant, feelingly.

"We'll get our chance _here_, then," replies Hull, reflectively. "I'll
creep up and take a look at it. Take my horse, orderly."

He is back in two minutes, graver than before, but his bearing is
spirited and firm. Hayne watches him with kindling eye.

"You'll take me in with you when you charge?" he asks.

"It is no place to charge there. The ground is all cut up with ravines
and gullies, and they've got a cross-fire that sweeps it clean. We'll
probably go in on the other flank; it's more open there. Here comes the
chief now."

Two officers come riding hastily around a projecting point of the slope
and spur at rapid gait towards the spot where the cavalry have
dismounted and are breathing their horses. There is hardly time for
salutations. A gray-headed, keen-eyed, florid-faced old soldier is the
colonel, and he is snapping with electricity, apparently.

"This way, Hull. Come right here, and I'll show you what you are to do."
And, followed by Rayner, Hull, and Hayne, the chief rides sharply over
to the extreme left of the position and points to the frowning ridge
across the intervening swale.

"There, Hull: there are twenty or thirty of the rascals in there who get
a flank fire on us when we attack on our side. What I want you to do is
to mount your men, let them draw pistol and be all ready. Rayner, here,
will line the ridge to keep them down in front. I'll go back to the
right and order the attack at once. The moment we begin and you hear our
shots, you give a yell, and charge full tilt across there, so as to
drive out those fellows in that ravine. We can do the rest. Do you
understand?"

"I understand, colonel; but--is it your order that I attempt to charge
mounted across that ground?"

"Why, certainly! It isn't the best in the world, but you can make it.
They can't do very much damage to your men before you reach them. It's
_got_ to be done; it's the only way."

"Very good, sir: that ends it!" is the calm, soldierly reply; and the
colonel goes bounding away.

A moment later the troop is in saddle, eager, wiry, bronzed fellows
every one, and the revolvers are in hand and being carefully examined.
Then Captain Hull signals to Hayne, while Rayner and three or four
soldiers sit in silence, watching the man who is to lead the charge. He
dismounts at a little knoll a few feet away, tosses his reins to the
trumpeter, and steps to his saddle-bags. Hayne, too, dismounts.

Taking his watch and chain from the pocket of his hunting-shirt, he
opens the saddle-bag on the near side and takes therefrom two
packets,--one heavily sealed,--which he hands to Hayne.

"In case I--don't come back, you know what to do with these,--as I told
you last night."

Hayne only looks imploringly at him: "You are not going to leave me
_here_, captain?"

"Yes, Hayne. You can't go with us. Hark! There they go at the right. Are
the packages all right?"

Hayne, with stunned faculties, thinking only of the charge he longs to
make,--not of the one he has to keep,--replies he knows not what. There
is a ringing bugle-call far off among the rocks to the westward; a
rousing cheer; a rattling volley. Rayner springs off to his men on the
hill-side. Hull spurs in front of his eager troop, holding high his
pistol-hand:

"Now, men, follow till I drop; and then keep ahead! Come on!"

There is a furious sputter of hoofs, a rush of excited steeds up the
gentle slope, a glad outburst of cheers as they sweep across the ridge
and out of sight, then the clamor and yell of frantic battle; and when
at last it dies away, the Riflers are panting over the hard-won position
and shaking hands with some few silent cavalrymen. They have carried the
ridge, captured the migrating village, squaws, ponies, travois, and
pappooses; their "long Toms" have sent many a stalwart warrior to the
mythical hunting-grounds, and the peppery colonel's triumph is complete.

But Lawrence Hayne, with all the light gone from his brave young face,
stands mutely looking down, upon the stiffening frame of his father's
old friend, and his, who lies shot through the heart.




I.


In the Pullman car of the westward-bound express, half-way across the
continent, two passengers were gazing listlessly out over the wintry
landscape. It was a bitter morning in February. North and south the
treeless prairie rolled away in successive ridge and depression. The
snow lay deep in the dry ravines and streaked the sea-like surface with
jagged lines of foam between which lay broad spaces clean-swept by the
gale. Heavy masses of cloud, dark and forbidding, draped the sky from
zenith to horizon, and the air was thick with spiteful gusts and spits
of snow, crackling against the window-panes, making fierce dashes every
time a car door was hurriedly opened, and driving about the platforms
like a myriad swarm of fleecy and aggressive gnats raging for battle.
Every now and then, responsive to some wilder blast, a blinding white
cloud came whirling from the depths of the nearest gully and breaking
like spray over the snow fence along the line. Not a sign of life was
visible. The tiny mounds in the villages of the prairie-dogs seemed
blocked and frozen; even the trusty sentinel had "deserted post" and
huddled with his fellows for warmth and shelter in the bowels of the
earth. Fluttering owl and skulking coyote, too, had vanished from the
face of nature. Timid antelope--fleetest coursers of the prairie--and
stolid horned cattle had gone, none knew whither, nor cared to know
until the "blizzard" had subsided. Two heavy engines fought their way,
panting, into the very teeth of the gale and slowly wound the long train
after them up-grade among the foot-hills of the great plateau of the
Rockies. Once in a while, when stopping for a moment at some group of
brown-painted sheds and earth-battened shanties, the wind moaned and
howled among the iron braces and brake-chains beneath the car and made
such mournful noise that it was a relief to start once more and lose
sound of its wailing in the general rumble. As for the scenery, only as
a picture of shiver-provoking monotony and desolation would one care to
take a second look.

And yet, some miles ahead, striving hard to reach the railway in time to
intercept this very train, a small battalion of cavalry was struggling
through the blasts, officers and men afoot and dragging their own
benumbed limbs and half-benumbed chargers through the drifts that lay
deep at the bottom of every "coulee." Some few soldiers remained in
saddle: they were too frozen to walk at all. Some few fell behind, and
would have thrown themselves flat upon the prairie in the lethargy that
is but premonition of death by freezing. Like men half deadened by
morphine, their rescue depended on heroic measures, humane in their
seeming brutality. Officers who at other times were all gentleness now
fell upon the hapless stragglers with kicks and blows. As the train drew
up at the platform of a station in mid-prairie, a horseman enveloped in
fur and frost and steam from his panting steed reined up beside the
leading engine and shouted to the occupants of the cab,--

"For God's sake hold on a few minutes. We've got a dozen frozen men with
us we must send on to Fort Warrener." And the train was held.

Meantime, those far to the rear in the sleeper knew nothing of what was
going on ahead. The car was warm and comfortable, and most of its
occupants were apparently appreciative of its shelter and coseyness in
contrast with the cheerless scene without. A motherly-looking woman had
produced her knitting, and was blithely clicking away at her needles,
while her enterprising son, a youth of four summers and undaunted
confidence in human nature, tacked up and down the aisle and made
impetuous incursions on the various sections by turns, receiving such
modified welcome as could be accorded features streaked with mingled
candy and cinders, and fingers whose propensity to cling to whatsoever
they touched was due no more to instincts of a predatory nature than to
the adhesive properties of the glucose which formed so large a
constituent of the confections he had been industriously consuming since
early morning. Four men playing whist in the rearmost section, two or
three commercial travellers, whose intimacy with the porter and airs of
easy proprietorship told of an apparent controlling interest in the
road, a young man of reserved manners, reading in a section all by
himself, a baby sleeping quietly upon the seat opposite the two
passengers first mentioned, and a Maltese kitten curled up in the lap of
one of them, completed the list of occupants.

The proximity of the baby and the kitten furnishes strong presumptive
evidence of the sex and general condition of the two passengers referred
to, and renders detail superfluous. A baby rarely travels without a
woman, or a kitten with a woman already encumbered with a baby. The baby
belonged to the elder passenger, the kitten to the younger. The one was
a buxom matron, the other a slender maid. In their ages there must have
been a difference of fifteen years; in feature there was still wider
disparity. The elder was a fine-looking woman, and one who prided
herself upon the Junoesque proportions which she occasionally exhibited
in a stroll for exercise up and down the aisle. Yet no one would call
her a beauty. Her eyes were of a somewhat fishy and uncertain blue; the
lids were tinged with an unornamental pink that told of irritation of
the adjacent interior surface and of possible irritability of temper.
Her complexion was of that mottled type which is so sore a trial to its
possessor and yet so inestimable a comfort to social rivals; but her
features were handsome, her teeth fine, her dress, bearing, and demeanor
those of a woman of birth and breeding, and yet one who might have
resented the intimation that she was not strikingly handsome. She looked
like a woman with a will of her own; her head was high, her step was
firm; it was of just such a walk as hers that Virgil wrote his "_vera
incessu patuit dea_," and she made the young man in the section by
himself think of that very passage as he glanced at her from under his
heavy, bushy eyebrows. She looked, moreover, like a woman with a
capacity for influencing people contrary to their will and judgment, and
with a decided fondness for the exercise of that unpopular function.
There was the air of _grande dame_ about her, despite the simplicity of
her dress, which, though of rich material, was severely plain. She wore
no jewelry. Her hands were snugly gloved, and undisfigured by the
distortions of any ring except the marriage circlet. Her manner attested
her a person of consequence in her social circle and one who realized
the fact. She had repelled, though without rudeness or discourtesy, the
garrulous efforts of the motherly knitter to be sociable. She had
promptly inspired the small, candy-crusted explorer with such awe that
he had refrained from further visits after his first confiding attempt
to poke a sticky finger through the baby's velvety cheek. She had spared
little scorn in her rejection of the _bourgeois_ advances of the
commercial traveller with the languishing eyes of Israel: he confided to
his comrades, in relating the incident, that she was smart enough to see
that it wasn't _her_ he was hankering to know, but the pretty sister by
her side; and when challenged to prove that they _were_ sisters,--a
statement which aroused the scepticism of his shrewd associates,--he had
replied, substantially,--

"How do I know? 'Cause I saw their pass before you was up this morning,
cully. It's for Mrs. Captain Rayner and sister, and they're going out
here to Fort Warrener. That's how I know." And the porter of the car had
confirmed the statement in the sanctity of the smoking-room.

And yet--such is the uncertainty of feminine temperament--Mrs. Rayner
was no more incensed at the commercial "gent" because he had obtruded
his attentions than she was at the young man reading in his own section
because he had refrained. Nearly twenty-four hours had elapsed since
they crossed the Missouri, and in all that time not once had she
detected in him a glance that betrayed the faintest interest in her,
or--still more remarkable--in the unquestionably lovely girl at her
side. Intrusiveness she might resent, but indifference she would and
did. Who was this youth, she wondered, who not once had so much as
stolen a look at the sweet, bonny face of her maiden sister? Surely
'twas a face any man would love to gaze upon,--so fair, so exquisite in
contour and feature, so pearly in complexion, so lovely in the deep,
dark brown of its shaded eyes.

The bold glances of the four card-players she had defiantly returned,
and vanquished. Those men, like the travelling gents, were creatures of
coarser mould; but her experienced eye told her the solitary occupant of
the opposite section was a gentleman. The clear cut of his pale
features, the white, slender hand and shapely foot, the style and finish
of his quiet travelling-dress, the soft modulation and refined tone of
his voice on the one occasion when she heard him reply to some
importunity of the train-boy with his endless round of equally
questionable figs and fiction, the book he was reading,--a volume of
Emerson,--all combined to speak of a culture and position equal to her
own. She had been over the trans-continental railways often enough to
know that it was permissible for gentlemen to render their
fellow-passengers some slight attention which would lead to mutual
introductions if desirable; and this man refused to see that the
opportunity was open to him.

True, when first she took her survey of those who were to be her
fellow-travellers at the "transfer" on the Missouri, she decided that
here was one against whom it would be necessary to guard the approaches.
She had good and sufficient reasons for wanting no young man as
attractive in appearance as this one making himself interesting to
pretty Nellie on their journey. She had already decided what Nellie's
future was to be. Never, indeed, would she have taken her to the gay
frontier station whither she was now _en route_, had not that future
been already settled to her satisfaction. Nellie Travers, barely out of
school, was betrothed, and willingly so, to the man she, her devoted
elder sister, had especially chosen. Rare and most unlikely of
conditions! she had apparently fallen in love with the man picked out
for her by somebody else. She was engaged to Mrs. Rayner's fascinating
friend Mr. Steven Van Antwerp, a scion of an old and esteemed and
wealthy family; and Mr. Van Antwerp, who had been educated abroad, and
had a Heidelberg scar on his left cheek, and dark, lustrous eyes, and
wavy hair,--almost raven,--was a devoted lover, though fully fifteen
years Miss Nellie's senior.

Full of bliss and comfort was Mrs. Rayner's soul as she journeyed
westward to rejoin her husband at the distant frontier post she had not
seen since the early spring. Army woman as she was, born and bred under
the shadow of the flag, a soldier's daughter, a soldier's wife, she had
other ambitions for her beautiful Nell. Worldly to the core, she herself
would never have married in the army but for the unusual circumstance of
a wealthy subaltern among the officers of her father's regiment.
Tradition had it that Mr. Rayner was not among the number of those who
sighed for Kate Travers's guarded smiles. Her earlier victims were kept
a-dangling until Rayner, too, succumbed, and then were sent adrift. She
meant that no penniless subaltern should carry off her "baby
sister,"--they had long been motherless,--and a season at the sea-shore
had done her work well. Steven Van Antwerp, with genuine distress and
loneliness, went back to his duties in Wall Street after seeing them
safely on their way to the West. "Guard her well for me," he whispered
to Mrs. Rayner. "I dread those fellows in buttons." And he shivered
unaccountably as he spoke.

Nellie was pledged, therefore, and this youth in the Pullman was not one
of "those fellows in buttons," so far as Mrs. Rayner knew, but she was
ready to warn him off, and meant to do so, until, to her surprise, she
saw that he gave no symptom of a desire to approach. By noon of the
second day she was as determined to extract from him some sign of
interest as she had been determined to resent it. I can in no wise
explain or account for this. The fact is stated without remark.

"What on earth can we be stopping so long here for?" was Mrs. Rayner's
somewhat petulant inquiry, addressed to no one in particular. There was
no reply. Miss Travers was busily twitching the ears of the kitten at
the moment and sparring with upraised finger at the threatening paw.

"Do look out of the window, Nell, and see."

"There is nothing to see, Kate,--nothing but whirling drifts and a big
water-tank all covered with ice. Br-r-r-r! how cold it looks!" she
answered, after vainly flattening her face against the inner pane.

"There must be something the matter, though," persisted Mrs. Rayner. "We
have been here full five minutes, and we are behind time now. At this
rate we'll never get to Warrener to-night. I do wish the porter would
stay here where he belongs."

The young man quietly laid down his book and arose. "I will inquire,
madame," he said, with grave courtesy. "You shall know in a moment."

"How _very_ kind of you!" said the lady. "Indeed I must not trouble you.
I'm sure the porter will be here after a while."

And even as she spoke, and as he was pulling on an overcoat, the train
rumbled off again. Then came an exclamation, this time from the younger:

"Why, Kate! Look! see all these men,--and horses! Why, they are
soldiers,--cavalry! Oh, how I love to see them again! But, oh, how cold
they look!--frozen!"

"Who _can_ they be?" said Mrs. Rayner, all vehement interest now, and
gazing eagerly from the window at the lowered heads of the horses and
the muffled figures in blue and fur. "What _can_ they be doing in the
field in such awful weather? I cannot recognize one of them, or tell
officers from men. Surely that must be Captain Wayne,--and Major
Stannard. Oh, what can it mean?"

The young man had suddenly leaped to the window behind them, and was
gazing out with an eagerness and interest little less apparent than her
own, but in a moment the train had whisked them out of sight of the
storm-beaten troopers. Then he hurried to the rear window of the car,
and Mrs. Rayner as hastily followed.

"_Do_ you know them?" she asked.

"Yes. That _was_ Major Stannard. It is his battalion of the ----th
Cavalry, and they have been out scouting after renegade Cheyennes.
Pardon me, madame, I must go forward and see who have boarded the
train."

He stopped at his section, and again she followed him, her eyes full of
anxiety. He was busy tugging at a flask in his travelling-bag.

"You know them! Do you know--have you heard of any infantry being out?
Pardon me for detaining you, but I am very anxious. My husband is
Captain Rayner, of Fort Warrener."

"No infantry have been sent, madame, I--have reason to know; at least,
none from Warrener."

And with that he hurriedly bowed and left her. The next moment, flask in
hand, he was crossing the storm-swept platform and making his way to the
head of the train.

"I believe he is an officer," said Mrs. Rayner to her sister. "Who else
would be apt to know about the movement of the troops? Did you notice
how gentle his manner was?--and he never smiled: he has such a sad face.
Yet he can't be an officer, or he would have made himself known to us
long ago."

"Is there no name on the satchel?" asked Miss Travers, with pardonable
curiosity. "He has an interesting face,--not handsome." And a dreamy
look came into her deep eyes. She was thinking, no doubt, of a dark,
oval, _distingue_ face with raven hair and moustache. The youth in the
travelling-suit was not tall, like Steven,--not singularly, romantically
handsome, like Steven. Indeed, he was of less interest to her than to
her married sister.

Mrs. Rayner could see no name on the satchel,--only two initials; and
they revealed very little.

"I have half a mind to peep at the fly-leaf of that book," she said. "He
walked just like a soldier: but there isn't anything there to indicate
what he is," she continued, with a doubtful glance at the items
scattered about the now vacant section. "Why isn't that porter here? He
ought to know who people are."

As though to answer her request, in came the porter, dishevelled and
breathless. He made straight for the satchel they had been scrutinizing,
and opened it without ceremony. Both ladies regarded this proceeding
with natural astonishment, and Mrs. Rayner was about to interfere and
question his right to search the luggage of passengers, when the man
turned hurriedly towards them, exhibiting a little bundle of
handkerchiefs, his broad Ethiopian face clouded with anxiety and
concern:

"The gentleman told me to take all his handkerchiefs. We'se got a dozen
frozen soldiers in the baggage-car,--some of 'em mighty bad,--and
they'se tryin' to make 'em comfortable until they get to the fort."

"Soldiers frozen! Why do you take them in the baggage-car?--such a barn
of a place! Why weren't they brought here, where we could make them warm
and care for them?" exclaimed Mrs. Rayner, in impulsive indignation.

"Laws, ma'am! never do in the world to bring frozen people into a hot
car! Sure to make their ears an' noses drop off, that would! Got to keep
'em in the cold and pile snow around 'em. That gentleman sittin'
here,--he knows," he continued: "he's an officer, and him and the
doctor's workin' with 'em now."

And Mrs. Rayner, vanquished by a statement of facts well known to her
yet forgotten in the first impetuosity of her criticism, relapsed into
the silence of temporary defeat.

"He _is_ an officer, then," said Miss Travers, presently. "I wonder what
he belongs to."

"Not to our regiment, I'm sure. Probably to the cavalry. He knew Major
Stannard and other officers whom we passed there."

"Did he speak to them?"

"No: there was no time. We were beyond hearing-distance when he ran to
the back door of the car; and there was no time before that. But it's
very odd!"

"What's very odd?"

"Why, his conduct. It is so strange that he has not made himself known
to us, if he's an officer."

"Probably he doesn't know you--or we--are connected with the army,
Kate."

"Oh, yes, he does. The porter knows perfectly well, and I told him just
before he left."

"Yes, but he didn't know before that time, did he?"

"He ought to have known," said Mrs. Rayner, uncompromisingly. "At least,
he should if he had taken the faintest interest. I mentioned Captain
Rayner so that he could not help hearing."

This statement being one that Miss Travers could in no wise
contradict,--as it was one, indeed, that Mrs. Rayner could have
dispensed with as unnecessary,--the younger lady again betook herself to
silence and pulling the kitten's ears.

"Even if he didn't know before," continued her sister, after a pause in
which she had apparently been brooding over the indifference of the
young man in question, "he ought to have made himself known after I told
him who I was." Another pause. "That's what I did it for," she wound up,
conclusively.

"And that's what I thought," said Miss Travers, with a quiet smile.
"However, he had no time then: he was hurrying off to see whether any of
the soldiers had come on board. He took his flask with him, and
apparently was in haste to offer someone a drink. I'm sure that is what
papa used to do," she added, as she saw a frown gathering on her
sister's face.

"What papa did just after the war--a time when everybody drank--is not
at all the proper thing now. Captain Rayner never touches it; and I
don't allow it in the house."

"Still, I should think it a very useful article when a lot of frozen and
exhausted men are on one's hands," said Miss Travers. "That was but a
small flask he had, and I'm sure they will need more."

There came a rush of cold air from the front, and the swinging door blew
open ahead of the porter, who was heard banging shut the outer portal.
Then he hurried in.

"Can some of you gentlemen oblige me with some whiskey or brandy?" he
asked. "We've got some frozen soldiers aboard. Two of 'em are pretty
nearly gone."

Two of the card-players dropped their hands and started for their
section at once. Before they could rummage in their bags for the
required article, Mrs. Rayner's voice was heard: "Take this, porter."
And she held forth a little silver flask. "I have more in my trunk if it
is needed," she added, while a blush mounted to her forehead as she saw
the quizzical smile on her sister's face. "You know I _always_ carry it
in travelling, Nellie,--in case of accident or illness; and I'm most
thankful I have it now."

"Ever so much obliged, ma'am," said the porter, "but this would be only
a thimbleful, and I can get a quart bottle of this gentleman."

"Where are they?" said the person thus referred to, as he came down the
aisle with a big brown bottle in his hand. "Come, Jim, let's go and see
what we can do. One of you gentlemen take my place in the game," he
continued, indicating the commercial gents, two of whom, nothing loath,
dropped into the vacated seats, while the others pushed on to the front
of the train. The porter hesitated one moment.

"Yes, take my flask: I shouldn't feel satisfied without doing something.
And please say to the officer that I'm Mrs. Rayner,--Mrs. Captain
Rayner, of the infantry,--and ask if there isn't something I can do to
help."

"Yes, ma'am; I will, ma'am. Oh, he knows who you are: I done told him
last night. He's goin' to Fort Warrener, too." And, touching his cap,
away went the porter.

"There! He _did_ know all along," said Mrs. Rayner, triumphantly. "It is
most extraordinary!"

"Well, is it the proper thing for people in the army to introduce
themselves when travelling? How are they to know it will be agreeable?"

"Agreeable! Why, Nellie, it's _always_ done,--especially when ladies are
travelling without escort, as we are. The commonest civility should
prompt it; and officers always send their cards by the porter the moment
they find army ladies are on the train. I don't understand this one at
all,--especially--" But here she broke off abruptly.

"Especially what?" asked Miss Nell, with an inspiration of maidenly
curiosity.

"Especially nothing. Never mind now." And here the baby began to fidget,
and stir about, and stretch forth his chubby hands, and thrust his
knuckles in his eyes, and pucker up his face in alarming contortions
preparatory to a wail, and, after one or two soothing and tentative
sounds of "sh--sh--sh--sh" from the maternal lips, the matron abandoned
the attempt to induce a second nap, and picked him up in her arms, where
he presently began to take gracious notice of his pretty aunt and the
kitten.

Two hours later, just as the porter had notified them that Warrener
Station would be in sight in five minutes, the young man of the
opposite section returned to the car. He looked tired, very anxious,
and his face was paler and the sad expression more pronounced than
before. The train-conductor stopped him to speak of some telegrams that
had been sent, and both ladies noted the respect which the railway
official threw into the tone in which he spoke. The card-players stopped
their game and went up to ask after the frozen men. It was not until the
whistle was sounding for the station that he stood before them and with
a grave and courteous bow held forth Mrs. Rayner's silver flask.

"It was a blessing to one poor fellow at least, and I thank you for him,
madame," he said.

"I have been so anxious. I wanted to do something. Did you not get my
message, Mr.----?" she asked, with intentional pause that he might
supply the missing name.

"Indeed there was nothing we could ask of you," he answered, totally
ignoring the evident invitation. "I am greatly obliged to you for your
kindness, but we had abundant help, and you really could not have
reached the car in the face of this gale. Good-morning, madame." And
with that he raised his fur travelling-cap and quickly turned to his
section and busied himself strapping up his various belongings.

"The man must be a woman-hater," she whispered to Miss Travers, "He's
going to get out here, too. Who _can_ he be?"

There was still a moment before the train would stop at the platform,
and she was not to be beaten so easily. Bending partly across the aisle,
she spoke again:

"You have been so kind to those poor fellows that I feel sure you must
be of the army. I think I told you I am Mrs. Rayner, of Fort Warrener.
May we not hope to see you there?"

A deep flush rose to his forehead, suffusing his cheeks, and passed as
quickly away. His mouth twitched and trembled. Gazing at him in surprise
and trouble, Nellie Travers saw that his face was full of pain and was
turning white again. He half choked before he could reply: he spoke low,
and yet distinctly, and the words were full of sadness:

"It--it is not probable that we shall meet at all."

And with that he turned away.




II.


Even in the excitement attendant upon their reception at the station
neither Mrs. Rayner nor her sister could entirely recover from the
surprise and pain which the stranger's singular words had caused. So far
from feeling in the least rebuffed, Mrs. Rayner well understood from his
manner that not the faintest discourtesy was intended. There was not a
symptom of rudeness, not a vestige of irritation or haste, in his tone.
Deep embarrassment, inexpressible sadness even, she read in the brief
glimpse she had of his paling face. It was all a mystery to her and to
the girl seated in silence by her side. Both followed him with their
eyes as he hurried away to the rear of the car, and then, with joyous
shouts, three or four burly, fur-enveloped men came bursting in the
front door, and the two ladies, the baby, and the kitten were pounced
upon and surrounded by a group that grew larger every minute. Released
finally from the welcoming embrace of her stalwart husband, Mrs. Rayner
found time to present the other and younger officers to her sister. As
many as half a dozen had followed the captain in his wild rush upon the
car, and, while he and his baby boy were resuming acquaintanceship after
a separation of many long months, Miss Travers found herself the centre
of a circle of young officers who had braved the wintry blizzard in
their eagerness to do her proper homage. Her cheeks were aflame with
excitement and pleasure, her eyes dancing, and despite the fatigue of
her long journey she was looking dangerously pretty, as Captain Rayner
glanced for a moment from the baby's wondering eyes, took in the picture
like an instantaneous photograph, and then looked again into Mrs.
Rayner's smiling face.

"You were wise in providing against possibilities as you did, Kate," he
said, with a significant nod of the head. "There are as many as a dozen
of them,--or at least there will be when the ----th gets back from the
field. Stannard is out yet with his battalion."

"Oh, yes: we saw them at a station east of here. They looked frozen to
death; and there _are_ ever so many of the soldiers frozen. The
baggage-car is full of them. Didn't you know it?"

"Not a word of it. We have been here for three mortal hours waiting at
the station, and any telegrams must have been sent right out to the
fort. The colonel is there, and he would have all arrangements made.
Here, Graham! Foster! Mrs. Rayner says there are a lot of frozen
cavalrymen forward in the baggage-car. Run ahead and see what is
necessary, will you? I'll be there in a minute, as soon as we've got
these ladies off the train."

Two of the young gentlemen who had been hovering around Miss Travers
took themselves off without a moment's delay. The others remained to
help their senior officer. Out into the whirling eddies of snow,
bundling them up in the big, warm capes of their regulation overcoats,
the officers half led, half carried their precious charges. The captain
bore his son and heir; Lieutenant Ross escorted Mrs. Rayner; two others
devoted themselves exclusively to Miss Travers; a fourth picked up the
Maltese kitten. Two or three smart, trim-looking infantry soldiers
cleared the section of bags and bundles of shawls, and the entire party
was soon within the door-way of the waiting-room, where a red-hot
coal-stove glowed fierce welcome. Here the ladies were left for a
moment, while all the officers again bustled out into the storm and
fought their way against the northwest gale until they reached the
little crowd gathered about the door-way of the freight-sheds. A stout,
short, burly man in beaver overcoat and cap pushed through the knot of
half-numbed spectators and approached their leader:

"We have only two ambulances, captain,--that is all there was at the
post when the despatch came,--and there are a dozen of these men,
besides Dr. Grimes, all more or less crippled, and Grimes has both hands
frozen. We must get them out at once. Can we take your wagon?"

"Certainly, doctor. Take anything we have. If the storm holds, tell the
driver not to try to come back for us. We can make the ladies
comfortable here at the hotel for the night. Some of the officers have
to get back for duties this evening. The rest will have to stay. How did
they happen to get caught in such a freeze?"

"They couldn't help it. Stannard had chased the Cheyennes across the
range, and was ordered to get back to the railway. It was twenty below
when they started, and they made three days' chase in that weather; but
no one seemed to care so long as they were on the trail. Then came the
change of wind, and a driving snow-storm, in which they lost the trail
as a matter of course; and then this blizzard struck them on the
back-track. Grimes is so exhausted that he could barely hold out until
he got here. He says he never could have brought them through from
Bluff Siding but for Mr. Hayne: he did everything."

"Mr. Hayne! Was he with them?"

"He was on the train, and came in at once to offer his services. Grimes
says he was invaluable."

"But Mr. Hayne was East on leave: I _know_ he was. He was promoted to my
company last month,--confound the luck!--and was to have six months'
leave before joining. I wish it was six years. Where is he now?" And the
captain peered excitedly around from under his shaggy cap. Oddly, too,
his face was paling.

"He left as soon as I took charge. I don't know where he's gone; but
it's God's mercy he was with these poor fellows. His skill and care have
done everything for them. Where did he get his knowledge?"

"I've no idea," said Captain Rayner, gruffly, and in evident ill humor.
"He is the last man I expected to see this day or for days to come. Is
there anything else I can do, doctor?"

"Nothing, thank you, captain." And the little surgeon hastened back to
his charges, followed by some of the younger officers, eager to be of
assistance in caring for their disabled comrades. Rayner himself
hesitated a moment, then turned about and trudged heavily back along the
wind-swept platform. The train had pulled away, and was out of sight in
the whirl of snow over the Western prairies. He went to his own
substantial wagon, and shouted to the driver, who sat muffled in buffalo
fur on the box,--

"Get around there to the freight-house and report to the doctor. There
are a lot of frozen cavalrymen to be taken out to the hospital. Don't
try to come back for us to-night: we'll stay here in town. Send the
quartermaster's team in for the trunks as soon as the storm is over and
the road clear. That's all."

Then he rejoined the party at the waiting-room of the station, and Mrs.
Rayner noted instantly that all the cheeriness had gone and that a cloud
had settled on his face. She was a shrewd observer, and she knew him
well. Something more serious than a mishap to a squad of soldiers had
brought about the sudden change. He was all gladness, all rejoicing and
delight, when he clasped her and his baby boy in his arms but ten
minutes before, and now--something had occurred to bring him serious
discomfort. She rested her hand on his arm and looked questioningly in
his face. He avoided her glance, and quickly began to talk. She saw
that he desired to answer no questions just then, and wisely refrained.

Meantime, Miss Travers was chatting blithely with two young gallants who
had returned to her side, and who had thrown off their heavy furs and
now stood revealed in their becoming undress uniforms. Mr. Ross had gone
to look over the rooms which the host of the railway hotel had offered
for the use of the party; the baby was yielding to the inevitable and
gradually condescending to notice the efforts of Mr. Foster to scrape
acquaintance; the kitten, with dainty step, and ears and tail erect, was
making a leisurely inspection of the premises, sniffing about the few
benches and chairs with which the bare room was burdened, and
reconnoitring the door leading to the hall-way with evident desire to
extend her researches in that direction. Presently that very door
opened, and in came two or three bundles of fur in masculine shape, and
with them two shaggy deer-hounds, who darted straight at the kitten.
There was a sudden flurry and scatter, a fury of spits and scratching, a
yelp of pain from one brute with lacerated nose, a sudden recoil of both
hounds, and then a fiery rush through the open door-way in pursuit of
puss. After the first gallant instinct of battle her nerve had given
out, and she had sought safety in flight.

"Oh, don't let them hurt her!" cried Miss Travers, as she darted into
the hall and gazed despairingly up the stairway to the second story,
whither the dogs had vanished like a flash. Two of the young officers
sped to the rescue and turned the wrong way. Mrs. Rayner and the captain
followed her into the hall. A rush of canine feet and an excited chorus
of barks and yelps were heard aloft; then a stern voice ordering, "Down,
you brutes!" a sudden howl as though in response to a vigorous kick, and
an instant later, bearing the kitten, ruffled, terrified, and wildly
excited, yet unharmed, there came springing lightly down the steps the
young man in civilian dress who was their fellow-traveller on the
Pullman. Without a word he gave his prize into the dainty hands
outstretched to receive it, and, never stopping an instant, never
listening to the eager words of thanks from her pretty lips, he darted
back as quickly as he came, leaving Miss Travers suddenly stricken dumb.

Captain Rayner turned sharply on his heel and stepped back into the
waiting-room. Mr. Ross nudged a brother lieutenant and whispered, "By
gad! that's awkward for Midas!" The two subalterns who had taken the
wrong turn at the top of the stairs reappeared there just as the
rescuer shot past them on his way back, and stood staring, first after
his disappearing form, and then at each other. Miss Travers, with wonder
and relief curiously mingled in her sweet face, clung to her restored
kitten and gazed vacantly up the stairs.

Mrs. Rayner looked confusedly from one to the other, quickly noting the
constraint in the manner of every officer present and the sudden
disappearance of her husband. There was an odd silence for a moment:
then she spoke:

"Mr. Ross, do you know that gentleman?"

"I know who he is. Yes."

"Who is he, then?"

"He is your husband's new first lieutenant, Mrs. Rayner. That is Mr.
Hayne."

"_That!_--Mr. Hayne?" she exclaimed, growing suddenly pale.

"Certainly, madame. Had you never seen him before?"

"Never; and I expected--I didn't expect to see such a--" And she broke
short off, confused and plainly distressed, turned abruptly, and left
the hall as had her husband.




III.


The officers of Fort Warrener were assembled, as was the daily morning
custom, in the presence of the colonel commanding. It had long been the
practice of that veteran soldier to require all his commissioned
subordinates to put in an appearance at his office immediately after the
ceremony of guard-mounting. He might have nothing to say to them, or he
might have a good deal; and he was a man capable of saying a good deal
in very few words, and meaning exactly what he said. It was his custom
to look up from his writing as each officer entered and respond to the
respectful salutation tendered him with an equally punctilious
"Good-morning, Captain Gregg," or "Good-morning, Mr. Blake,"--never
omitting the mention of the name, unless, as was sometimes tried, a
squad of them came in together and made their obeisance as a body. In
this event the colonel simply looked each man in the face, as though
taking mental note of the individual constituents of the group, and
contented himself with a "Good-morning, gentlemen."

When in addition to six troops of his own regiment of cavalry there were
sent to the post a major and four companies of infantry, some of the
junior officers of the latter organization had suggested to their
comrades of the yellow stripes that as the colonel had no roll-call it
might be a matter of no great risk to "cut the _matinee_" on some of the
fiendishly cold mornings that soon set in; but the experiment was never
designedly tried, thanks, possibly, to the frank exposition of his
personal views as expressed by Lieutenant Blake, of the cavalry, who
said, "Try it if you are stagnating for want of a sensation, my genial
plodder, but not if you value the advice of one who has been there, so
to speak. The chief will spot you quicker than he can a missing shoe,--a
missing _horse_shoe, Johnny, let me elaborate for your
comprehension,--and the next question will be, 'Mr. Bluestrap, did you
intentionally absent yourself?' and _then_ how will you get out of it?"

The _matinees_, so called, were by no means unpopular features of the
daily routine. The officers were permitted to bring their pipes or
cigars and take their after-breakfast smoke in the big, roomy office of
the commander, just as they were permitted to enjoy the post-prandial
whiff when at evening recitation in the same office they sat around the
room, chatting in low tones, for half an hour, while the colonel
received the reports of his adjutant, the surgeon, and the old and the
new officer of the day. Then any matters affecting the discipline or
instruction or general interests of the command were brought up; both
sides of the question were presented, if question arose; the decision
was rendered then and there, and the officers were dismissed for the day
with the customary "That's all, gentlemen." They left the office well
knowing that only in the event of some sudden emergency would they be
called thither again or disturbed in their daily vocations until the
same hour on the following morning. Meantime, they must be about their
work: drills, if weather permitted; stable-duty, no matter what the
weather; garrison courts, boards of survey, the big general court that
was perennially dispensing justice at the post, and the long list of
minor but none the less exacting demands on the time and attention of
the subalterns and company commanders. The colonel was a strict, even
severe, disciplinarian, but he was cool, deliberate, and just. He
"worked" his officers, and thereby incurred the criticism of a few, but
held the respect of all. He had been a splendid cavalry-commander in the
field of all others where his sterling qualities were sure to find
responsive appreciation in his officers and men,--on active and stirring
campaigns against the Indians,--and among his own regiment he knew that
deep in their hearts the ----th respected and believed in him, even
when they growled at garrison exactions which seemed uncalled for. The
infantry officers knew less of him as a sterling campaigner, and were
not so well pleased with his discipline. It was all right for him to
"rout out" every mother's son in the cavalry at reveille, because all
the cavalry officers had to go to stables soon afterwards,--that was all
they were fit for,--but what on earth was the use of getting them--the
infantry--out of their warm beds before sunrise on a wintry morning and
having no end of roll-calls and such things through the day, "just to
keep them busy"? The real objection--the main objection--to the
colonel's system was that it kept a large number of officers, most of
whom were educated gentlemen, hammering all day long at an endless
routine of trivial duties, allowing actually no time in which they could
read, study, or improve their minds; but, as ill luck would have it, the
three young gentlemen who decided to present to the colonel this view of
the case had been devoting what spare time they could find to a lively
game of poker down at "the store," and their petition for "more time to
themselves" brought down a reply from the oracular lips of the commander
that became immortal on the frontier and made the petitioners nearly
frantic. For a week the trio was the butt of all the wits at Fort
Warrener. And yet the entire commissioned force felt that they were
being kept at the grindstone because of the frivolity of these few
youngsters, and they did not like it. All the same the cavalrymen stuck
up for their colonel, and the infantrymen respected him, and the
_matinees_ were business-like and profitable. They were rarely
unpleasant in any feature; but this particular morning--two days after
the arrival of Mrs. Rayner and her sister--there had been a scene of
somewhat dramatic interest, and the groups of officers in breaking up
and going away could discuss nothing else. The colonel had requested one
of their number to remain, as he wished to speak to him further; and
that man was Lieutenant Hayne.

Seven years had that young gentleman been a second lieutenant of the
regiment of infantry a detachment of which was now stationed at
Warrener. Only this very winter had promotion come to him; and, of all
companies in the regiment, he was gazetted to the first-lieutenancy of
Captain Rayner's. For a while the regiment when by itself could talk of
little else. Mr. Hayne had spent three or four years in the exile of a
little "two-company post" far up in the mountains. Except the officers
there stationed, none of his comrades had seen him during that time. No
one of them would like to admit that he would care to see him. And yet,
when once in a while they got to talking among themselves about him, and
the question was sometimes confidentially asked of comrades who came
down on leave from that isolated station, "How is Hayne doing?" or,
"What is Hayne doing?" the language in which he was referred to grew by
degrees far less truculent and confident than it had been when he first
went thither. Officers of other regiments rarely spoke to the "Riflers"
of Mr. Hayne. Unlike one or two others of their arm of the service, this
particular regiment of foot held the affairs of its officers as
regimental property in which outsiders had no concern. If they had
disagreements, they were kept to themselves; and even in a case which in
its day had attracted wide-spread attention the Riflers had long since
learned to shun all talk outside. It was evident to other commands that
the Hayne affair was a sore point and one on which they preferred
silence. And yet it was getting to be whispered around that the Riflers
were by no means so unanimous as they had been in their opinion of this
very officer. They were becoming divided among themselves; and what
complicated matters was the fact that those who felt their views
undergoing a reconstruction were compelled to admit that just in
proportion as the case of Mr. Hayne rose in their estimation the
reputation of another officer was bound to suffer; and that officer was
Captain Rayner.

Between these two men not a word had been exchanged for five years,--not
a single word since the day when, with ashen face and broken accents,
but with stern purpose in every syllable, Lieutenant Hayne, standing in
the presence of nearly all the officers of his regiment, had hurled this
prophecy in his adversary's teeth: "Though it take me years, I will live
it down despite you; and you will wish to God you had bitten out your
perjured tongue before ever you told the lie that wrecked me."

No wonder there was talk, and lots of it, in the "Riflers" and all
through the garrison when Rayner's first lieutenant suddenly threw up
his commission and retired to the mines he had located in Montana, and
Hayne, the "senior second," was promoted to the vacancy. Speculation as
to what would be the result was given a temporary rest by the news that
War Department orders had granted the subaltern six months' leave,--the
first he had sought in as many years. It was known that he had gone
East; but hardly had he been away a fortnight when there came the
trouble with the Cheyennes at the reservation,--a leap for liberty by
some fifty of the band, and an immediate rush of the cavalry in
pursuit. There were some bloody atrocities, as there always are. All the
troops in the department were ordered to be in readiness for instant
service, while the officials eagerly watched the reports to see which
way the desperate band would turn; and the next heard of Mr. Hayne was
the news that he had thrown up his leave and had hurried out to join his
company the moment the Eastern papers told of the trouble. It was all
practically settled by the time he reached the department; but the
spirit and intent of his action could not be doubted. And now here he
was at Warrener. That very morning during the _matinee_ he had entered
the office unannounced, walked up to the desk of the commander, and,
while every voice but his in the room was stilled, he quietly spoke:

"Permit me to introduce myself, colonel,--Mr. Hayne. I desire to
relinquish my leave of absence and report for duty."

The colonel quickly arose and extended his hand:

"Mr. Hayne, I am especially glad to see you and to thank you here for
all your care and kindness to our men. The doctor tells me that many of
them would have had to suffer the loss of noses and ears, even of hands
and feet in some cases, but for your attention. Major Stannard will add
his thanks to mine when he returns. Take a seat, sir, for the present.
You are acquainted with the officers of your own regiment, doubtless.
Mr. Billings, introduce Mr. Hayne to ours."

Whereat the adjutant courteously greeted the new-comer, presented a
small party of yellow-strapped shoulders, and then drew him into earnest
talk about the adventure of the train. It was noticed that Mr. Hayne
neither by word nor glance gave the slightest recognition of the
presence of the officers of his own regiment, and that they as
studiously avoided him. One or two of their number had, indeed, risen
and stepped forward, as though to offer him the civil greeting due to
one of their own cloth; but it was with evident doubt of the result.
They reddened when he met their tentative--which was that of a
gentleman--with a cold look of utter repudiation. He did not choose to
see them, and, of course, that ended it.

Nor was his greeting hearty among the cavalrymen. There were only a few
present, as most of the ----th were still out in the field and marching
slowly homeward. The introductions were courteous and formal, there was
even constraint among some two or three, but there was civility and an
evident desire to refer to his services in behalf of their men. All such
attempts, however, Mr. Hayne waved aside by an immediate change of the
subject. It was plain that to them too, he had the manner of a man who
was at odds with the world and desired to make no friends.

The colonel quickly noted the general silence and constraint, and
resolved to shorten it as much as possible. Dropping his pen, he wheeled
around in his chair with determined cheerfulness:

"Mr. Hayne, you will need a day or two to look about before you select
quarters and get ready for work, I presume."

"Thank you, colonel. No, sir. I shall move in this afternoon and be on
duty to-morrow morning," was the calm reply.

There was an awkward pause for a moment. The officers looked blankly
from one to another, and then began craning their necks to search for
the post quartermaster, who sat an absorbed listener. Then the colonel
spoke again:

"I appreciate your promptness, Mr. Hayne; but have you considered that
in choosing quarters according to your rank you will necessarily move
somebody out? We are crowded now, and many of your juniors are married,
and the ladies will want time to pack."

An anxious silence again. Captain Rayner was gazing at his boot-toes and
trying to appear utterly indifferent; others leaned forward, as though
eager to hear the answer. A faint smile crossed Mr. Hayne's features: he
seemed rather to enjoy the situation:

"I _have_ considered, colonel. I shall turn nobody out, and nobody need
be incommoded in the least."

"Oh! then you will share quarters with some of the bachelors?" asked the
colonel, with evident relief.

"No, sir;" and the answer was stern in tone, though perfectly
respectful: "I shall live as I have lived for years,--utterly alone."

One could have heard a pin drop in the office,--even on the matted
floor. The colonel half rose:

"Why, Mr. Hayne, there is not a vacant set of quarters in the garrison.
You will _have_ to move some one out if you decide to live alone."

"There may be no quarters _in_ the post, sir, but, if you will permit
me, I can live near my company and yet in officers' quarters."

"How so, sir?"

"In the house out there on the edge of the garrison, facing the prairie.
It is within stone's-throw of the barracks of Company B, and is exactly
like those built for the officers in here along the parade."

"Why, Mr. Hayne, no officers ever lived there. It is utterly out of the
way and isolated. I believe it was built for the sutler years ago, but
was bought in by the government afterwards.--Who lives there now, Mr.
Quartermaster?"

"No one, sir. It is being used as a tailors' shop; half a dozen of the
company tailors work there; but I can send them back to their own
barracks. The house is in good repair, and, as Mr. Hayne says, exactly
like those built for officers' use."

"And you mean you want to live there, alone, Mr. Hayne?"

"I do, sir,--exactly."

The colonel turned sharply to his desk once more. The strained silence
continued a moment. Then he faced his officers:

"Mr. Hayne, will you remain a few moments? I wish to speak with
you.--Gentlemen, that is all this morning." And so the meeting
adjourned.

While many of the cavalry officers strolled into the neighboring
club-and reading-room, it was noticed that their comrades of the
infantry lost no time at intermediate points, but took the shortest road
to the row of brown cottages known as the officers' quarters. The
feeling of constraint that had settled upon all was still apparent in
the group that entered the club-room, and for a moment no one spoke.
There was a general settling into easy-chairs and picking up of
newspapers without reference to age or date. No one seemed to want to
say anything, and yet every one felt it necessary to have some apparent
excuse for becoming absorbed in other matters. This was so evident to
Lieutenant Blake that he speedily burst into a laugh,--the first that
had been heard,--and when two or three heads popped out from behind
their printed screens to inquire into the cause of his mirth, that
light-hearted gentleman was seen sprawling his long legs apart and
gazing out of the window after the groups of infantrymen.

"What do you see that's so intensely funny?" growled one of the elders
among the dragoons.

"Nothing, old mole,--nothing," said Blake, turning suddenly about. "It
looks too much like a funeral procession for fun. What I'm chuckling at
is the absurdity of our coming in here like so many mutes in weepers.
It's none of _our_ funeral."

"Strikes me the situation is damned awkward," growled "the mole" again.
"Here's a fellow comes in who's cut by his regiment and has placed ours
under lasting obligation before he gets inside the post."

"Well, does any man here know the rights and wrongs of the case,
anyhow?" said a tall, bearded captain as he threw aside the paper which
he had not been reading, and rose impatiently to his feet. "It seems to
me, from the little I've heard of Mr. Hayne and the little I've seen,
that there is a broad variation between facts and appearances. He looks
like a gentleman."

"No one _does_ know anything more of the matter than was known at the
time of the court-martial five years ago," answered "the mole." "Of
course you have heard all about that; and my experience is that when a
body of officers and gentlemen find, after due deliberation on the
evidence, that another has been guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer
and a gentleman, the chances are a hundred to one he has been doing
something disreputable, to say the least."

"Then why wasn't he dismissed?" queried a young lieutenant. "The law
says he must be."

"That's right, Dolly: pull your Ives and Benet on 'em, and show you know
all about military law and courts-martial," said the captain,
crushingly. "It's one thing for a court to sentence, and another for the
President to approve. Hayne _was_ dismissed, so far as a court could do
it, but the President remitted the whole thing."

"There was more to it than that, though, and you know it, Buxton," said
Blake. "Neither the department commander nor General Sherman thought the
evidence conclusive, and they said so,--especially old Gray Fox. And you
ask any of these fellows here now whether they believe Hayne was really
guilty, and I'll bet you that eight out of ten will flunk at the
question."

"And yet they all cut him dead. That's _prima facie_ evidence of what
they think."

"Cut be blowed! By gad, if any man asked me to testify on oath as to
where the cut lay, I should say he had cut _them_. Did you see how he
ignored Foster and Graham this morning?"

"I did; and I thought it damned ungentlemanly in him. Those fellows did
the proper thing, and he ought to have acknowledged it," broke in a
third officer.

"I'm not defending _that_ point; the Lord knows he has done nothing to
encourage civility with his own people; but there are two sides to every
story, and I asked their adjutant last fall, when there was some talk
of his company's being sent here, what Hayne's status was, and he told
me. There isn't a squarer man or sounder soldier in the army than the
adjutant of the Riflers; and he said that it was Hayne's stubborn pride
that more than anything else stood in the way of his restoration to
social standing. He had made it a rule that every one who was not for
him was against him, and refused to admit any man to his society who
would not first come to him of his own volition and say he believed him
utterly innocent. As that involved the necessity of their looking upon
Rayner as either perjured or grossly and persistently mistaken, no one
felt called upon to do it. Guilty or innocent, he has lived the life of
a Pariah ever since."

"_I_ wanted to open out to him, to-day," said Captain Gregg, "but the
moment I began to speak of his great kindness to our men he froze as
stiff as Mulligan's ear. What was the use? I simply couldn't thaw an
icicle. What made him so effective in getting the frost out of them was
his capacity for absorbing it into his own system."

"Well, here, gentlemen," said Buxton, impatiently, "we've got to face
this thing sooner or later, and may as well do it now. I know Rayner,
and like him, and don't believe he's the kind of man to wilfully wrong
another. I _don't_ know Mr. Hayne, and Mr. Hayne apparently don't want
to know me. _I_ think that where a man has been convicted of
dishonorable--disgraceful conduct and is cut by his whole regiment it is
our business to back the regiment, not the man. Now the question is,
where shall we draw the line in this case? It's none of our funeral, as
Blake says, but ordinarily it would be our duty to call upon this
officer. Shall we do it, now that he is in Coventry, or shall we leave
him to his own devices?"

"I'll answer for myself, Buxton," said Blake, "and you can do as, you
please. Except that one thing, and the not unusual frivolities of a
youngster that occurred previous to his trial, I understand that his
character has been above reproach. So far as I can learn, he is a far
more reputable character than I am, and a better officer than most of
us. Growl all you want to, comrades mine: 'it's a way we have in the
army,' and I like it. So long as I include myself in these malodorous
comparisons, you needn't swear. It is my conviction that the Riflers
wouldn't say he was guilty to-day if they hadn't said so five years ago.
It is my information that he has paid every cent of the damages, whether
he caused them or not, and it is my intention to go and call upon Mr.
Hayne as soon as he's settled. I don't propose to influence any man in
his action; and excuse me, Buxton, I think you _did_."

The captain looked wrathful. Blake was an oddity, of whom he rather
stood in awe, for there was no mistaking the popularity and respect in
which he was held in his own regiment. The ----th was somewhat
remarkable for being emphatically an "outspoken crowd," and for some
years, thanks to a leaven of strong and truthful men in whom this trait
was pronounced and sustained, it had grown to be the custom of all but a
few of the officers to discuss openly and fully all matters of
regimental policy and utterly to discountenance covert action of any
kind. Blake was thoroughly popular, and generally respected, despite a
tendency to rant and rattle on most occasions. Nevertheless, there were
signs of dissent as to the line of action he proposed, though it were
only for his own guidance.

"And how do you suppose Rayner and the Riflers generally will regard
your calling on their black sheep?" asked Buxton, after a pause.

"I don't know," said Blake, more seriously, and with a tone of concern.
"I like Rayner, and have found most of those fellows thorough gentlemen
and good friends. This will test the question thoroughly. I believe most
of them, except of course Rayner, would do the same were they in my
place. At all events, I mean to see."

"What are you going to do, Gregg?" asked "the mole," wheeling suddenly
on his brother troop-commander.

"I don't know," said Gregg, doubtfully. "I think I'll ask the colonel."

"What do you suppose _he_ means to do?"

"I don't know again; but I'll bet we all know as soon as he makes up his
mind; and he is making up his mind now,--or he's made it up, for there
goes Mr. Hayne, and here comes the orderly. Something's up already."

Every head was turned to the door-way as the orderly's step was heard in
the outer hall, and every voice stilled to hear the message, it was so
unusual for the commanding officer to send for one of his subordinates
after the morning meeting. The soldier tapped at the panel, and at the
prompt "Come in" pushed it partly open and stood with one white-gloved
hand resting on the knob, the other raised to his cap-visor in salute.

"Lieutenant Blake?" he asked, as he glanced around.

"What is it?" asked Blake, stepping quickly from the window.

"The commanding officer's compliments, sir, and could he see the
lieutenant one minute before the court meets?"

"Coming at once," said Blake, as he pushed his way through the chairs,
and the orderly faced about and disappeared.

"I'll bet it's about Hayne," was the apparently unanimous sentiment as
the cavalry party broke up and scattered for the morning's duties. Some
waited purposely to hear.

The adjutant alone stood in the colonel's presence as Blake knocked and
entered. All others had gone. There was a moment's hesitation, and the
colonel paused and looked his man over before he spoke:

"You will excuse my sending for you, Mr. Blake, when I tell you that it
is a matter that has to be decided at once. In this case you will
consider, too, that I want you to say yes or no exactly as you would to
a comrade of your own grade. If you were asked to meet Mr. Hayne at any
other house in the garrison than mine, would you desire to accept? You
are aware of all the circumstances, the adjutant tells me."

"I am, sir, and have just announced my intention of calling upon him."

"Then will you dine with us this evening to meet Mr. Hayne?"

"I will do so with pleasure, sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

It could hardly have been an hour afterwards when Mrs. Rayner entered
the library in her cosey home and found Miss Travers entertaining
herself with a book.

"Have you written to Mr. Van Antwerp this morning?" she asked. "I
thought that was what you came here for."

"I did mean to, but Mrs. Waldron has been here, and I was interrupted."

"It is fully fifteen minutes since she left, Nellie. You might have
written two or three pages already; and you know that all manner of
visitors will be coming in by noon."

"I was just thinking over something she told me. I'll write presently."

"Mrs. Waldron is a woman who talks about everything and everybody. I
advise you to listen to her no more than you can help. What was it she
told you?"

Miss Travers smiled roguishly: "Why should you want to know, Kate, if
you disapprove of her revelations?"

"Oh," with visible annoyance, "it is to--I wanted to know so as to let
you see that it was something unfounded, as usual."

"She said she had just been told that the colonel was going to give a
dinner-party this evening to Mr. Hayne."

"What?"

"She--said--she--had--just--been--told--that--the colonel--was going--to
give--a dinner-party--this evening--to Mr.--Hayne."

"Who told her?"

"Kate, I didn't ask."

"Who are invited? None of _ours_?"

"Kate, I don't know."

"Where did she say she had heard it?"

"She didn't say."

Mrs. Rayner paused one moment, irresolute: "Didn't she tell you anything
more about it?"

"Nothing, sister mine. Why should you feel such an interest in what Mrs.
Waldron says, if she's such a gossip?" And Miss Travers was evidently
having hard work to keep from laughing outright.

"_You_ had better write your letter," said her big sister, and flounced
suddenly out of the room and up the stairs.

A moment later she was at the parlor door with a wrap thrown over her
shoulders: "If Captain Rayner comes in, tell him I want particularly to
see him before he goes out again."

"Where are you going, Kate?"

"Oh, just over to Mrs. Waldron's a moment."




IV.


Facing the broad, bleak prairie, separated from it only by a rough,
unpainted picket fence, and flanked by uncouth structures of pine, one
of which was used as a storehouse for quartermaster's property, the
other as the post-trader's depository for skins and furs, there stood
the frame cottage which Mr. Hayne had chosen as his home. As has been
said, it was precisely like those built for the subaltern officers, so
far as material, plan, and dimensions were concerned. The locality made
the vast difference which really existed. Theirs stood all in a row,
fronting the grassy level of the parade, surrounded by verandas,
bordering on a well-kept gravel path and an equally well graded drive.
Clear, sparkling water rippled in tiny _acequias_ through the front
yards of each, and so furnished the moisture needed for the life of
various little shrubs and flowering plants. The surroundings were at
least "sociable," and there was companionship and jollity, with an
occasional tiff to keep things lively. The married officers, as a rule,
had chosen their quarters farthest from the entrance-gate and nearest
those of the colonel commanding. The bachelors, except the two or three
who were old in the service and had "rank" in lieu of encumbrances, were
all herded together along the eastern end, a situation that had
disadvantages as connected with duties which required the frequent
presence of the occupants at the court-martial rooms or at
head-quarters, and that was correspondingly far distant from the
barracks of the soldiers. It had its recommendations in being convenient
to the card-room and billiard-tables at "the store," and in embracing
within its limits one house which possessed mysterious interest in the
eyes of every woman and most of the men in the garrison: it was said to
be haunted.

A sorely-perplexed man was the post quartermaster when the rumor came
out from the railway-station that Mr. Hayne had arrived and was coming
to report for duty. As a first lieutenant he would have choice of
quarters over every second lieutenant in the garrison: there were ten of
these young gentlemen, and four of the ten were married. Every set of
quarters had its occupants, and Hayne could move in nowhere, unless as
occupant of a room or two in the house of some comrade, without first
compelling others to move out. This proceeding would lead to vast
discomfort, occurring as it would in the dead of winter, and the
youngsters were naturally perturbed in spirit,--their wives especially
so. What made the prospects infinitely worse was the fact that the
cavalry bachelors were already living three in a house: the only spare
rooms were in the quarters of the second lieutenants of the infantry,
and they were not on speaking-terms with Mr. Hayne. Everything,
therefore, pointed to the probability of his "displacing" a junior, who
would in turn displace somebody else, and so they would go tumbling like
a row of bricks until the lowest and last was reached. All this would
involve no end of worry for the quartermaster, who even under the most
favorable circumstances is sure to be the least appreciated and most
abused officer under the commandant himself, and that worthy was simply
agasp with relief and joy when he heard Mr. Hayne's astonishing
announcement that he would take the quarters out on "Prairie Avenue."

It was the talk of the garrison all that day. The ladies, especially,
had a good deal to say, because many of the men seemed averse to
expressing their views. "Quite the proper thing for Mr. Hayne to do,"
was the apparent opinion of the majority of the young wives and mothers.
As a particularly kind and considerate thing it was not remarked by one
of them, though that view of the case went not entirely unrepresented.
In choosing to live there Mr. Hayne separated himself from
companionship. That, said some of the commentators,--men as well as
women,--he simply accepted as the virtue of necessity, and so there was
nothing to commend in his action. But Mr. Hayne was said to possess an
eye for the picturesque and beautiful. If so, he deliberately condemned
himself to the daily contemplation of a treeless barren, streaked in
occasional shallows with dingy patches of snow, ornamented only in spots
by abandoned old hats, boots, or tin cans blown beyond the jurisdiction
of the garrison police-parties. A line of telegraph-poles was all that
intervened between his fence and the low-lying hills of the eastern
horizon. Southeastward lay the distant roofs and the low, squat
buildings of the frontier town; southward the shallow valley of the
winding creek in which lay the long line of stables for the cavalry and
the great stacks of hay; while the row on which he chose to
live--"Prairie Avenue," as it was termed--was far worse at his end of it
than at the other. It covered the whole eastern front. The big, brown
hospital building stood at the northern end. Then came the quarters of
the surgeon and his assistants, then the snug home of the post trader,
then the "store" and its scattering appendages, then the
entrance-gateway, then a broad vacant space, through which the wind
swept like a hurricane, then the little shanty of the trader's fur house
and one or two hovel-like structures used by the tailors and cobbler of
the adjacent infantry companies. Then came the cottage itself: south of
it stood the quartermaster's store-room, back of which lay an extension
filled with ordnance stores, then other and similar sheds devoted to
commissary supplies, the post butcher-shop, the saddler's shop, then big
coal-sheds, and then the brow of the bluff, down which at a steep grade
plunged the road to the stables. It was as unprepossessing a place for a
home as ever was chosen by a man of education or position; and Mr. Hayne
was possessed of both.

In garrison, despite the flat parade, there was a grand expanse of
country to be seen stretching away towards the snow-covered Rockies.
There was life and the sense of neighborliness to one's kind. Out on
Prairie Avenue all was wintry desolation, except when twice each day the
cavalry officers went plodding by on their way to and from the stables,
muffled up in their fur caps and coats, and hardly distinguishable from
so many bears, much less from one another.

And yet Mr. Hayne smiled not unhappily as he glanced from his eastern
window at this group of burly warriors the afternoon succeeding his
dinner at the colonel's. He had been busy all day long unpacking books,
book-shelves, some few pictures which he loved, and his simple,
soldierly outfit of household goods, and getting them into shape. His
sole assistant was a Chinese servant, who worked rapidly and well, and
who seemed in no wise dismayed by the bleakness of their surroundings.
If anything, he was disposed to grin and indulge in high-pitched
commentaries in "pidgin English" upon the unaccustomed amount of room.
His master had been restricted to two rooms and a kitchen during the two
years he had served him. Now they had a house to themselves, and more
rooms than they knew what to do with. The quartermaster had sent a
detail of men to put up the stoves and move out the rubbish left by the
tailors; "Sam" had worked vigorously with soft soap, hot water, and a
big mop in sprucing up the rooms; the adjutant had sent a little note
during the morning, saying that the colonel would be glad to order him
any men he needed to put the quarters in proper shape, and that Captain
Rayner had expressed his readiness to send a detail from the company to
unload and unpack his boxes, etc., to which Mr. Hayne replied in person
that he thanked the commanding officer for his thoughtfulness, but that
he had very little to unpack, and needed no assistance beyond that
already afforded by the quartermaster's men. Mr. Billings could not help
noting that he made no allusion to that part of the letter which spoke
of Captain Rayner's offer. It increased his respect for Mr. Hayne's
perceptive powers.

While every officer of the infantry battalion was ready to admit that
Mr. Hayne had rendered invaluable service to the men of the cavalry
regiment, they were not so unanimous in their opinion as to how it
should be acknowledged and requited by its officers. No one was prepared
for the announcement that the colonel had asked him to dinner and that
Blake and Billings were to meet him. Some few of their number thought it
going too far, but no one quite coincided with the vehement declaration
of Mrs. Rayner that it was an outrage and an affront aimed at the
regiment in general and at Captain Rayner in particular. She was an
energetic woman when aroused, and there was no doubt of her being very
much aroused as she sped from house to house to see what the other
ladies thought of it. Rayner's wealth and Mrs. Rayner's qualities had
made her an undoubted though not always popular leader in all social
matters in the Riflers. She was an authority, so to speak, and one who
knew it. Already there had been some points on which she had differed
with the colonel's wife, and it was plain to all that it was a difficult
thing for her to come down from being _the_ authority--the leader of the
social element of a garrison--and from the position of second or third
importance which she had been accorded when first assigned to the
station. There were many, indeed, who asserted that it was because she
found her new position unbearable that she decided on her long visit to
the East and departed thither before the Riflers had been at Warrener a
month. The colonel's wife had greeted her and her lovely sister with
charming grace on their arrival two days previous to the stirring event
of the dinner, and every one was looking forward to a probable series of
pleasant entertainments by the two households, even while wondering how
long the _entente cordiale_ would last,--when the colonel's invitation
to Mr. Hayne brought on an immediate crisis. It is safe to say that Mrs.
Rayner was madder than the captain her husband, who hardly knew how to
take it. He was by no means the best liked officer in his regiment, nor
the "deepest" and best informed, but he had a native shrewdness which
helped him. He noted even before his wife would speak of it to him the
gradual dying out of the bitter feeling that had once existed at Hayne's
expense. He felt, though it hurt him seriously to make inquiries, that
the man whom he had practically crushed and ruined in the long ago was
slowly but surely gaining strength even where he would not make friends.
Worse than all, he was beginning to doubt the evidence of his own senses
as the years receded, and unknown to any soul on earth, even his wife,
there was growing up deep down in his heart a gnawing, insidious,
ever-festering fear that after all, after all, he might have been
mistaken. And yet on the sacred oath of a soldier and a gentleman,
against the most searching cross-examination, again and again had he
most confidently and positively declared that he had both seen and heard
the fatal interview on which the whole case hinged. And as to the exact
language employed, he alone of those within earshot had lived to testify
for or against the accused: of the five soldiers who stood in that now
celebrated group, three were shot to death within the hour. He was
growing nervous, irritable, haggard; he was getting to hate the mere
mention of the case. The promotion of Hayne to his own company thrilled
him with an almost superstitious dismay. _Were_ his words coming true?
_Was_ it the judgment of an offended God that his hideous pride,
obstinacy, and old-time hatred of this officer were now to be revenged
by daily, hourly contact with the victim of his criminal persecution? He
had grown morbidly sensitive to any remarks as to Hayne's having "lived
down" the toils in which he had been encircled. Might he not "live down"
the ensnarer? He dreaded to see him,--though Rayner was no coward,--and
he feared day by day to hear of his restoration to fellowship in the
regiment, and yet would have given half his wealth to bring it about,
could it but have been accomplished without the dreadful admission, "I
was wrong. I was _utterly_ wrong." He had grown lavish in hospitality;
he had become almost aggressively open-handed to his comrades, and had
sought to press money upon men who in no wise needed it. He was as eager
to lend as some are to borrow, and his brother officers dubbed him
"Midas" not because everything he touched would turn to gold, but
because he would intrude his gold upon them at every turn. There were
some who borrowed; and these he struggled not to let repay. He seemed to
have an insane idea that if he could but get his regimental friends
bound to him pecuniarily he could control their opinions and actions. It
was making him sick at heart, and it made him in secret doubly
vindictive and bitter against the man he had doomed to years of
suffering. This showed out that very morning. Mrs. Rayner had begun to
talk, and he turned fiercely upon her:

"Not a word on that subject, Kate, if you love me!--not even the mention
of his name! I must have peace in my own house. It is enough to have to
talk of it elsewhere."

Talk of it he had to. The major early that morning asked him, as they
were going to the _matinee_,--

"Have you seen Hayne yet?"

"Not since he reported on the parade yesterday," was the curt reply.

"Well, I suppose you will send men to help him get those quarters in
habitable shape?"

"I will, of course, major, if he ask it. I don't propose sending men to
do such work for an officer unless the request come."

"He is entitled to that consideration, Rayner, and I think the men
should be sent to him. He is hardly likely to ask."

"Then he is less likely to get them," said the captain, shortly, for,
except the post commander, he well knew that no officer could order it
to be done. He was angry at the major for interfering. They were old
associates, and had entered service almost at the same time, but his
friend had the better luck in promotion and was now his battalion
commander. Rayner made an excuse of stopping to speak with the officer
of the day, and the major went on without him. He was a quiet old
soldier: he wanted no disturbance with his troubled friend, and, like a
sensible man, he turned the matter over to their common superior, in a
very few words, before the arrival of the general audience. It was this
that had caused the colonel to turn quietly to Rayner and say, in the
most matter-of-fact way,--

"Oh, Captain Rayner, I presume Mr. Hayne will need three or four men to
help him get his quarters in shape. I suppose you have already thought
to send them?"

And Rayner flushed, and stammered, "They have not gone yet, sir; but I
had--thought of it."

Later, when the sergeant sent the required detail he reported to the
captain in the company office in five minutes: "The lieutenant's
compliments and thanks, but he does not need the men."

The dinner at the colonel's, quiet as it was and with only eight at
table, was an affair of almost momentous importance to Mr. Hayne. It was
the first thing of the kind he had attended in five years; and though he
well knew for knew that it was intended by the cavalry commander more
especially as a recognition of the services rendered their suffering
men, he could not but rejoice in the courtesy and tact with which he was
received and entertained. The colonel's wife, the adjutant's, and those
of two captains away with the field battalion, were the four ladies who
were there to greet him when, escorted by Mr. Blake, he made his
appearance. How long--how very long--it seemed to him since he had sat
in the presence of refined and attractive women and listened to their
gay and animated chat! They seemed all such good friends, they made him
so thoroughly at home, and they showed so much tact and ease, that never
once did it seem apparent that they knew of his trouble in his own
regiment; and yet there was no actual avoidance of matters in which the
Riflers were generally interested. It was mainly of his brief visit to
the East, however, that they made him talk,--of the operas and theatres
he had attended, the pictures he had seen, the music that was most
popular; and when dinner was over their hostess led him to her piano,
and he played and sang for them again and again. His voice was soft and
sweet, and, though it was uncultivated, he sang with expression and
grace, playing with more skill but less feeling and effect than he sang.
Music and books had been the solace of lonely years, and he could easily
see that he had pleased them with his songs. He went home to the dreary
rookery out on Prairie Avenue and laughed at the howling wind. The bare
grimy walls and the dim kerosene lamp, even Sam's unmelodious snore in
the back room, sent no gloom to his soul. It had been a happy evening.
It had cost him a hard struggle to restrain the emotion which he had
felt at times; and when he withdrew, soon after the trumpets sounded
tattoo, and the ladies fell to discussing him, as women will, there was
but one verdict,--his manners were perfect.

But the colonel said more than that. He had found him far better read
than any other officer of his age he had ever met; and one and all they
expressed the hope that they might see him frequently. No wonder it was
of momentous importance to him. It was the opening to a new life. It
meant that here at least he had met soldiers and gentlemen and their
fair and gracious wives who had welcomed him to their homes, and, though
they must have known that a pall of suspicion and crime had overshadowed
his past, they believed either that he was innocent of the grievous
charge or that his years of exile and suffering had amply atoned. It was
a happy evening indeed to him; but there was gloom at Captain Rayner's.

The captain himself had gone out soon after tattoo. He found that the
parlor was filled with young visitors of both sexes, and he was in no
mood for merriment. Miss Travers was being welcomed to the post in
genuine army style, and was evidently enjoying it. Mrs. Rayner was
flitting nervously in and out of the parlor with a cloud upon her brow,
and for once in her life compelled to preserve temporary silence upon
the subject uppermost in her thoughts. She had been forbidden to speak
of it to her husband; yet she knew he had gone out again with every
probability of needing some one to talk to about the matter. She could
not well broach the topic in the parlor, because she was not at all sure
how Captain and Mrs. Gregg of the cavalry would take it; and they were
still there. She was a loyal wife; her husband's quarrel was hers, and
more too; and she was a woman of intuition even keener than that which
we so readily accord the sex. She knew, and knew well, that a hideous
doubt had been preying for a long time in her husband's heart of hearts,
and she knew still better that it would crush him to believe it was even
suspected by any one else. Right or wrong, the one thing for her to do,
she doubted not, was to maintain the original guilt against all comers,
and to lose no opportunity of feeding the flame that consumed Mr.
Hayne's record and reputation. He was guilty,--he must be guilty; and
though she was a Christian according to her view of the case,--a pillar
of the Church in matters of public charity and picturesque conformity to
all the rubric called for in the services, and much that it did
not,--she was unrelenting in her condemnation of Mr. Hayne. To those who
pointed out that he had made every atonement man could make, she
responded with the severity of conscious virtue that there could be no
atonement without repentance, and no repentance without humility. Mr.
Hayne's whole attitude was that of stubborn pride and resentment; his
atonement was that enforced by the unanimous verdict of his comrades;
and even if it were so that he had more than made amends for his crime,
the rules that held good for ordinary sinners were not applicable to an
officer of the army. _He_ must be a man above suspicion, incapable of
wrong or fraud, and once stained he was forever ineligible as a
gentleman. It was a subject on which she waxed declamatory rather too
often, and the youngsters of her own regiment wearied of it. As Mr.
Foster once expressed it in speaking of this very case, "Mrs. Rayner can
talk more charity and show less than any woman I know." So long as her
talk was aimed against any lurking tendency of their own to look upon
Hayne as a possible martyr, it fell at times on unappreciative ears, and
she was quick to see it and to choose her hearers; but here was a new
phase,--one that might rouse the latent _esprit de corps_ of the
Riflers,--and she was bent on striking while the iron was hot. If
anything would provoke unanimity of action and sentiment in the
regiment, this public recognition by the cavalry, in their very
presence, of the man they cut as a criminal, was the thing of all others
to do it; and she meant to head the revolt.

Possibly Gregg and his modest helpmeet discovered that there was
something she desired to "spring" upon the meeting. The others present
were all of the infantry; and when Captain Rayner simply glanced in,
spoke hurried good-evenings, and went as hurriedly out again, Gregg was
sure of it, and marched his wife away. Then came Mrs. Rayner's
opportunity:

"If it were not Captain Rayner's house, I could not have been even civil
to Captain Gregg. You heard what he said at the club this morning, I
suppose?"

In one form or another, indeed, almost everybody _had_ heard. The
officers present maintained an embarrassed silence. Miss Travers looked
reproachfully at her flushed sister, but to no purpose. At last one of
the ladies remarked,--

"Well, of course I heard of it, but--I've heard so many different
versions. It seems to have grown somewhat since morning."

"It sounds just like him, however," said Mrs. Rayner, "and I made
inquiry before speaking of it. He said he meant to invite Mr. Hayne to
his house to-morrow evening, and if the infantry didn't like it they
could stay away."

"Well, now, Mrs. Rayner," protested Mr. Foster, "of course none of us
heard what he said exactly, but it is my experience that no conversation
was ever repeated without being exaggerated, and I've known old Gregg
for ever so long, and never heard him say a sharp thing yet. Why, he's
the mildest-mannered fellow in the whole ----th Cavalry. He would never
get into such a snarl as that would bring about him in five minutes."

"Well, he said he would do just as the colonel did, anyway,--we have
that straight from cavalry authority,--and we all know what the colonel
has done. He has chosen to honor Mr. Hayne in the presence of the
officers who denounce him, and practically defies the opinion of the
Riflers."

"But, Mrs. Rayner, I did not understand Gregg's remarks to be what you
say, exactly. Blake told me that when asked by somebody whether he was
going to call on Mr. Hayne, Gregg simply replied he didn't know,--he
would ask the colonel."

"Very well. That means, he proposes to be guided by the colonel, or
nothing at all; and Captain Gregg is simply doing what the others will
do. They say to us, in so many words, 'We prefer the society of your
_bete noire_ to your own.' That's the way I look at it," said Mrs.
Rayner, in deep excitement.

It was evident that, though none were prepared to endorse so extreme a
view, there was a strong feeling that the colonel had put an affront
upon the Riflers by his open welcome to Mr. Hayne. He had been exacting
before, and had caused a good deal of growling among the officers and
comment among the women. They were ready to find fault, and here was
strong provocation. Mr. Foster was a youth of unfortunate and unpopular
propensities. He should have held his tongue, instead of striving to
stem the tide.

"I don't uphold Hayne any more than you do, Mrs. Rayner, but it seems to
me this is a case where the colonel has to make some acknowledgment of
Mr. Hayne's conduct--"

"Very good. Let him write him a letter, then, thanking him in the name
of the regiment, but don't pick him up like this in the face of ours,"
interrupted one of the juniors, who was seated near Miss Travers (a wise
stroke of policy: Mrs. Rayner invited him to breakfast); and there was a
chorus of approbation.

"Well, hold on a moment," said Foster. "Hasn't the colonel had every one
of us to dinner more or less frequently?"

"Admitted. But what's that to do with it?"

"Hasn't he invariably invited each officer to dine with him in every
case where an officer has arrived?"

"Granted. But what then?"

"If he broke the rule or precedent in Mr. Hayne's case would he not
practically be saying that he endorsed the views of the court-martial as
opposed to those of the department commander, General Sherman, the
Secretary of War, the President of the United--"

"Oh, make out your transfer papers, Foster. You ought to be in the
cavalry or some other disputatious branch of the service," burst in Mr.
Graham.

"I declare, Mr. Foster, I never thought you would abandon your colors,"
said Mrs. Rayner.

"I haven't, madame, and you've no right to say so," said Foster,
indignantly. "I simply hold that any attempt to work up a regimental row
out of this thing will make bad infinitely worse, and I deprecate the
whole business."

"I suppose you mean to intimate that Captain Rayner's position and that
of the regiment is bad,--all wrong,--that Mr. Hayne has been
persecuted," said Mrs. Rayner, with trembling lips and cheeks aflame.

"Mrs. Rayner, you are unjust," said poor Foster. "I ought not to have
undertaken to explain or defend the colonel's act, perhaps, but I am not
disloyal to my regiment or my colors. What I want is to prevent further
trouble; and I know that anything like a concerted resentment of the
colonel's invitation will lead to infinite harm."

"_You_ may cringe and bow and bear it if you choose; you may humble
yourself to such a piece of insolence; but rest assured there are plenty
of men and women in the Riflers who won't bear it, Mr. Foster; and for
one _I_ won't." She had risen to her full height now, and her eyes were
blazing. "For his own sake I trust the colonel will omit our names from
the next entertainment he gives. Nellie shan't--"

"Oh, think, Mrs. Rayner!" interrupted one of the ladies; "they _must_
give her a dinner or a reception."

"Indeed they shall not! I refuse to enter the door of people who have
insulted my husband as they have."

"Hush! Listen!" said Mr. Graham, springing towards the door.

There was wondering silence an instant.

"It is nothing but the trumpet sounding taps," said Mrs. Rayner,
hurriedly.

But even as she spoke they rose to their feet. Muffled cries were heard,
borne in on the night wind,--a shot, then another, down in the
valley,--the quick peal of the cavalry trumpet.

"It isn't taps. It's fire!" shouted Graham from the door-way. "Come on!"




V.


Down in the valley south of the post a broad glare was already shooting
upward and illumining the sky. One among a dozen little shanties and log
houses, the homes of the laundresses of the garrison and collectively
known as Sudsville, was a mass of flames. There was a rush of officers
across the parade, and the men, answering the alarum of the trumpet and
the shots and shouts of the sentries, came tearing from their quarters
and plunging down the hill. Among the first on the spot came the young
men who were of the party at Captain Rayner's, and Mr. Graham was ahead
of them all. It was plain to the most inexperienced eye that there was
hardly anything left to save in or about the burning shanty. All efforts
must be directed towards preventing the spread of the flames to those
adjoining. Half-clad women and children were rushing about, shrieking
with fright and excitement, and a few men were engaged in dragging
household goods and furniture from those tenements not yet reached by
the flames. Fire-apparatus there seemed to be none, though squads of men
speedily appeared with ladders, axes, and buckets, brought from the
different company quarters, and the arriving officers quickly formed the
bucket-lines and water dipped up from the icy creek began to fly from
hand to hand. Before anything like this was fairly under way, a scene of
semi-tragic, semi-comic intensity had been enacted in the presence of a
rapidly gathering audience. "It was worth more than the price of
admission to hear Blake tell it afterwards," said the officers, later.

A tall, angular woman, frantic with excitement and terror, was dancing
about in the broad glare of the burning hut, tearing her hair, making
wild rushes at the flames from time to time as though intent on dragging
out some prized object that was being consumed before her eyes, and all
the time keeping up a volley of maledictions and abuse in lavish
Hibernian, apparently directed at a cowering object who sat in limp
helplessness upon a little heap of fire-wood, swaying from side to side
and moaning stupidly through the scorched and grimy hands in which his
face was hidden. His clothing was still smoking in places; his hair and
beard were singed to the roots; he was evidently seriously injured, and
the sympathizing soldiers who had gathered around him after deluging him
with snow and water were striving to get him to arise and go with them
to the hospital. A little girl, not ten years old, knelt sobbing and
terrified by his side. She, too, was scorched and singed, and the
soldiers had thrown rough blankets about her; but it was for her father,
not herself, she seemed worried to distraction. Some of the women were
striving to reassure and comfort her in their homely fashion, bidding
her cheer up,--the father was only stupid from drink, and would be all
right as soon as "the liquor was off of him." But the little one was
beyond consolation so long as he could not or would not speak in answer
to her entreaties.

All this time, never pausing for breath, shrieking anathemas on her
drunken spouse, reproaches on her frightened child, and invocations to
all the blessed saints in heaven to reward the gintleman who had saved
her hoarded money,--a smoking packet that she hugged to her
breast,--Mrs. Clancy, "the saynior laundress of Company B," as she had
long styled herself, was prancing up and down through the gathering
crowd, her shrill voice overmastering all other clamor. The vigorous
efforts of the men, directed by cool-headed officers, soon beat back the
flames that were threatening the neighboring shanties, and levelled to
the ground what remained of Private Clancy's home. The fire was
extinguished almost as rapidly as it began, but the torrent of Mrs.
Clancy's eloquence was still unstemmed. The adjurations of sympathetic
sisters to "Howld yer whist," the authoritative admonition of some old
sergeant to "Stop your infernal noise," and the half-maudlin yet
appealing glances of her suffering lord were all insufficient to check
her. It was not until the quiet tones of the colonel were heard that she
began to cool down: "We've had enough of this, Mrs. Clancy: be still,
now, or we'll have to send you to the hospital in the coal-cart." Mrs.
Clancy knew that the colonel was a man of few words, and believed him to
be one of less sentiment. She was afraid of him, and concluded it time
to cease threats and abuse and come down to the more effective _role_ of
wronged and suffering womanhood,--a feat which she accomplished with the
consummate ease of long practice, for the rows in the Clancy household
were matters of garrison notoriety. The surgeon, too, had come, and,
after quick examination of Clancy's condition, had directed him to be
taken at once to the hospital; and thither his little daughter insisted
on following him, despite the efforts of some of the women to detain her
and dress her properly.

Before returning to his quarters the colonel desired to know something
of the origin of the fire. There was testimony enough and to spare.
Every woman in Sudsville had a theory to express, and was eager to be
heard at once and to the exclusion of all others. It was not until he
had summarily ordered them to go to their homes and not come near him
that the colonel managed to get a clear statement from some of the men.

Clancy had been away all the evening, drinking as usual, and Mrs. Clancy
was searching about Sudsville as much for sympathy and listeners as for
him. Little Kate, who knew her father's haunts, had guided him home, and
was striving to get him to his little sleeping-corner before her
mother's return, when in his drunken helplessness he fell against the
table, overturning the kerosene lamp, and the curtains were all aflame
in an instant. It was just after taps--or ten o'clock--when Kate's
shrieks aroused the inmates of Sudsville and started the cry of "Fire."
The flimsy structure of pine boards burned like so much tinder, and the
child and her stupefied father had been dragged forth only in time to
save their lives. The little one, after giving the alarm, had rushed
again into the house and was tugging at his senseless form when rescue
came for both,--none too soon. As for Mrs. Clancy, at the first note of
danger she had rushed screaming to the spot, but only in time to see the
whole interior ablaze and to howl frantically for some man to save her
money,--it was all in the green box under the bed. For husband and child
she had for the moment no thought. They were safely out of the fire by
the time she got there, and she screamed and fought like a fury against
the men who held her back when she would have plunged into the midst of
it. It took but a minute for one or two men to burst through the flimsy
wall with axes, to rescue the burning box and knock off the lid. It was
a sight to see when the contents were handed to her. She knelt, wept,
prayed, counted over bill after bill of smoking, steaming greenbacks,
until suddenly recalled to her senses by the eager curiosity and the
remarks of some of her fellow-women. That she kept money and a good deal
of it in her quarters had long been suspected and as fiercely denied;
but no one had dreamed of such a sum as was revealed. In her frenzy she
had shrieked that the savings of her lifetime were burning,--that there
was over three thousand dollars in the box; but she hid her treasure and
gasped and stammered and swore she was talking "wild-like." "They was
nothing but twos and wans," she vowed; yet there were women there who
declared that they had seen tens and twenties as she hurried them
through her trembling fingers, and Sudsville gossiped and talked for two
hours after she was led away, still moaning and shivering, to the
bedside of poor Clancy, who was the miserable cause of it all. The
colonel listened to the stories with such patience as could be accorded
to witnesses who desired to give prominence to their personal exploits
in subduing the flames and rescuing life and property. It was not until
he and the group of officers with him had been engaged some moments in
taking testimony that something was elicited which caused a new
sensation.

It was not by the united efforts of Sudsville that Clancy and Kate had
been dragged from the flames, but by the individual dash and
determination of a single man: there was no discrepancy here, for the
ten or a dozen who were wildly rushing about the house made no effort to
burst into it until a young soldier leaped through their midst into the
blazing door-way, was seen to throw a blanket over some object within,
and the next minute appeared again, dragging a body through the flames.
Then they had sprung to his aid, and between them Kate and "the ould
man" were lifted into the open air. A moment later he had handed Mrs.
Clancy her packet of money, and--they hadn't seen him since. He was an
officer, said they,--a new one. They thought it must be the new
lieutenant of Company B; and the colonel looked quickly around and said
a few words to his adjutant, who started up the hill forthwith. A group
of officers and ladies were standing at the brow of the plateau east of
the guard-house, gazing down upon the scene below, and other ladies,
with their escorts, had gathered on a little knoll close by the road
that led to Prairie Avenue. It was past these that the adjutant walked
rapidly away, swinging his hurricane-lamp in his hand.

"Which way now, Billings?" called one of the cavalry officers in the
group.

"Over to Mr. Hayne's quarters," he shouted back, never stopping at all.

A silence fell upon the group at mention of the name. They were the
ladies from Captain Rayner's and a few of their immediate friends. All
eyes followed the twinkling light as it danced away eastward towards the
gloomy coal-sheds. Then there was sudden and intense interest. The lamp
had come to a stand-still, was deposited on the ground, and by its dim
ray the adjutant could be seen bending over a dark object that was half
sitting, half reclining at the platform of the shed. Then came a shout,
"Come here, some of you." And most of the men ran to the spot.

For a moment not one word was spoken in the watching group: then Miss
Travers's voice was heard:

"What can it be? Why do they stop there?"

She felt a sudden hand upon her wrist, and her sister's lips at her ear:

"Come away, Nellie. I want to go home. Come!"

"But, Kate, I must see what it means."

"No: come! It's--it's only some other drunken man, probably. Come!" And
she strove to lead her.

But the other ladies were curious too, and all, insensibly, were edging
over to the east as though eager to get in sight of the group. The
recumbent object had been raised, and was seen to be the dark figure of
a man whom the others began slowly to lead away. One of the group came
running back to them: it was Mr. Foster.

"Come, ladies: I will escort you home, as the others are busy."

"What is the matter, Mr. Foster?" was asked by half a dozen voices.

"It was Mr. Hayne,--badly burned, I fear. He was trying to get home
after having saved poor Clancy."

"You don't say so! Oh, isn't there something we can do? Can't we go
that way and be of some help?" was the eager petition of more than one
of the ladies.

"Not now. They will have the doctor in a minute. He has not inhaled
flame; it is all external; but he was partly blinded and could not find
his way. He called to Billings when he heard him coming. I will get you
all home and then go back to him. Come!" And, offering his arm to Mrs.
Rayner, who was foremost in the direction he wanted to go,--the pathway
across the parade,--Mr. Foster led them on. Of course there was eager
talk and voluble sympathy; but Mrs. Rayner spoke not a word. The others
crowded around him with questions, and her silence passed unnoted except
by one.

The moment they were inside the door and alone, Miss Travers turned to
her sister: "Kate, what was this man's crime?"




VI.


An unusual state of affairs existed at the big hospital for several
days: Mrs. Clancy had refused to leave the bedside of her beloved Mike,
and was permitted to remain. For a woman who was notorious as a virago
and bully, who had beaten little Kate from her babyhood and abused and
hammered her Michael until, between her and drink, he was but the wreck
of a stalwart manhood, Mrs. Clancy had developed a degree of devotion
that was utterly unexpected. In all the dozen years of their marital
relations no such trait could be recalled; and yet there had been many
an occasion within the past few years when Clancy's condition demanded
gentle nursing and close attention,--and never would have got it but for
faithful little Kate. The child idolized the broken-down man, and loved
him with a tenderness that his weakness seemed but to augment a
thousandfold, while it but served to infuriate her mother. In former
years, when he was Sergeant Clancy and a fine soldier, many was the time
he had intervened to save her from an undeserved thrashing; many a time
had he seized her in his strong arms and confronted the furious woman
with stern reproof. Between him and the child there had been the
tenderest love, for she was all that was left to him of four. In the old
days Mrs. Clancy had been the belle of the soldiers' balls, a
fine-looking woman, with indomitable powers as a dancer and
conversationalist and an envied reputation for outshining all her rivals
in dress and adornment. "She would ruin Clancy, that she would," was
the unanimous opinion of the soldiers' wives; but he seemed to minister
to her extravagance with unfailing good nature for two or three years.
He had been prudent, careful of his money, was a war-soldier with big
arrears of bounty and, tradition had it, a consummate skill in poker. He
was the moneyed man among the sergeants when the dashing relict of a
brother non-commissioned officer set her widow's cap for him and won. It
did not take many years for her to wheedle most of his money away; but
there was no cessation to the demand, no apparent limit to the supply.
Both were growing older, and now it became evident that Mrs. Clancy was
the elder of the two, and that the artificiality of her charms could not
stand the test of frontier life. No longer sought as the belle of the
soldiers' ball-rooms, she aspired to leadership among their wives and
families, and was accorded that pre-eminence rather than the fierce
battle which was sure to follow any revolt. She became avaricious,--some
said miserly,--and Clancy miserable. Then began the downward course. He
took to drink soon after his return from a long, hard summer's campaign
with the Indians. He lost his sergeant's stripes and went into the
ranks. There came a time when the new colonel forbade his re-enlistment
in the cavalry regiment in which he had served so many a long year. He
had been a brave and devoted soldier. He had a good friend in the
infantry, he said, who wouldn't go back on a poor fellow who took a drop
too much at times, and, to the surprise of many soldiers,--officers and
men,--he was brought to the recruiting officer one day, sober,
soldierly, and trimly dressed, and Captain Rayner expressed his desire
to have him enlisted for his company; and it was done. Mrs. Clancy was
accorded the quarters and rations of a laundress, as was then the
custom, and for a time--a very short time--Clancy seemed on the road to
promotion to his old grade. The enemy tripped him, aided by the
scoldings and abuse of his wife, and he never rallied. Some work was
found for him around the quartermaster's shops which saved him from
guard-duty or the guard-house. The infantry--officers and men--seemed to
feel for the poor, broken-down old fellow and to lay much of his woe to
the door of his wife. There was charity for his faults and sympathy for
his sorrows, but at last it had come to this. He was lying, sorely
injured, in the hospital, and there were times when he was apparently
delirious. At such times, said Mrs. Clancy, she alone could manage him;
and she urged that no other nurse could do more than excite or irritate
him. To the unspeakable grief of little Kate, she, too, was driven from
the sufferer's bedside and forbidden to come into the room except when
her mother gave permission. Clancy had originally been carried into the
general ward with the other patients, but the hospital steward two days
afterwards told the surgeon that the patient moaned and cried so at
night that the other sick men could not sleep, and offered to give up a
little room in his own part of the building. The burly doctor looked
surprised at this concession on the part of the steward, who was a man
tenacious of every perquisite and one who had made much complaint about
the crowded condition of the hospital wards and small rooms ever since
the frozen soldiers had come in. All the same the doctor asked for no
explanation, but gladly availed himself of the steward's offer. Clancy
was moved to this little room adjoining the steward's quarters
forthwith, and Mrs. Clancy was satisfied.

Another thing had happened to excite remark and a good deal of it.
Nothing short of eternal damnation was Mrs. Clancy's frantic sentence on
the head of her unlucky spouse the night of the fire, when she was the
central figure of the picture and when hundreds of witnesses to her
words were grouped around. Correspondingly had she called down the
blessings of the Holy Virgin and all the saints upon the man who rescued
and returned to her that precious packet of money. Everybody heard her,
and it was out of the question for her to retract. Nevertheless, from
within an hour after Clancy's admission to the hospital not another word
of the kind escaped her lips. She was all patience and pity with the
injured man, and she shunned all allusion to his preserver and her
benefactor. The surgeon had been called away, after doing all in his
power to make Clancy comfortable,--he was needed elsewhere,--and only
two or three soldiers and a hospital nurse still remained by his
bedside, where Mrs. Clancy and little Kate were drying their tears and
receiving consolation from the steward's wife. The doctor had mentioned
a name as he went away, and it was seen that Clancy was striving to ask
a question. Sergeant Nolan bent down:

"Lie quiet, Clancy, me boy: you _must_ be quiet, or you'll move the
bandages."

"Who did he say was burned? who was he going to see?" gasped the
sufferer.

"The new lieutenant, Clancy,--him that pulled ye out. He's a good one,
and it's Mrs. Clancy that'll tell ye the same."

"Tell him what?" said she, turning about in sudden interest.

"About the lieutenant's pulling him out of the fire and saving your
money."

"Indeed yes! The blessings of all the saints be upon his beautiful head,
and--"

"But _who_ was it? What was his name, I say?" vehemently interrupted
Clancy, half raising himself upon his elbow, and groaning with the
effort. "What was his name? I didn't see him."

"Lieutenant Hayne, man."

"Oh, my God!" gasped Clancy, and fell back as though struck a sudden
blow.

She sprang to his side: "It's faint he is. Don't answer his questions,
sergeant! He's beside himself! Oh, will ye never stop talking to him and
lave him in pace? Go away, all of ye's,--go away, I say, or ye'll dhrive
him crazy wid yer--Be quiet, Mike! don't ye spake agin." And she laid a
broad red hand upon his face. He only groaned again, and threw his one
unbandaged arm across his darkened eyes, as though to hide from sight of
all.

From that time on she made no mention of the name that so strangely
excited her stricken husband; but the watchers in the hospital the next
night declared that in his ravings Clancy kept calling for Lieutenant
Hayne.

Stannard's battalion of the cavalry came marching into the post two days
after the fire, and created a diversion in the garrison talk, which for
one long day had been all of that dramatic incident and its attendant
circumstances. In social circles, among the officers and ladies, the
main topic was the conduct of Mr. Hayne and the injuries he had
sustained as a consequence of his gallant rescue. Among the enlisted men
and the denizens of Sudsville the talk was principally of the revelation
of Mrs. Clancy's hoard of greenbacks. But in both circles a singular
story was just beginning to creep around, and it was to the effect that
Clancy had cried aloud and fainted dead away and that Mrs. Clancy had
gone into hysterics when they were told that Lieutenant Hayne was the
man to whom the one owed his life and the other her money. Some one met
Captain Rayner on the sidewalk the morning Stannard came marching home,
and asked him if he had heard the queer story about Clancy. He had not,
and it was told him then and there. Rayner did not even attempt to laugh
at it or turn it off in any way. He looked dazed, stunned, for a moment,
turned very white and old-looking, and, hardly saying good-day to his
informant, faced about and went straight to his quarters. He was not
among the crowd that gathered to welcome the incoming cavalrymen that
bright, crisp, winter day; and that evening Mrs. Rayner went to the
hospital to ask what she could do for Clancy and his wife. Captain
Rayner always expected her to see that every care and attention was paid
to the sick and needy of his company, she explained to the doctor, who
could not recall having seen her on a similar errand before, although
sick and needy of Company B were not unknown in garrisons where he had
served with them. She spent a good while with Mrs. Clancy, whom she had
never noticed hitherto, much to the laundress's indignation, and
concerning whose conduct she had been known to express herself in terms
of extreme disapprobation. But in times of suffering such things are
forgotten: Mrs. Rayner was full of sympathy and interest; there was
nothing she was not eager to send them, and no thanks were necessary.
She could never do too much for the men of her husband's company.

Yet there was a member of her husband's company on whom in his suffering
neither she nor the captain saw fit to call. Mr. Hayne's eyes were
seriously injured by the flames and heat, and he was now living in
darkness. It might be a month, said the doctor, before he could use his
eyes again.

"Only think of that poor fellow, all alone out there on that ghastly
prairie and unable to read!" was the exclamation of one of the cavalry
ladies in Mrs. Rayner's presence; and, as there was an awkward silence
and somebody had to break it, Mrs. Rayner responded,--

"If I lived on Prairie Avenue I should consider blindness a blessing."

It was an unfortunate remark. There was strong sympathy developing for
Hayne all through the garrison. Mrs. Rayner never meant that it should
have any such significance, but inside of twenty-four hours, in course
of which her language had been repeated some dozens of times and
distorted quite as many, the generally accepted version of the story was
that Mrs. Rayner, so far from expressing the faintest sympathy or sorrow
for Mr. Hayne's misfortune, so far from expressing the natural
gratification which a lady should feel that it was an officer of her
regiment who had reached the scene of danger ahead of the cavalry
officer of the guard, had said in so many words that Mr. Hayne ought to
be thankful that blindness was the worst thing that had come to him.

There was little chance for harmony after that. Many men and some women,
of course, refused to believe it, and said they felt confident that she
had been misrepresented. Still, all knew by this time that Mrs. Rayner
was bitter against Hayne, and had heard of her denunciation of the
colonel's action. So, too, had the colonel heard that she openly
declared that she would refuse any invitation extended to her or to her
sister which might involve her accepting hospitality at his house. These
things _do_ get around in most astonishing ways.

Then another complication arose: Hayne, too, was mixing matters. The
major commanding the battalion, a man in no wise connected with his
misfortunes, had gone to him and urged, with the doctor's full consent,
that he should be moved over into and become an inmate of his household
in garrison. He had a big, roomy house. His wife earnestly added her
entreaties to the major's, but all to no purpose: Mr. Hayne firmly
declined. He thanked the major; he rose and bent over the lady's hand
and thanked her with a voice that was full of gentleness and gratitude;
but he said that he had learned to live in solitude. Sam was accustomed
to all his ways, and he had every comfort he needed. His wants were few
and simple. She would not be content, and urged him further. He loved
reading: surely he would miss his books and would need some one to read
aloud to him, and there were so many ladies in the garrison who would be
glad to meet at her house and read to him by turns. He loved music, she
heard, and there was her piano, and she knew several who would be
delighted to come and play for him by the hour. He shook his head, and
the bandages hid the tears that came to his smarting eyes. He had made
arrangements to be read aloud to, he said; and as for music, that must
wait awhile. The kind woman retired dismayed,--she could not understand
such obduracy,--and her husband felt rebuffed. Stannard of the cavalry,
too, came in with his gentle wife. She was loved throughout the regiment
for her kindliness and grace of mind, as well as for her devotion to the
sick and suffering in the old days of the Indian wars, and Stannard had
made a similar proffer and been similarly refused, and he had gone away
indignant. He thought Mr. Hayne too bumptious to live; but he bore no
malice, and his wrath was soon over. Many of the cavalry officers called
in person and tendered their services, and were very civilly received,
but all offers were positively declined. Just what the infantry officers
should do was a momentous question. That they could no longer hold aloof
was a matter that was quickly settled, and three of their number went
through the chill gloaming of the wintry eve and sent in their cards by
Sam, who ushered them into the cheerless front room, while one of their
number followed to the door-way which led to the room in rear, in which,
still confined to his bed by the doctor's advice, the injured officer
was lying. It was Mr. Ross who went to the door and cleared his throat
and stood in the presence of the man to whom, more than five years
before, he had refused his hand. The others listened anxiously:

"Mr. Hayne, this is Ross. I come with Foster and Graham to say how
deeply we regret your injuries, and to tender our sympathy and our
services."

There was a dead silence for a moment. Foster and Graham stood with
hearts that beat unaccountably hard, looking at each other in
perplexity. Would he never reply?

The answer came at last,--a question:

"To what injuries do you allude, Mr. Ross?"

Even in the twilight they could see the sudden flush of the Scotchman's
cheek. He was a blunt fellow, but, as the senior, had been chosen
spokesman for the three. The abrupt question staggered him. It was a
second or two before he could collect himself.

"I mean the injuries at the fire," he replied.

This time, no answer whatever. It was growing too painful. Ross looked
in bewilderment at the bandaged face, and again broke the silence:

"We hope you won't deny us the right to be of service, Mr. Hayne. If
there is anything we can do that you need, or would like--"
hesitatingly.

"You have nothing further to say?" asked the calm voice from the pillow.

"I--don't know what else we _can_ say," faltered Ross, after an
instant's pause.

The answer came, firm and prompt, but icily cool:

"Then there is nothing that you can do."

And the three took their departure, sore at heart.

There were others of the infantry who had purposed going to see Hayne
that evening, but the story of Ross's experience put an end to it all.
It was plain that even now Mr. Hayne made the condition of the faintest
advance from his regimental comrades a full confession of error. He
would have no less.

That evening the colonel sat by his bedside and had an earnest talk. He
ventured to expostulate with the invalid on his refusal to go to the
major's or to Stannard's. He could have so many comforts and delicacies
there that would be impossible here. He did not refer to edibles and
drinkables alone, he said, with a smile; but Hayne's patient face gave
no sign of relenting. He heard the colonel through, and then said,
slowly and firmly,--

"I have not acted hastily, sir: I appreciate their kindness, and am not
ungrateful. Five years ago my whole life was changed. From that time to
this I have done without a host of things that used to be indispensable,
and have abjured them one and all for a single luxury that I cannot live
without,--the luxury of utter independence,--the joy of knowing that I
owe no man anything,--the blessing of being beholden to no one on earth
for a single service I cannot pay for. It is the one luxury left me."




VII.


It was a clear winter's evening, sharply cold, about a week after the
fire, when, as Mrs. Rayner came down the stairway equipped for a walk,
and was passing the parlor door without stopping, Miss Travers caught
sight of and called to her,--

"Are you going walking, Kate? _Do_ wait a moment, and I'll go with you."

Any one in the hall could have shared the author's privilege and seen
the expression of annoyance and confusion that appeared on Mrs. Rayner's
face:

"I thought you _were_ out. Did not Mr. Graham take you walking?"

"He did; but we wandered into Mrs. Waldron's, and she and the major
begged us to stay, and we had some music, and then the first call
sounded for retreat, and Mr. Graham had to go, so he brought me home.
I've had no walk, and need exercise."

"But I don't like you to be out after sunset. That cough of yours--"

"Disappeared the day after I got here, Kate, and there hasn't been a
vestige of it since. This high, dry climate put an end to it. No, I'll
be ready in one minute more. Do wait."

Mrs. Rayner's hand was turning the knob while her sister was hurrying to
the front door and drawing on her heavy jacket as she did so. The former
faced her impatiently:

"I don't think you are at all courteous to your visitors. You know just
as well as I do that Mr. Foster or Mr. Royce or some other of those
young officers are sure to be in just at this hour. You really are very
thoughtless, Nellie."

Miss Travers stopped short in her preparations.

"Kate Rayner," she began, impressively, "it was only night before last
that you rebuked me for sitting here with Mr. Blake at this very hour,
and asked me how I supposed Mr. Van Antwerp would like it. Now you--"

"Fudge! I cannot stay and listen to such talk. If you _must_ go, wait a
few minutes until I get back. I--I want to make a short call. Then I'll
take you."

"So do I want to make a short call,--over at the doctor's; and you are
going right to the hospital, are you not?"

"How do you know I am?" asked Mrs. Rayner, reddening.

"You _do_ go there every evening, it seems to me."

"I don't. Who told you I did?"

"Several people mentioned your kindness and attention to the Clancys,
Kate. I have heard it from many sources."

"I wish people would mind their own affairs," wailed Mrs. Rayner,
peevishly.

"So do I, Kate; but they never have, and never will, especially with an
engaged girl. I have more to complain of than you, but it doesn't make
me forlorn, whereas you look fearfully worried about nothing."

"Who says I'm worried?" asked Mrs. Rayner, with sudden vehemence.

"You look worried, Kate, and haven't been at all like yourself for
several days. Now, _why_ shouldn't I go to the hospital with you? Why do
you try to hide your going from me? Don't you know that I must have
heard the strange stories that are flitting about the garrison? Haven't
I asked you to set me right if I have been told a wrong one? Kate, you
are fretting yourself to death about something, and the captain looks
worried and ill. I cannot but think it has some connection with the case
of Mr. Hayne. Why should the Clancys--"

"You have no right to think any such thing," answered her sister,
angrily. "We have suffered too much at his hands or on his account
already, and I never want to hear such words from your lips. It would
outrage Captain Rayner to hear that my sister, to whom he has given a
home and a welcome, was linking herself with those who side with
that--that thief."

"Kate! Oh, how _can_ you use such words? How dare you speak so of an
officer? You would not tell me what he was accused of; but I tell you
that if it be theft I don't believe it,--and no one else--"

There was a sudden footfall on the porch without, and a quick, sharp,
imperative knock at the door. Mrs. Rayner fled back along the hall
towards the dining-room. Miss Travers, hesitating but a second, opened
the door.

It was the soldier telegraph-operator, with a despatch-envelope in his
hand:

"It is for Mrs. Rayner, miss, and an answer is expected. Shall I wait?"

Mrs. Rayner came hastily forward from her place of refuge within the
dining-room, took the envelope without a word, and passed into the
parlor, where, standing beneath the lamp, she tore it open, glanced
anxiously at its contents, then threw it with an exclamation of peevish
indignation upon the table:

"You'll have to answer for yourself, Nellie. I cannot straighten your
affairs and mine too." And with that she was going; but Miss Travers
called her back.

The message simply read, "No letter in four days. Is anything wrong?
Answer paid," and was addressed to Mrs. Rayner and signed S.V.A.

"I think you have been extremely neglectful," said Mrs. Rayner, who had
turned and now stood watching the rising color and impatiently tapping
foot of her younger sister. Miss Travers bit her lips and compressed
them hard. There was an evident struggle in her mind between a desire to
make an impulsive and sweeping reply and an effort to control herself.

"Will you answer a quiet question or two?" she finally asked.

"You know perfectly well I will," was the sisterly rejoinder.

"How long does it take a letter to go from here to New York?"

"Five or six days, I suppose."

Miss Travers stepped to the door, briefly told the soldier there was no
answer, thanked him for waiting, and returned.

"You are not going to reply?" asked Mrs. Rayner, in amaze.

"_I_ am not; and I inferred _you_ did not intend to. Now another
question. How many days have we been here?"

"Eight or nine,--nine, it is."

"You saw me post a letter to Mr. Van Antwerp as we left the Missouri,
did you not?"

"Yes. At least I suppose so."

"I wrote again as soon as we got settled here, three days after that,
did I not?"

"You said you did," replied Mrs. Rayner, ungraciously.

"And you, Kate, when you are yourself have been prompt to declare that I
say what I mean. Very probably it may have been four days from the time
that letter from the transfer reached Wall Street to the time the next
one could get to him from here, even had I written the night we arrived.
Possibly you forget that you forbade my doing so, and sent me to bed
early. Mr. Van Antwerp has simply failed to remember that I had gone
several hundred miles farther west; and even had I written on the train
twice a day, the letters would not have reached him uninterruptedly. By
this time he is beginning to get them fast enough. And as for you, Kate,
you are quite as unjust as he. It augurs badly for my future peace;
and--I am learning two lessons here, Kate."

"What two, pray?"

"That he can be foolishly unreliable in estimating a woman."

"And the other?"

"That you may be persistently unreliable in your judgment of a man."

Verily, for a young woman with a sweet, girlish face, whom we saw but a
week agone twitching a kitten's ears and saying little or nothing, Miss
Travers was displaying unexpected fighting qualities. For a moment, Mrs.
Rayner glared at her in tremulous indignation and dismay.

"You--you ought to be ashamed of yourself!" was her eventual outbreak.

But to this there was no reply. Miss Travers moved quietly to the
door-way, turned and looked her angry sister in the eye, and said,--

"I shall give up the walk, and will go to my room. Excuse me to any
visitors this evening."

"You are not going to write to him now, when you are angry, I hope?"

"I shall not write to him until to-morrow, but when I do I shall tell
him this, Kate: that if he desire my confidence he will address his
complaints and inquiries to me. If I am old enough to be engaged to him,
in your opinion, I am equally old enough to attend to such details as
these, in my own."

Mrs. Rayner stood one moment as though astounded; then she flew to the
door and relieved her surcharged bosom as follows, "Well, I pity the man
you marry, whether you are lucky enough to keep this one or not!" and
flounced indignantly out of the house.

When Captain Rayner came in, half an hour afterwards, the parlor was
deserted. He was looking worn and dispirited. Finding no one on the
ground-floor, he went to the foot of the stairs, and called,--

"Kate."

A door opened above: "Kate has gone out, captain."

"Do you know where, Nellie?"

"Over to the hospital, I think; though I cannot say."

She heard him sigh deeply, move irresolutely about the hall for a
moment, then turn and go out.

At his gate he found two figures dimly visible in the gathering
darkness: they had stopped on hearing his footstep. One was an officer
in uniform, wrapped in heavy overcoat, with a fur cap, and a bandage
over his eyes. The other was a Chinese servant, and it was the latter
who asked,--

"This Maje Waldlon's?"

"No," said he, hastily. "Major Waldron's is the third door beyond."

At the sound of his voice the officer quickly started, but spoke in low,
measured tone: "Straight ahead, Sam." And the Chinaman led him on.

Rayner stood a moment watching them, bitter thoughts coursing through
his mind. Mr. Hayne was evidently sufficiently recovered to be up and
out for air, and now he was being invited again. This time it was his
old comrade Waldron who honored him. Probably it was another dinner.
Little by little, at this rate, the time would soon come when Mr. Hayne
would be asked everywhere and he and his correspondingly dropped. He
turned miserably away, and went back to the billiard-rooms at the store.
When Mrs. Rayner rang her bell for tea that evening he had not
reappeared, and she sent a messenger for him.

It was a brilliant moonlit evening. A strong prairie gale had begun to
blow from the northwest, and was banging shutters and whirling pebbles
at a furious rate. At the sound of the trumpets wailing tattoo a brace
of young officers calling on the ladies took their leave. The captain
had retired to his den, or study, where he shut himself up a good deal
of late, and thither Mrs. Rayner followed him and closed the door after
her. Throwing a cloak over her shoulders, Miss Travers stepped out on
the piazza and gazed in delight upon the moonlit panorama,--the
snow-covered summits to the south and west, the rolling expanse of
upland prairie between, the rough outlines of the foot-hills softened in
the silvery light, the dark shadows of the barracks across the parade,
the twinkling lights of the sergeants as they took their stations, the
soldierly forms of the officers hastening to their companies far across
the frozen level. Suddenly she became aware of two forms coming down the
walk. They issued from Major Waldron's quarters, and the door closed
behind them. One was a young officer; the other, she speedily made out,
a Chinese servant, who was guiding his master. She knew the pair in an
instant, and her first impulse was to retire. Then she reflected that he
could not see, and she wanted to look: so she stayed. They had almost
reached her gate, when a wild blast whirled the officer's cape about his
ears and sent some sheets of music flying across the road. Leaving his
master at the fence, the Chinaman sped in pursuit; and the next thing
she noted was that Mr. Hayne's fur cap was blown from his head and that
he was groping for it helplessly.

There was no one to call, no one to assist. She hesitated one minute,
looked anxiously around, then sprang to the gate, picked up the cap,
pulled it well down over the bandaged eyes, seized the young officer
firmly by the arm, drew him within the gate, and led him to the shelter
of the piazza. Once out of the fury of the gale, she could hear his
question, "Did you get it all, Sam?"

"Not yet," she answered. Oh, how she longed for a deep contralto! "He is
coming. He will be here in a moment."

"I am so sorry to have been a trouble to you," he began again, vaguely.

"You are no trouble to me. I'm glad I was where I happened to see you
and could help."

He spoke no more for a minute. She stood gazing at all that was visible
of the pale face below the darkened eyes. It was so clear-cut, so
refined in feature, and the lips under the sweeping blonde moustache,
though set and compressed, were delicate and pink. He turned his head
eagerly towards the parade; but Sam was still far away. The music had
scattered, and was leading him a lively dance.

"Isn't my servant coming?" he asked, constrainedly. "I fear I'm keeping
you. Please do not wait. He will find me here. You were going
somewhere."

"No,--unless it was here." She was trembling now. "Please be patient,
Mr.--Mr. Hayne. Sam may be a minute or two yet, and here you are out of
the wind."

Again she looked in his face. He was listening eagerly to her words, as
though striving to "place" her voice. _Could_ she be mistaken? Was he,
too, not trembling? Beyond all doubt his lips were quivering now.

"May I not know who it is that led me here?" he asked, gently.

She hesitated, hardly knowing how to tell him.

"Try and guess," she laughed, nervously. "But you couldn't. You do not
know my name. It is my good fortune, Mr. Hayne. You--you saved my
kitten; I--your cap."

There was no mistaking his start. Beyond doubt he had winced as though
stung, and was now striving to grope his way to the railing. She divined
his purpose in an instant, and her slender hand was laid pleadingly yet
firmly on his arm.

"Mr. Hayne, don't go. Don't think of going. Stay here until Sam comes.
He's coming now," she faltered.

"Is this Captain Rayner's house?" he asked, hoarse and low.

"No matter whose it is! I welcome you here. You shall not go," she
cried, impulsively, and both little hands were tagging at his arm. He
had found the railing, and was pulling himself towards the gate, but her
words, her clinging hands, were too persuasive.

"I cannot realize this," he said. "I do not understand--"

"Do not try to understand it, Mr. Hayne. If I am only a girl, I have a
right to think for myself. My father was a soldier,--I am Nellie
Travers,--and if he were alive I know well he would have had me do just
what I have done this night. Now won't you stay?"

And light was beaming in through his darkened eyes and gladdening his
soul with a rapture he had not known for years. One instant he seized
and clasped her hand. "May God bless you!" was all he whispered, but so
softly that even she did not hear him. He bowed low over the slender
white hand, and stayed.




VIII.


March had come,--the month of gale and bluster, sleet and storm, in
almost every section of our broad domain,--and March at Warrener was to
the full as blustering and conscienceless as in New England. There were
a few days of sunshine during the first week; then came a fortnight of
raging snow-storms. The cavalry troops, officers and men, went about
their stable-duties as usual, but, except for roll-call on the porch of
the barracks and for guard-mounting over at the guard-house, all
military exercise seemed suspended. This meant livelier times for the
ladies, however, as the officers were enabled to devote just so many
more hours a day to their entertainment. There were two or three hops a
week over in the big assembly-room, and there was some talk of getting
up a german in honor of Miss Travers, but the strained relations
existing between Mrs. Rayner and the ladies of other families at the
post made the matter difficult of accomplishment. There were bright
little luncheon-, dinner-, and tea-parties, where the young officers and
the younger ladies met every day; and, besides all this, despite the
fact that Mrs. Rayner had at first shown a fixed determination to
discuss the rights and wrongs of "the Hayne affair," as it was now
beginning to be termed, with all comers who belonged to the Riflers, it
had grown to be a very general thing for the youngsters to drop in at
her house at all hours of the day; but that was because there were
attractions there which outweighed her combativeness. Then Rayner
himself overheard some comments on the mistake she was making, and
forbade her discussing the subject with the officers even of her own
regiment. She was indignant, and demanded a reason. He would name no
names, but told her that he had heard enough to convince him she was
doing him more harm than good, and, if anything, contributing to the
turn of the tide in Hayne's favor. Then she felt outraged and utterly
misjudged. It was a critical time for her, and if deprived of the use of
her main weapon of offence and defence the battle was sure to go amiss.
Sorely against her inclination, she obeyed her lord, for, as has been
said, she was a loyal wife, and for the time being the baby became the
recipient of her undivided attention.

True to her declaration, she behaved so coldly and with such marked
distance of manner to the colonel and his wife when they met in society
immediately after the dinner that the colonel quietly told his wife she
need not give either dinner or reception in honor of Mrs. Rayner's
return. He would like to have her do something to welcome Miss Travers,
for he thought the girl had much of her father in her. He knew him well
in the old days before and during the war, and liked him. He liked her
looks and her sweet, unaffected, cheery manner. He liked the contrast
between her and her sister; for Miss Travers had listened in silence to
her sister's exposition of what her manner should be to the colonel and
his wife, and when they met she was bright and winsome. The colonel
stood and talked with her about her father, whom she could remember only
vaguely, but of whom she never tired of hearing; and that night Mrs.
Rayner rebuked her severely for her disloyalty to the captain, who had
given her a home.

But when Mrs. Rayner heard that Major and Mrs. Waldron had invited Mr.
Hayne to dine with them, and had invited to meet him two of the cavalry
officers and their wives, she was incensed beyond measure. She and Mrs.
Waldron had a brief talk, as a result of which Mrs. Rayner refused to
speak to Mrs. Waldron at the evening party given by Mrs. Stannard in
honor of her and her sister. It was this that brought on the crisis.
Whatever was said between the men was not told. Major Waldron and
Captain Rayner had a long consultation, and they took no one into their
confidence; but Mrs. Rayner obeyed her husband, went to Mrs. Waldron and
apologized for her rudeness, and then went with her sister and returned
the call of the colonel's wife; but she chose a bright afternoon, when
she knew well the lady was not at home.

She retired from the contest, apparently, as has been said, and took
much Christian consolation to herself from the fact that at so great a
sacrifice she was obeying her husband and doing the duty she owed to
him. In very truth, however, the contest was withdrawn from her by the
fact that for a week or more after his evening at the Waldrons' Mr.
Hayne did not reappear in garrison, and she had no cause to talk about
him. Officers visiting the house avoided mention of his name. Ladies of
the cavalry regiment calling upon Mrs. Rayner and Miss Travers
occasionally spoke of him and his devotion to the men and his bravery at
the fire, but rather as though they meant in a general way to compliment
the Riflers, not Mr. Hayne; and so she heard little of the man whose
existence was so sore a trial to her. What she would have said, what she
would have thought, had she known of the meeting between him and her
guarded Nellie, is beyond us to describe; but she never dreamed of such
a thing, and Miss Travers never dreamed of telling her,--for the
present, at least. Fortunately--or unfortunately--for the latter, it was
not so much of her relations with Mr. Hayne as of her relations with
half a dozen young bachelors that Mrs. Rayner speedily felt herself
compelled to complain. It was a blessed relief to the elder sister. Her
surcharged spirit was in sore need of an escape-valve. She was ready to
boil over in the mental ebullition consequent upon Mr. Hayne's reception
at the post, and with all the pent-up irritability which that episode
had generated she could not have contained herself and slept. But here
Miss Travers came to her relief. Her beauty, her winsome ways, her
unqualified delight in everything that was soldierly, speedily rendered
her vastly attractive to all the young officers in garrison. Graham and
Foster of the infantry, Merton, Webster, and Royce of the cavalry,
haunted the house at all manner of hours, and the captain bade them
welcome and urged them to come oftener and stay later, and told Mrs.
Rayner he wanted some kind of a supper or collation every night. He set
before his guests a good deal of wine, and drank a good deal more
himself than he had ever been known to do before, and they were keeping
very late hours at Rayner's, for, said the captain, "I don't care if
Nellie is engaged: she shall have a good time while she's here; and if
the boys know all about it,--goodness knows you've told them often
enough, Kate,--and they don't mind it, why, it's nobody's
business,--here, at least."

What Mr. Van Antwerp might think or care was another matter. Rayner
never saw him, and did not know him. He rather resented it that Van
Antwerp had never written to him and asked his consent. As Mrs. Rayner's
husband and Nellie's brother-in-law, it seemed to him he stood _in loco
parentis_; but Mrs. Rayner managed the whole thing herself, and he was
not even consulted. If anything, he rather enjoyed the contemplation of
Van Antwerp's fidgety frame of mind as described to him by Mrs. Rayner
about the time it became apparent to her that Nellie was enjoying the
attentions of which she was so general an object, and that the captain
was sitting up later and drinking more wine than was good for him. She
was aware that the very number of Nell's admirers would probably prevent
her becoming entangled with any one of them, but she needed something to
scold about, and eagerly pitched upon this. She knew well that she could
not comfort her husband in the anxiety that was gnawing at his
heart-strings, but she was jealous of comfort that might come to him
from any other source, and the Lethe of wine and jolly companionship she
dreaded most of all. Long, long before, she had induced him to promise
that he would never offer the young officers spirits in his house. She
would not prohibit wine at table, she said; but she never thought of
there coming a time when he himself would seek consolation in the glass
and make up in quantity what it lacked in alcoholic strength. He was
impatient of all reproof now, and would listen to no talk; but Nellie
was years her junior,--more years than she would admit except at such
times as these, when she meant to admonish; and Nellie had to take it.

Two weeks after their arrival at Warrener the burden of Mrs. Rayner's
song--morn, noon, and night--was, "What would Mr. Van Antwerp say if he
could but see this or hear that?"

Can any reader recall an instance where the cause of an absent lover was
benefited by the ceaseless warning in a woman's ear, "Remember, you're
engaged"? The hero of antiquity who caused himself to be attended by a
shadowing slave whispering ever and only, "Remember, thou art mortal,"
is a fine figure to contemplate--at this remote date. He, we are told,
admitted the need, submitted to the infliction. But lives there a woman
who will admit that she needs any instruction as to what her conduct
should be when the lord of her heart is away? Lives there a woman who,
submitting, because she cannot escape, to the constant reminder, "Thou
art engaged," will not resent it in her heart of hearts and possibly
revenge herself on the one alone whom she holds at her mercy? Left to
herself,--to her generosity, her conscience, her innate tenderness,--the
cause of the absent one will plead for itself, and, if it have even
faint foundation, hold its own. "With the best intentions in the world,"
many an excellent cause has been ruined by the injudicious urgings of a
mother; but to talk an engaged girl into mutiny, rely on the
infallibility of two women,--a married sister or a maiden aunt.

Just what Mr. Van Antwerp would have said could he have seen the
situation at Warrener is perhaps impossible to predict. Just what he did
say without seeing was, perhaps, the most unwise thing he could have
thought of: he urged Mrs. Rayner to keep reminding Nellie of her
promise. His had not been a life of unmixed joy. He was now nearly
thirty-five, and desperately in love with a pretty girl who had simply
bewitched him during the previous summer. It was not easy to approach
her then, he found, for her sister kept vigilant guard; but, once
satisfied of his high connections, his wealth, and his social standing,
the door was opened, and he was something more than welcomed, said the
gossips at the Surf House. What his past history had been, where and how
his life had been spent, were matters of less consequence, apparently,
than what he was now. He had been wild at college, as other boys had
been, she learned; he had tried the cattle-business in the West, she was
told; but there had been a quarrel with his father, a reconciliation, a
devoted mother, a long sojourn abroad,--Heidelberg,--a sudden summons to
return, the death of the father, and then the management of a valuable
estate fell to the son. There were other children, brother and sisters,
three in all, but Steven was the first-born and the mother's glory. She
was with him at the sea-side, and the first thing that moved Nellie
Travers to like him was his devotion to that white-haired woman who
seemed so happy in his care. Between that mother and Mrs. Rayner there
had speedily sprung up an acquaintance. She had vastly admired Nellie,
and during the first fortnight of their visit to the Surf House had
shown her many attentions. The illness of a daughter called her away,
and Mrs. Rayner announced that she, too, was going elsewhere, when Mr.
Van Antwerp himself returned, and Mrs. Rayner decided it was so late in
the season that they had better remain until it was time to go to town.
In October they spent a fortnight in the city, staying at the
Westminster, and he was assiduous in his attentions, taking them
everywhere, and lavishing flowers and bonbons upon Nell. Then Mrs. Van
Antwerp invited them to visit her at her own comfortable, old-fashioned
house down town, and Mrs. Rayner was eager to accept, but Nellie said
no; she would not do it: she could not accept Mr. Van Antwerp; she
liked, admired, and was attracted by him, but she felt that love him she
did not. He was devoted, but had tact and patience, and Mrs. Rayner at
last yielded to her demand and took her off in October to spend some
time in the interior of the State with relations of their mother, and
there, frequently, came Mr. Van Antwerp to see her and to urge his suit.
They were to have gone to Warrener immediately after the holidays, but
January came and Nellie had not surrendered. Another week in the city, a
long talk with the devoted old mother whose heart was so wrapped up in
her son's happiness and whose arms seemed yearning to enfold the lovely
girl, and Nellie was conquered. If not fully convinced of her love for
Mr. Van Antwerp, she was more than half in love with his mother. Her
promise was given, and then she seemed eager to get back to the
frontier which she had known and loved as a child. "I want to see the
mountains, the snow-peaks, the great rolling prairies, once more," she
said; and he had to consent. Man never urged more importunately than he
that the wedding should come off that very winter; but Nellie once more
said no; she could not and would not listen to an earlier date than the
summer to come.

No one on earth knew with what sore foreboding and misery he let her go.
It was something that Mrs. Rayner could not help remarking,--his
unconquerable aversion to every mention of the army and of his own
slight experience on the frontier. He would not talk of it even with
Nellie, who was an enthusiast and had spent two years of her girlhood
almost under the shadow of Laramie Peak and loved the mere mention of
the Wyoming streams and valleys. In her husband's name Mrs. Rayner had
urged him to drop his business early in the spring and come to them for
a visit. He declared it was utterly impossible. Every moment of his time
must be given to the settling of estate affairs, so that he could be a
free man in the summer. He meant to take his bride abroad immediately
and spend a year or more in Europe. These were details which were
industriously circulated by Mrs. Rayner and speedily became garrison
property. It seemed to the men that in bringing her sister there engaged
she had violated all precedent to begin with, and in this instance, at
least, there was general complaint. Mr. Blake said it reminded him of
his early boyhood, when they used to take him to the great toy-stores at
Christmas: "Look all you like, long for it as much as you please, but
don't touch." Merton and Royce, of the cavalry, said it was simply a
challenge to any better fellow to cut in and cut out the Knickerbocker;
and, to do them justice, they did their best to carry out their theory.
Both they and their comrades of the Riflers were assiduous in their
attentions to Miss Travers, and other ladies, less favored, made
acrimonious comment in consequence. A maiden sister of one of the
veteran captains in the ----th, a damsel whose stern asceticism of
character was reflected in her features and grimly illustrated in her
dress, was moved to censure of her more attractive neighbor. "If I had
given my heart to a gentleman," said she, and her manner was indicative
of the long struggle which such a bestowal would cost both him and her,
"nothing on earth would induce _me_ to accept attentions from any one
else, not if _he_ were millions of miles away."

But Nellie Travers was "accepting attentions" with laughing grace and
enjoying the society of these young fellows immensely. The house would
have been gloomy without her and "the boys," Rayner was prompt to admit,
for he was ill at ease and sorely worried, while his inflammable Kate
was fuming over the situation of her husband's affairs. Under ordinary
circumstances she would have seen very little to object to so long as
Nellie showed no preference for any one of her admirers at Warrener, and
unless peevish or perturbed in spirit would have made little allusion to
it. As matters stood, however, she was in a most querulous and excitable
mood: she could not rail at the real cause of her misery, and so,
woman-like, she was thankful for a pretext for uncorking the vials of
her wrath on somebody or something else. If the young matrons in
garrison who, with the two or three visiting maidens, were disposed to
rebel at Miss Nell's apparent absorption of all the available cavaliers
at the post, and call her a too lucky girl, could but have heard Mrs.
Rayner's nightly tirades and hourly rebukes, they might have realized
that here, as elsewhere, the rose had its stinging thorns. As for Miss
Travers, she confounded her sister by taking it all very submissively
and attempting no defence. Possibly conscience was telling her that she
deserved more than she was getting, or than she would be likely to get
until her sister heard of the adventure with Mr. Hayne.

"By the way," said Mr. Royce one evening as they were stamping off the
snow and removing their heavy wraps in Rayner's hall-way after a series
of garrison calls, "Mrs. Waldron says she expects you to play for her
to-morrow afternoon, Miss Travers. Of course it will be my luck to be at
stables."

"You hear better music every afternoon than I can give you, Mr. Royce."

"Where, pray?" asked Mrs. Rayner, turning quickly upon them.

Mr. Royce hesitated, and--with shame be it said--allowed Miss Travers to
meet the question:

"At Mr. Hayne's, Kate."

There was the same awkward silence that always followed the mention of
Hayne's name. Mrs. Rayner looked annoyed. It was evident that she wanted
more information,--wanted to ask, but was restrained. Royce determined
to be outspoken.

"Several of us have got quite in the way of stopping there on our way
from afternoon stables," he said, very quietly. "Mr. Hayne has his
piano now, and has nearly recovered the full use of his eyes. He plays
well."

Mrs. Rayner turned about once more, and, without saying so much as
good-night, went heavily up-stairs, leaving her escort to share with Mr.
Royce such welcome as the captain was ready to accord them. If forbidden
to talk on the subject nearest her heart, she would not speak at all.
She would have banged her door, but that would have waked baby. It stung
her to the quick to know that the cavalry officers were daily visitors
at Mr. Hayne's quarters. It was little comfort to know that the infantry
officers did not go, for she and they both knew that, except Major
Waldron, no one of their number was welcome under that roof unless he
would voluntarily come forward and say, "I believe you innocent." She
felt that but for the stand made by Hayne himself most of their number
would have received him into comradeship again by this time, and she
could hardly sleep that night from thinking over what she had heard.

But could she have seen the figure that was slinking in the snow at the
rear door of Hayne's quarters that very evening, peering into the
lighted rooms, and at last, after many an irresolute turn, knocking
timidly for admission and then hiding behind the corner of the shed
until Sam came and poked his pig-tailed head out into the wintry
darkness in wondering effort to find the visitor, she would not have
slept at all.

It was poor Clancy, once more mooning about the garrison and up to his
old tricks. Clancy had been drinking; but he wanted to know, "could he
spake with the lieutenant?"




IX.


"I have been reading over your letter of Thursday last, dear Steven,"
wrote Miss Travers, "and there is much that I feel I ought to answer.
You and Kate are very much of a mind about the 'temptations' with which
I am surrounded; but you are far more imaginative than she is, and far
more courteous. There is so much about your letter that touches me
deeply that I want to be frank and fair in my reply. I have been dancing
all this evening, was out at dinner before that, and have made many
calls this afternoon; but, tired as I am, my letter must be written,
for to-morrow will be but the repetition of to-day. Is it that I am cold
and utterly heartless that I can sit and write so calmly in reply to
your fervent and appealing letter? Ah, Steven, it is what may be said of
me; but, if cold and heartless to you, I have certainly given no man at
this garrison the faintest reason to think that he has inspired any
greater interest in him. They are all kind, all very attentive. I have
told you how well Mr. Royce dances and Mr. Merton rides and Mr. Foster
reads and talks. They entertain me vastly, and I _do_ like it. More than
this, Steven, I am pleased with their evident admiration,--not alone
pleased and proud that they should admire me who am pledged to you,--not
that alone, I frankly confess, but because it in itself is pleasant. It
pleases me. Very possibly it is because I am vain.

"And yet, though my hours are constantly occupied, though they are here
from morning till night, no one of them is more attentive than another.
There are five or six who come daily. There are some who do not come at
all. Am I a wretch, Steven? There are two or three that do not call who
I wish _would_ call. I would like to know them.

"Yet they know--they could not help it, with Kate here, and I never
forget--that I am your promised wife. Steven, do you not sometimes
forget the conditions of that promise? Even now, again and again do I
not repeat to you that you ought to release me and free yourself? Of
course your impulse will be to say my heart is changing,--that I have
seen others whom I like better. No, I have seen no one I like as well.
But _is_ 'like' what you deserve,--what you ask? and is it not all I
have ever been able to promise you? Steven, bear me witness, for Kate is
bitterly unjust to me at times, I told you again and again last summer
and fall that I did not love you and ought not to think of being your
wife. Yet, poor, homeless, dependent as I am, how strong was the
temptation to say yes to your plea! You know that I did not and would
not until time and again your sweet mother, whom I _do_ love, and Kate,
who had been a mother to me, both declared that _that_ should make no
difference: the love would come: the happiest marriages the world over
were those in which the girl respected the man of her choice: love would
come, and come speedily, when once she was his wife. You yourself
declared you could wait in patience,--you would woo and win by and by.
Only promise to be your wife before returning to the frontier, and you
would be content. Steven, _are_ you content? You know you are not: you
know you are unhappy; and it is all, not because I am growing to love
some one else, but because I am not growing to love you. Heaven knows I
want to love you; for so long as you hold me to it my promise is sacred
and shall be kept. More than that, if you say that it is your will that
I seclude myself from these attentions, give up dancing, give up rides,
drives, walks, and even receiving visits, here, so be it. I will obey.
But write this to me, Steven,--not to Kate. I am too proud to ask her to
show me the letters I know she has received from you,--and there are
some she has not shown me,--but I cannot understand a man's complaining
to other persons of the conduct of the woman who is, or is to be, his
wife. Forgive me if I pain you: sometimes even to myself I seem old and
strange. I have lived so much alone, have had to think and do for myself
so many years while Kate has been away, that perhaps I'm not 'like other
girls;' but the respect I feel for you would be injured if I thought you
strove to guide or govern me through others; and of one thing be sure,
Steven, _I must honor and respect and look up to the man I marry_, love
or no love.

"Once you said it would kill you if you believed I could be false to
you. If by that you meant that, having given my promise to you to be
your wife at some future time, I must school myself to love you, and
will be considered false if love do not come at my bidding or yours, I
say to you solemnly, release me now. I may not love, but I cannot and
will not deceive you, even by simulating love that does not exist.
Suppose that love were to be kindled in my heart. Suppose I were to
learn to care for some one here. You would be the first one to know it;
for I would tell you as soon as I knew it myself. _Then_ what could I
hope for,--or you? Surely you would not want to marry a girl who loved
another man. But is it much better to marry one who feels that she does
not love you? Think of it, Steven: I am very lonely, very far from
happy, very wretched over Kate's evident trouble and all the sorrow I am
bringing you and yours; but have I misled or deceived you in any one
thing? Once only has a word been spoken or a scene occurred that you
could perhaps have objected to. I told you the whole thing in my letter
of Sunday last, and why I had not told Kate. We have not met since that
night, Mr. Hayne and I, and may not; but he is a man whose story excites
my profound pity and sorrow, and he is one of the two or three I feel
that I would like to see more of. Is this being false to you or to my
promise? If so, Steven, you cannot say that I have not given you the
whole truth.

"It is very late at night,--one o'clock,--and Kate is not yet asleep,
and the captain is still down-stairs, reading. He is not looking well at
all, and Kate is sorely anxious about him. It was his evidence that
brought years of ostracism and misery upon Lieutenant Hayne, and there
are vague indications that in his own regiment the officers are
beginning to believe that possibly he was not the guilty man. The
cavalry officers, of course, say nothing to us on the subject, and I
have never heard the full story. If he has been, as is suggested, the
victim of a scoundrel, and Captain Rayner was at fault in his evidence,
no punishment on earth could be too great for the villain who planned
his ruin, and no remorse could atone for Captain Rayner's share. I never
saw so sad a face on mortal man as Mr. Hayne's. Steven Van Antwerp, I
wish I _were_ a man! I would trace that mystery to the bitter end.

"This is a strange letter to send to--to you; but I am a strange girl.
Already I am more than expecting you to write and release me
unconditionally; and you _ought_ to do it. I do not say I want it.

"Faithfully, at least, yours,

"NELLIE.

"P.S.--Should you write to Kate, you are not to tell her, remember, of
my meeting with Mr. Hayne. Of course I am anxious to have your reply to
that letter; but it will be five days yet."

An odd letter, indeed, for a girl not yet twenty, and not of a
hope-inspiring character; but when it reached Mr. Van Antwerp he did not
pale in reading it: his face was ghastly before he began. If anything,
he seemed relieved by some passages, though rejoiced by none. Then he
took from an inner pocket the letter that had reached him a few days
previous, and all alone in his room, late at night, he read it over
again, threw it upon the table at which he was sitting, then, with
passionate abandonment, buried his face in his arms and groaned aloud in
anguish.

Two days after writing this letter Miss Travers was so unfortunate as to
hear a conversation in the dining-room which was not intended for her
ears. She had gone to her room immediately after breakfast, and,
glancing from her window, saw that the officers were just going to
head-quarters for the daily _matinee_. For half or three-quarters of an
hour, therefore, there could be no probable interruption; and she
decided to write an answer to the letter which came from Mr. Van Antwerp
the previous afternoon. A bright fire was burning in the old-fashioned
stove with which frontier quarters are warmed if not ornamented, and she
perched her little, slippered feet upon the hearth, took her portfolio
in her lap, and began. Mrs. Rayner was in the nursery, absorbed with the
baby and the nurse, when a servant came and announced that "a lady was
in the kitchen" and wanted to speak with the lady of the house. Mrs.
Rayner promptly responded that she was busy and couldn't be disturbed,
and wondered who it could be that came to her kitchen to see her.

"Can I be of service, Kate?" called Miss Travers. "I will run down, if
you say so."

"I wish you would," was the reply; and Miss Travers put aside her
writing. "Didn't she give any name?" asked Mrs. Rayner of the Abigail,
who was standing with her head just visible at the stairway, it being
one of the unconquerable tenets of frontier domestics to go no farther
than is absolutely necessary in conveying messages of any kind; and this
damsel, though new to the neighborhood, was native and to the manner
born in all the tricks of the trade.

"She said you knew her name, ma'am. She's the lady from the hospital."

"Here, Jane, take the baby! Never mind, Nellie: I must go!" And Mrs.
Rayner started with surprising alacrity; but as she passed her door Miss
Travers saw the look of deep anxiety on her face.

A moment later she heard voices at the front door,--a party of ladies
who were going to spend the morning with the colonel's wife at some
"Dorcas society" work which many of them had embraced with enthusiasm.
"I want to see Miss Travers, just a minute," she heard a voice say, and
recognized the pleasant tones of Mrs. Curtis, the young wife of one of
the infantry officers: so a second time she put aside her writing, and
then ran down to the front door. Mrs. Curtis merely wanted to remind her
that she must be sure to come and spend the afternoon with her and bring
her music, and was dismayed to find that Miss Travers could not come
before stable-call: she had an engagement. "Of course: I might have
known it: you are besieged every hour. Well, can you come to-morrow?
Do." And, to-morrow being settled upon, and despite the fact that
several of the party waiting on the sidewalk looked cold and impatient,
Mrs. Curtis found it impossible to tear herself away until certain
utterly irrelevant matters had been lightly touched upon and lingeringly
abandoned. The officers were just beginning to pour forth from
head-quarters when the group of ladies finally got under way again and
Miss Travers closed the door. It was now useless to return to her
letter: so she strolled into the parlor just as she heard her sister's
voice at the kitchen door:

"Come right in here, Mrs. Clancy. Now, quick, what is it?"

And from the dining-room came the answer, hurried, half whispered, and
mysterious,--

"He's been drinkin' ever since he got out of hospital, ma'am, an' he's
worse than ever about Loot'nant Hayne. It's mischief he'll be doin',
ma'am: he's crazy-like--"

"Mrs. Clancy, you _must_ watch him. You--Hush!"

And here she stopped short, for, in astonishment at what she had already
heard, and in her instant effort to hear no more of what was so
evidently not intended for her, Miss Travers hurried from the parlor,
the swish of her skirts telling loudly of her presence there. She went
again to her room. What could it mean? Why was her proud, imperious Kate
holding secret interviews with this coarse and vulgar woman? What
concern was it of hers that Clancy should be "worse" about Mr. Hayne? It
could not mean that the mischief he would do was mischief _to_ the man
who had saved his life and his property. That was out of the question.
It could not mean that the poor, broken-down, drunken fellow had the
means in his power of further harming a man who had already been made to
suffer so much. Indeed, Kate's very exclamation, the very tone in which
she spoke, showed a distress of mind that arose from no fear for one
whom she hated as she hated Hayne. Her anxiety was personal. It was for
her husband and for herself she feared, or woman's tone and tongue never
yet revealed a secret. Nellie Travers stood in her room stunned and
bewildered, yet trying hard to recall and put together all the scattered
stories and rumors that had reached her about the strange conduct of
Clancy after he was taken to the hospital,--especially about his
heart-broken wail when told that it was Lieutenant Hayne who had rescued
him and little Kate from hideous death. Somewhere, somehow, this man was
connected with the mystery which encircled the long-hidden truth in
Hayne's trouble. Could it be possible that he did not realize it, and
that her sister had discovered it? Could it be--oh, heaven! _no!_--could
it be that Kate was standing between that lonely and friendless man and
the revelation that would set him right? She could not believe it of
her! She would not believe it of her sister! And yet what did Kate mean
by charging Mrs. Clancy to watch him,--that drunken husband? What could
it mean but that she was striving to prevent Mr. Hayne's ever hearing
the truth? She longed to learn more and solve the riddle once and for
all. They were still earnestly talking together down in the dining-room;
but she could not listen. Kate knew her so well that she had not closed
the door leading into the hall, though both she and the laundress of
Company B had lowered their voices. It was disgraceful at best, thought
Miss Travers, it was beneath her sister, that she should hold any
private conversation with a woman of that class. Confidences with such
were contamination. She half determined to rush down-stairs and put an
end to it, but was saved the scene: fresh young voices, hearty ringing
tones, and the stamp of heavy boot-heels were heard at the door; and as
Rayner entered, ushering in Royce and Graham, Mrs. Rayner and the
laundress fled once more to the kitchen.

When the sisters found themselves alone again, it was late in the
evening. Mrs. Rayner came to Nellie's room and talked on various topics
for some little time, watching narrowly her sister's face. The young
girl hardly spoke at all. It was evident to the elder what her thoughts
must be.

"I suppose you think I should explain Mrs. Clancy's agitation and
mysterious conduct, Nellie," she finally and suddenly said.

"I do not want you to tell me anything, Kate, that you yourself do not
wish to tell me. You understand, of course, how I happened to be there?"

"Oh, certainly. I wasn't thinking of that. You couldn't help hearing;
but you must have thought it queer,--her being so agitated, I mean."

No answer.

"Didn't you?"

"I wasn't thinking of her at all."

"What did you think, then?" half defiantly, yet trembling and growing
white.

"I thought it strange that _you_ should be talking with her in such a
way."

"She was worried about her husband,--his drinking so much,--and came to
consult me."

"Why should she--and you--show such consternation at his connection with
the name of Mr. Hayne?"

"Nellie, _that_ matter is one you know I cannot bear to talk of." ("Very
recently only," thought the younger.) "You once asked me to tell you
what Mr. Hayne's crime had been, and I answered that until you could
hear the whole story you could not understand the matter at all. We are
both worried about Clancy. He is not himself; he is wild and imaginative
when he's drinking. He has some strange fancies since the fire, and he
thinks he ought to do something to help the officer because he helped
him, and his head is full of Police Gazette stories, utterly without
foundation, and he thinks he can tell who the real culprits were,--or
something of that kind. It is utter nonsense. I have investigated the
whole thing,--heard the whole story. It is the trashiest, most
impossible thing you ever dreamed of, and would only make fearful
trouble if Mr. Hayne got hold of it."

"Why?"

"_Why?_ Because he is naturally vengeful and embittered, and he would
seize on any pretext to make it unpleasant for the officers who brought
about his trial."

"Do you mean that what Clancy says in any way affects them?" asked Nell,
with quickening pulse and color.

"It might, if there were a word of truth in it; but it is the maudlin
dream of a liquor-maddened brain. Mrs. Clancy and I both know that what
he says is utterly impossible. Indeed, he tells no two stories alike."

"Has he told you anything?"

"No; but she tells me everything."

"How do you know she tells the truth?"

"Nellie! Why should she deceive me? I have done everything for them."

"I distrust her all the same; and you had better be warned in time. If
he has any theory, no matter how crack-brained, or if he knows anything
about the case and wants to tell it to Mr. Hayne, you are the last woman
on earth who should stand in the way."

"Upon my word, Nellie Travers, this is going too far! One would think
you believed I wish to stand in the way of that young man's
restoration."

"Kate, if you lift a hand or speak one word to prevent Clancy's seeing
Mr. Hayne and telling him everything he knows, you will make me
believe--precisely that."

Captain Rayner heard sobbing and lamentation on the bedroom floor when
he came in a few moments after. Going aloft, he found Miss Travers's
door closed as usual, and his wife in voluble distress of mind. He
could only learn that she and Nellie had had a falling out, and that
Nell had behaved in a most unjust, disrespectful, and outrageous way.
She declined to give further particulars.




X.


Miss Travers had other reasons for wanting to be alone. That very
afternoon, just after stable-call, she found herself unoccupied for the
time being, and decided to go over and see Mrs. Waldron a few moments.
The servant admitted her to the little army parlor, and informed her
that Mrs. Waldron had stepped out, but would be home directly. A bright
wood fire was blazing on the hearth and throwing flickering lights and
shadows about the cosey room. The piano stood invitingly open, and on
the rack were some waltzes of Strauss she remembered having heard the
cavalry band play a night or two previous. Seating herself, she began to
try them, and speedily became interested. Her back being to the door,
she did not notice that another visitor was soon ushered in,--a man. She
continued slowly "picking out" the melody, for the light was growing dim
and it was with difficulty that she could distinguish the notes. Twice
she essayed a somewhat complicated passage, became entangled, bent down
and closely scanned the music, began again, once more became involved,
exclaimed impatiently, "How absurd!" and whirled about on the
piano-stool, to find herself facing Mr. Hayne.

Now that the bandage was removed from his eyes it was no such easy
matter to meet him. Her sweet face flushed instantly as he bent low and
spoke her name.

"I had no idea any one was here. It quite startled me," she said, as she
withdrew from his the hand she had mechanically extended to him.

"It was my hope not to interrupt you," he answered, in the low, gentle
voice she had marked before. "You helped me when my music was all adrift
the other night: may I not help you find some of this?"

"I wish you _would_ play, Mr. Hayne."

"I will play for you gladly, Miss Travers, but waltz-music is not my
forte. Let me see what else there is here." And he began turning over
the sheets on the stand.

"Are your eyes well enough to read music,--especially in such a dim
light?" she asked, with evident sympathy.

"My eyes are doing very well,--better than my fingers, in fact,--and, as
I rarely play by note after I once learn a piece, the eyes make no
difference. What music do you like? I merely looked at this collection
thinking you might see something that pleased you."

"Mrs. Ray told me you played Rubinstein so well,--that melody in F, for
one."

"Did Mrs. Ray speak of that?"--his face brightening. "I'm glad they
found anything to enjoy in my music."

"'They' found a great deal, Mr. Hayne, and there are a number who are
envious of their good fortune,--I, for one," she answered, blithely.
"Now play for me. Mrs. Waldron will be here in a minute."

And when Mrs. Waldron came in, a little later, Miss Travers, seated in
an easy-chair and looking intently into the blaze, was listening as
intently to the soft, rich melodies that Mr. Hayne was playing. The
firelight was flickering on her shining hair; one slender white hand was
toying with the locket that hung at her throat, the other gently tapping
on the arm of the chair in unison with the music. And Mr. Hayne, seated
in the shadow, bent slightly over the key-board, absorbed in his
pleasant task, and playing as though all his soul were thrilling in his
finger-tips. Mrs. Waldron stood in silence at the door-way, watching the
unconscious pair with an odd yet comforted expression in her eyes. At
last, in one long, sweet, sighing chord, the melody softly died away,
and Mr. Hayne slowly turned and looked upon the girl. She seemed to have
wandered off into dream-land. For a moment there was no sound; then,
with a little shivering sigh, she roused herself.

"It is simply exquisite," she said. "You have given me such a treat!"

"I'm glad. I owe you a great deal more pleasure, Miss Travers."

Mrs. Waldron hereat elevated her eyebrows. She would have slipped away
if she could, but she was a woman of substance, and as solid in flesh as
she was warm of heart. She did the only thing left to her,--came
cordially forward to welcome her two visitors and express her delight
that Miss Travers could have an opportunity of hearing Mr. Hayne play.
She soon succeeded in starting him again, and shortly thereafter managed
to slip out unnoticed. When he turned around a few minutes afterwards,
she had vanished.

"Why, I had no idea she was gone!" exclaimed Miss Travers; and then the
color mounted to her brow. He must think her extremely absorbed in his
playing; and so indeed she was.

"You are very fond of music, I see," he said, at a venture.

"Yes, very; but I play very little and very badly. Pardon me, Mr. Hayne,
but you have played many years, have you not?"

"Not so very many; but--there have been many in which I had little else
to do but practise."

She reddened again. It was so unlike him, she thought, to refer to that
matter in speaking to her. He seemed to read her:

"I speak of it only that I may say to you again what I began just before
Mrs. Waldron came. You gave me no opportunity to thank you the other
night, and I may not have another. You do not know what an event in my
life that meeting with you was; and you cannot know how I have gone over
your words again and again. Forgive me the embarrassment I see I cause
you, Miss Travers. We are so unlikely to meet at all that you can afford
to indulge me this once." He was smiling so gravely, sadly, now, and had
risen and was standing by her as she sat there in the big easy-chair,
still gazing into the fire, but listening for his every word. "In five
long years I have heard no words from a woman's lips that gave me such
joy and comfort as those you spoke so hurriedly and without
premeditation. Only those who know anything of what my past has been
could form any idea of the emotion with which I heard you. If I could
not have seen you to say how--how I thanked you, I would have had to
write. This explains what I said awhile ago: I owe you more pleasure
than I can ever give. But one thing was certain: I could not bear the
idea that you should not be told, and by me, how grateful your words
were to me,--how grateful I was to you. Again, may God bless you!"

And now he turned abruptly away, awaiting no answer, reseated himself at
the piano and retouched the keys. But, though she sat motionless and
speechless, she knew that he had been trembling so violently and that
his hands were still so tremulous he could play no more. It was some
minutes that they sat thus, neither speaking; and as he regained his
self-control and began to attempt some simple little melodies, Mrs.
Waldron returned:

"How very domestic you look, young people! Shall we light the lamps?"

"I've stayed too long already," said Miss Travers, springing to her
feet. "Kate does not know I'm out, and will be wondering what has
become of her sister." She laughed nervously. "Thank you so much for the
music, Mr. Hayne!--Forgive my running off so suddenly; won't you, Mrs.
Waldron?" she asked, pleadingly, as she put her hand in hers; and as her
hostess reassured her she bent and kissed the girl's flushed cheek. Mr.
Hayne was still standing patiently by the centre-table. Once more she
turned, and caught his eye, flushed, half hesitated, then held out her
hand with quick impulse:

"Good-evening, Mr. Hayne. I _shall_ hope to hear you play again."

And, with pulses throbbing, and cheeks that still burned, she ran
quickly down the line to Captain Rayner's quarters, and was up-stairs
and in her room in another minute.

This was an interview she would find it hard to tell to Kate. But told
it was, partially, and she was sitting now, late at night, hearing
through her closed door her sister's unmusical lamentations,--hearing
still ringing in her ears the reproaches heaped upon her when that
sister was quietly told that she and Mr. Hayne had met twice. And now
she was sitting there, true to herself and her resolution, telling Mr.
Van Antwerp all about it. Can one conjecture the sensations with which
he received and read that letter?

Mr. Hayne, too, was having a wakeful night. He had gone to Mrs.
Waldron's to pay a dinner-call, with the result just told. He had one or
two other visits to make among the cavalry households in garrison, but,
after a few moments' chat with Mrs. Waldron, he decided that he
preferred going home. Sam had to call three times before Mr. Hayne
obeyed the summons to dinner that evening. The sun was going down behind
the great range to the southwest, and the trumpets were pealing
"retreat" on the frosty air, but Hayne's curtains were drawn, and he was
sitting before his fire, deep in thought, hearing nothing. The doctor
came in soon after he finished his solitary dinner, chatted with him
awhile, and smoked away at his pipe. He wanted to talk with Hayne about
some especial matter, and he found it hard work to begin. The more he
saw of his patient the better he liked him: he was interested in him,
and had been making inquiries. Without his pipe he found himself
uninspired.

"Mr. Hayne, if you will permit, I'll fill up and blow another cloud.
Didn't you ever smoke?"

"Yes. I was very fond of my cigar six or seven years ago."

"And you gave it up?" asked the doctor, tugging away at the strings of
his little tobacco-pouch.

"I gave up everything that was not an absolute necessity," said Hayne,
calmly. "Until I could get free of a big load there was no comfort in
anything. After that was gone I had no more use for such old friends
than certain other old friends seemed to have for me. It was a mutual
cut."

"To the best of my belief, you were the gainer in both cases," said the
doctor, gruffly. "The longer I live the more I agree with Carlyle: the
men we live and move with are mostly fools."

Hayne's face was as grave and quiet as ever:

"These are hard lessons to learn, doctor. I presume few young fellows
thought more of human friendship than I did the first two years I was in
service."

"Hayne," said the doctor, "sometimes I have thought you did not want to
talk about this matter to any soul on earth; but I am speaking from no
empty curiosity now. If you forbid it, I shall not intrude; but there
are some questions that, since knowing you, and believing in you as I
unquestionably do, I would like to ask. You seem bent on returning to
duty here to-morrow, though you might stay on sick report ten days yet;
and I want to stand between you and the possibility of annoyance and
trouble if I can."

"You are kind, and I appreciate it, doctor; but do you think that the
colonel is a man who will be apt to let me suffer injustice at the hands
of any one here?"

"I don't, indeed. He is full of sympathy for you, and I know he means
you shall have fair play; but a company commander has as many and as
intangible ways of making a man suffer as has a woman. How do you stand
with Rayner?"

"Precisely where I stood five years ago. He is the most determined enemy
I have in the service, and will down me if he can; but I have learned a
good deal in my time. There is a grim sort of comfort now in knowing
that while he would gladly trip me I can make him miserable by being too
strong for him."

"You still hold the same theory as to his evidence you did at the time
of the court? of course I have heard what you said to and of him."

"I have never changed in that respect."

"But supposing that--mind you, _I_ believe he was utterly mistaken in
what he thought he heard and saw,--supposing that all that was testified
to by him actually occurred, have you any theory that would point out
the real criminal?"

"Only one. If that money was ever handed me that day at Battle Butte,
only one man could have made away with it; and it is useless to charge
it to him."

"You mean Rayner?"

"I _have_ to mean Rayner."

"But you claim it never reached you?"

"Certainly."

"Yet every other package--memoranda and all--was handed you?"

"Not only that, but Captain Hull handed me the money-packet with the
others,--took them all from his saddle-bags just before the charge. The
packet was sealed when he gave it to me, and when I broke the seal it
was stuffed with worthless blanks."

"And you have never suspected a soldier,--a single messenger or
servant?"

"Not one. Whom could I?"

"Hayne, had you any knowledge of this man Clancy before?"

"Clancy! The drunken fellow we pulled out of the fire?"

"The same."

"No; never to my knowledge saw or heard of him, except when he appeared
as witness at the court."

"Yet he was with the ----th Cavalry at that very fight at Battle Butte. He
was a sergeant then, though not in Hull's troop."

"Does he say he knew me? or does he talk of that affair?" asked the
lieutenant, with sudden interest.

"Not that. He cannot be said to say anything; but he was wonderfully
affected over your rescuing him,--strangely so, one of the nurses
persists in telling me, though the steward and Mrs. Clancy declare it
was just drink and excitement. Still, I have drawn from him that he knew
you well by sight during that campaign; but he says he was not by when
Hull was killed."

"Does he act as though he knew anything that could throw any light on
the matter?"

"I cannot say. His wife declares he has been queer all winter,--hard
drinking,--and of course that is possible."

"Sam told me there was a soldier here two nights ago who wanted to talk
with me, but the man was drunk, and he would not let him in or tell me.
He thought he wanted to borrow money."

"I declare, I believe it was Clancy!" said the doctor. "If he wants to
see you and talk, let him. There's no telling but what even a
drink-racked brain may bring the matter to light."

And long that night Mr. Hayne sat there thinking, partly of what the
doctor had said, but more of what had occurred during the late
afternoon. Midnight was called by the sentries. He went to his door and
looked out on the broad, bleak prairie, the moonlight glinting on the
tin roofing of the patch of buildings over at the station far across the
dreary level and glistening on the patches of snow that here and there
streaked the surface. It was all so cold and calm and still. His blood
was hot and fevered. Something invited him into the peace and purity of
the night. He threw on his overcoat and furs, and strolled up to the
gateway, past the silent and deserted store, whose lighted bar and
billiard-room was generally the last thing to close along Prairie
Avenue. There was not a glimmer of light about the quarters of the
trader or the surgeon's beyond. One or two faint gleams stole through
the blinds at the big hospital, and told of the night-watch by some
fevered bedside. He passed on around the fence and took a path that led
to the target-ranges north of the post and back of officers' row,
thinking deeply all the while; and finally, re-entering the garrison by
the west gate, he came down along the hard gravelled walk that passed in
circular sweeps the offices and the big house of the colonel commanding
and then bore straight away in front of the entire line. All was
darkness and quiet. He passed in succession the houses of the
field-officers of the cavalry, looked longingly at the darkened front of
Major Waldron's cottage, where he had lived so sweet an hour before the
setting of the last sun, then went on again and paused surprised in
front of Captain Rayner's. A bright light was still burning in the front
room on the second floor. Was she, too, awake and thinking of that
interview? He looked wistfully at the lace curtains that shrouded the
interior, and then the clank of a cavalry sabre sounded in his ears, and
a tall officer came springily across the road.

"Who the devil's that?" was the blunt military greeting.

"Mr. Hayne," was the quiet reply.

"What? Mr. Hayne? Oh! Beg your pardon, man,--couldn't imagine who it was
mooning around out here after midnight."

"I don't wonder," answered Hayne. "I am rather given to late hours, and
after reading a long time I often take a stroll before turning in."

"Ah, yes: I see. Well, won't you drop in and chat awhile? I'm officer of
the day, and have to owl to-night."

"Thanks, no, not this time; I must go to bed. Good-night, Mr. Blake."

"Good-night to you, Mr. Hayne," said Blake, then stood gazing
perplexedly after him. "Now, my fine fellow," was his dissatisfied
query, "what on earth do you mean by prowling around Rayner's at this
hour of the night?"




XI.


It was very generally known throughout Fort Warrener by ten o'clock on
the following morning that Mr. Hayne had returned to duty and was one of
the first officers to appear at the _matinee_. Once more the colonel had
risen from his chair, taken him by the hand, and welcomed him. This time
he expressed the hope that nothing would now occur to prevent their
seeing him daily.

"Won't you come in to the club-room?" asked Captain Gregg, afterwards.
"We will be pleased to have you."

"Excuse me, captain, I shall be engaged all morning," answered Mr.
Hayne, and walked on down the row. Nearly all the officers were
strolling away in groups of three or four. Hayne walked past them all
with quick, soldierly step and almost aggressive manner, and was soon
far ahead, all by himself. Finding it an unprofitable subject, there had
been little talk between the two regiments as to what Mr. Hayne's status
should be on his reappearance. Everybody heard that he had somewhat
rudely spurned the advances of Ross and his companions. Indeed, Ross had
told the story with strong coloring to more than half the denizens of
officers' row. Evidently he desired no further friendship or intercourse
with his brother blue-straps; and only a few of the cavalry officers
found his society attractive. He played delightfully; he was well read;
but in general talk he was not entertaining. "Altogether too
sepulchral,--or at least funereal," explained the cavalry. "He never
laughs, and rarely smiles, and he's as glum as a Quaker meeting," was
another complaint. So a social success was hardly to be predicted for
Mr. Hayne.

While he could not be invited where just a few infantry people were the
other guests, from a big general gathering or party he, of course, could
not be omitted; but there he would have his cavalry and medical friends
to talk to, and then there was Major Waldron. It was a grievous pity
that there should be such an element of embarrassment, but it couldn't
be helped. As the regimental adjutant had said, Hayne himself was the
main obstacle to his restoration to regimental friendship. No man who
piques himself on the belief that he is about to do a virtuous and
praiseworthy act will be apt to persevere when the object of his
benevolence treats him with cold contempt. If Mr. Hayne saw fit to
repudiate the civilities a few officers essayed to extend to him, no
others would subject themselves to similar rebuffs; and if he could
stand the _status quo_, why, the regiment could; and that, said the
Riflers, was the end of the matter.

But it was not the end, by a good deal. Some few of the ladies of the
infantry, actuated by Mrs. Rayner's vehement exposition of the case, had
aligned themselves on her side as against the post commander, and by
their general conduct sought to convey to the colonel and to the ladies
who were present at the first dinner given Mr. Hayne thorough
disapproval of their course. This put the cavalry people on their mettle
and led to a division in the garrison; and as Major Waldron was, in Mrs.
Rayner's eyes, equally culpable with the colonel, it so resulted that
two or three infantry households, together with some unmarried
subalterns, were arrayed socially against their own battalion commander
as well as against the grand panjandrum at post head-quarters. If it had
not been for the determined attitude of Mr. Hayne himself, the garrison
might speedily have been resolved into two parties,--Hayne and
anti-Hayne sympathizers; but the whole bearing of that young man was
fiercely repellent of sympathy; he would have none of it. "Hayne's
position," said Major Waldron, "is practically this: he holds that no
man who has borne himself as he has during these five years--denied
himself everything that he might make up every cent that was lost,
though he was in no wise responsible for the loss--could by any
possibility have been guilty of the charges on which he was tried. From
this he will not abate one jot or tittle; and he refuses now to restore
to his friendship the men who repudiated him in his years of trouble,
except on their profession of faith in his entire innocence." Now, this
was something the cavalry could not do without some impeachment of the
evidence which was heaped up against the poor fellow at the time of the
trial; and it was something the infantry would not do, because thereby
they would virtually pronounce one at least of their own officers to
have repeatedly and persistently given false testimony. In the case of
Waldron and the cavalry, however, it was possible for Hayne to return
their calls of courtesy, because they, having never "sent him to
Coventry," received him precisely as they would receive any other
officer. With the Riflers it was different: having once "cut" him as
though by unanimous accord, and having taught the young officers joining
year after year to regard him as a criminal, _they_ could be restored to
Mr. Hayne's friendship, as has been said before, only "on confession of
error." Buxton and two or three of his stamp called or left their cards
on Mr. Hayne because their colonel had so done; but precisely as the
ceremony was performed, just so was it returned. Buxton was red with
wrath over what he termed Hayne's conceited and supercilious manner when
returning his call: "I called upon him like a gentleman, by thunder,
just to let him understand I wanted to help him out of the mire, and
told him if there was anything I could do for him that a gentleman
_could_ do, not to hesitate about letting me know; and when he came to
my house to-day, damned if he didn't patronize _me_!--talked to me about
the Plevna siege, and wanted to discuss Gourko and the Balkans or some
other fool thing: what in thunder have I to do with campaigns in
Turkey?--and I thought he meant those nigger soldiers the British have
in India,--Goorkhas, I know now,--and I _did_ tell him it was an awful
blunder, that only a Russian would make, to take those Sepoy fellows and
put 'em into a winter campaign. Of course I hadn't been booking up the
subject, and he had, and sprung it on me; and then, by gad, as he was
going, he said he had books and maps he would lend me, and if there was
anything he could do for me that a gentleman _could_ do, not to hesitate
about asking. Damn his impudence!"

Poor Buxton! One of his idiosyncrasies was to talk wisely to the juniors
on the subject of European campaigns and to criticise the moves of
generals whose very names and centuries were entangling snares. His own
subalterns were, unfortunately for him, at the house when Hayne called,
and when he, as was his wont, began to expound on current military
topics. "A little learning," even, he had not, and the dangerous thing
that that would have been was supplanted by something quite as bad, if
not worse. He was trapped and thrown by the quiet-mannered infantry
subaltern, and it was all Messrs. Freeman and Royce could do to restrain
their impulse to rush after Hayne and embrace him. Buxton was cordially
detested by his "subs" and well knew they would tell the story of his
defeat, so he made a virtue of necessity and came out with his own
version. Theirs was far more ludicrous, and, while it made Mr. Hayne
famous, he gained another enemy. The ----th could not fail to notice how
soon after that all social recognition ceased between their bulky
captain and the pale, slender subaltern; and Mrs. Buxton and Mrs. Rayner
became suddenly infatuated with each other, while their lords were
seldom seen except together.

All this time, however, Miss Travers was making friends throughout the
garrison. No one ever presumed to discuss the Hayne affair in her
presence, because of her relationship to the Rayners; and yet Mrs.
Waldron had told several people how delightfully she and Mr. Hayne had
spent an afternoon together. Did not Mrs. Rayner declare that Mrs.
Waldron was a woman who told everything she knew, or words to that
effect? It is safe to say that the garrison was greatly interested in
the story. How strange it was that he should have had a _tete-a-tete_
with the sister of his bitterest foe! _When_ did they meet? Had they met
since? Would they meet again? All these were questions eagerly
discussed, yet never asked of the parties themselves, Mr. Hayne's
reputation for snubbing people standing him in excellent stead, and Miss
Travers's quiet dignity and reserve of manner being too much for those
who would have given a good deal to gain her confidence. But there was
Mrs. Rayner. She, at least, with all her high and mighty ways, was no
unapproachable creature when it came to finding out what she thought of
other people's conduct. So half a dozen, at least, had more or less
confidentially asked if she knew of Mr. Hayne and Miss Travers's
meeting. Indeed she did! and she had given Nellie her opinion of her
conduct very decidedly. It was Captain Rayner himself who interposed,
she said, and forbade her upbraiding Nellie any further. Nellie being
either in an adjoining room or up in her own on several occasions when
these queries were propounded to her sister, it goes without saying that
that estimable woman, after the manner of her sex, had elevated her
voice in responding, so that there was no possibility of the wicked
girl's failing to get the full benefit of the scourging she deserved.
Rayner had, indeed, positively forbidden her further rebuking Nellie;
but the man does not live who can prevent one woman's punishing another
so long as she can get within earshot, and Miss Travers was paying
dearly for her independence.

It cannot be estimated just how great a disappointment her visit to the
frontier was proving to that young lady, simply because she kept her own
counsel. There were women in the garrison who longed to take her to
their hearts and homes, she was so fresh and pure and sweet and winning,
they said; but how could they, when her sister would recognize them only
by the coldest possible nod? Nellie was not happy, that was certain,
though she made no complaint, and though the young officers who were
daily her devotees declared she was bright and attractive as she could
be. There were still frequent dances and parties in the garrison, but
March was nearly spent, and the weather had been so vile and blustering
that they could not move beyond the limits of the post. April might
bring a change for the better in the weather, but Miss Travers wondered
how it could better her position.

It is hard for a woman of spirit to be materially dependent on any one,
and Miss Travers was virtually dependent on her brother-in-law. The
little share of her father's hard savings was spent on her education.
Once free from school, she was bound to another apprenticeship, and
sister Kate, though indulgent, fond, and proud, lost no opportunity of
telling her how much she owed to Captain Rayner. It got to be a fearful
weight before the first summer was well over. It was the main secret of
her acceptance of Mr. Van Antwerp. And now, until she would consent to
name the day that should bind her for life to him, she had no home but
such as Kate Rayner could offer her; and Kate was bitterly offended at
her. There was just one chance to end it now and forever, and to relieve
her sister and the captain of the burden of her support. _Could_ she
make up her mind to do it? And Mr. Van Antwerp offered the opportunity.

So far from breaking with her, as she half expected,--so far from being
even angry and reproachful on receiving the letter she had written
telling him all about her meetings with Mr. Hayne,--he had written again
and again, reproaching himself for his doubts and fears, begging her
forgiveness for having written and telegraphed to Kate, humbling himself
before her in the most abject way, and imploring her to reconsider her
determination and to let him write to Captain and Mrs. Rayner to return
to their Eastern home at once, that the marriage might take place
forthwith and he could bear her away to Europe in May. Letter after
letter came, eager, imploring, full of tenderest love and devotion, full
of the saddest apprehension, never reproaching, never doubting, never
commanding or restraining. The man had found the way to touch a woman
of her generous nature: he had left all to her; he was at her mercy; and
she knew well that he loved her fervently and that to lose her would
wellnigh break his heart. Could she say the word and be free? Surely, as
this man's wife there would be no serfdom; and, yet, could she wed a man
for whom she felt no spark of love?

They went down to the creek one fine morning early in April. There had
been a sudden thaw of the snows up the gorges of the Rockies, and the
stream had overleaped its banks, spread over the lowlands, and flooded
some broad depressions in the prairie. Then, capricious as a woman's
moods, the wind whistled around from the north one night and bound the
lakelets in a band of ice. The skating was gorgeous, and all the pretty
ankles on the post were rejoicing in the opportunity before the setting
of another sun. Coming homeward at luncheon-time, Mrs. Rayner, Mrs.
Buxton, Miss Travers, and one or two others, escorted by a squad of
bachelors, strolled somewhat slowly along Prairie Avenue towards the
gate. It so happened that the married ladies were foremost in the little
party, when who should meet them but Mr. Hayne, coming from the east
gate! Mrs. Rayner and Mrs. Buxton, though passing him almost elbow to
elbow, looked straight ahead or otherwise avoided his eye. He raised his
forage-cap in general acknowledgment of the presence of ladies with the
officers, but glanced coldly from one to the other until his blue eyes
lighted on Miss Travers. No woman in that group could fail to note the
leap of sunshine and gladness to his face, the instant flush that rose
to his cheek. Miss Travers, herself, saw it quickly, as did the maiden
walking just behind her, and her heart bounded at the sight. She bowed
as their eyes met, spoke his name in low tone, and strove to hide her
face from Mr. Blake, who turned completely around and stole a sudden
glance at her. She could no more account for than she could control it,
but her face was burning. Mrs. Rayner, too, looked around and stared at
her, but this she met firmly, her dark eyes never quailing before the
angry glare in her sister's. Blake was beginning to like Hayne and to
dislike Mrs. Rayner, and he always _did_ like mischief.

"You owe me a grudge, Miss Travers, if you did but know it," he said, so
that all could hear.

"You, Mr. Blake! How can that be possible?"

"I spoiled a serenade for you a few nights ago. I was officer of the
day, and caught sight of a man gazing up at your window after midnight.
I felt sure he was going to sing: so, like a good fellow, I ran over to
play an accompaniment, and then--would you believe it?--he wouldn't
sing, after all."

She was white now. Her eyes were gazing almost imploringly at him.
Something warned him to hold his peace, and he broke off short.

"_Who_ was it? Oh, _do_ tell us, Mr. Blake!" were the exclamations, Mrs.
Rayner being most impetuous in her demands. Again Blake caught the
appeal in Miss Travers's eyes.

"That's what I want to know," he responded, mendaciously. "When I woke
up next morning, the whole thing was a dream, and I couldn't fix the
fellow at all."

There was a chorus of disappointment and indignation. The idea of
spoiling such a gem of a sensation! But Blake took it all complacently,
until he got home. Then it began to worry him.

Was it possible that she knew he was there?

That night there was a disturbance in the garrison. Just after ten
o'clock, and while the sentries were calling off the hour, a woman's
shrieks and cries were heard over behind the quarters of Company B and
close to the cottage occupied by Lieutenant Hayne. The officers of the
guard ran to the spot with several men, and found Private Clancy
struggling and swearing in the grasp of two or three soldiers, while
Mrs. Clancy was imploring them not to let him go, he was wild-like
again; it was drink; he had the horrors, and was batin' her while she
was tryin' to get him home. And Clancy's appearance bore out her words.
He was wild and drunken; but he swore he meant no harm; he struggled
hard for freedom; he vowed he only wanted to see the lieutenant at his
quarters; and Mr. Hayne, lamp in hand, had come upon the scene, and was
striving to quiet the woman, who only screamed and protested the louder.
At his quiet order the soldiers released Clancy, and the man stood
patient and subordinate.

"Did you want to see me, Clancy?" asked Mr. Hayne.

"Askin' yer pardon, sir, I did," began the man, unsteadily, and
evidently struggling with the fumes of the liquor he had been drinking;
but before he could speak again, Mrs. Clancy's shrieks rang out on the
still air:

"Oh, for the love of God, howld him, some o' ye's! He'll kill him! He's
mad, I say! Shure 'tis I that know him best. Oh, blessed Vargin, save
us! _Don't_ let him loose, Misther Foster!" she screamed to the officer
of the guard, who at that moment appeared on the full run.

"What's the trouble?" he asked, breathlessly.

"Clancy seems to have been drinking, and wants to talk with me about
something, Mr. Foster," said Hayne, quietly. "He belongs to my company,
and I will be responsible that he goes home. It is really Mrs. Clancy
that is making all the trouble."

"Oh, for the love of God, hear him, now, whin the man was tearin' the
hair o' me this minute! Oh, howld him, men! Shure 'tis Captain Rayner
wud niver let him go."

"What's the matter, Mrs. Clancy?" spoke a quick, stern voice, and
Rayner, with face white as a sheet, suddenly stood in their midst.

"Oh, God be praised, it's here ye are, captin! Shure it's Clancy, sir,
dhrunk, sir, and runnin' round the garrison, and batin' me, sir."

"Take him to the guard-house, Mr. Foster," was the stern, sudden order.
"Not a word, Clancy," as the man strove to speak. "Off with him; and if
he gives you any trouble, send for me."

And as the poor fellow was led away, silence fell upon the group. Mrs.
Clancy began a wail of mingled relief and misery, which the captain
ordered her to cease and go home. More men came hurrying to the spot,
and presently the officer of the day. "It is all right now," said Rayner
to the latter. "One of my men--Clancy--was out here drunk and raising a
row. I have sent him to the guard-house. Go back to your quarters, men.
Come, captain, will you walk over home with me?"

"Was Mr. Hayne here when the row occurred?" asked the cavalryman,
looking as though he wanted to hear something from the young officer who
stood a silent witness.

"I don't know," replied Rayner. "It makes no difference, captain. It is
not a case of witnesses. I shan't prefer charges against the man. Come!"
And he drew him hastily away.

Hayne stood watching them as they disappeared beyond the glimmer of his
lamp. Then a hand was placed on his arm:

"Did you notice Captain Rayner's face,--his lips? He was ashen as
death."

"Come in here with me," was the reply; and, turning, Hayne led the post
surgeon into the house.




XII.


There was an unusual scene at the _matinee_ the following morning. When
Captain Ray relieved Captain Gregg as officer of the day, and the two
were visiting the guard-house and turning over prisoners, they came upon
the last name on the list,--Clancy,--and Gregg turned to his regimental
comrade and said,--

"No charges are preferred against Clancy, at least none as yet, Captain
Ray; but his company commander requests that he be held here until he
can talk over his case with the colonel."

"What's he in for?" demanded Captain Ray.

"Getting drunk and raising a row and beating his wife," answered Gregg;
whereat there was a titter among the soldiers.

"I never shtruck a woman in me life, sir," said poor Clancy.

"Silence, Clancy!" ordered the sergeant of the guard.

"No, I'm blessed if I believe that part of it, Clancy, drunk or no
drunk," said the new officer of the day.--"Take charge of him for the
present, sergeant." And away they went to the office.

Captain Rayner was in conversation with the commanding officer as they
entered, and the colonel was saying,--

"It is not the proper way to handle the case, captain. If he has been
guilty of drunkenness and disorderly conduct he should be brought to
trial at once."

"I admit that, sir; but the case is peculiar. It was Mrs. Clancy that
made all the noise. I feel sure that after he is perfectly sober I can
give him such a talking-to as will put a stop to this trouble."

"Very well, sir. I am willing to let company commanders experiment at
least once or twice on their theories, so you can try the scheme; but we
of the ----th have had some years of experience with the Clancys, and
were not a little amused when they turned up again in our midst as
accredited members of your company."

"Then, as I understand you, colonel, Clancy is not to be brought to
trial for this affair," suddenly spoke the post surgeon.

Everybody looked up in surprise. "Pills" was the last man, ordinarily,
to take a hand in the "shop talk" at the morning meetings.

"No, doctor. His captain thinks it unnecessary to prefer charges."

"So do I, sir; and, as I saw the man both before and after his
confinement last night, I do not think it was necessary to confine
him."

"The officer of the day says there was great disorder," said the
colonel, in surprise.

"Ay, sir, so there was; and the thing reminds me of the stories they
used to tell on the New York police. It looked to me as though all the
row was raised by Mrs. Clancy, as Captain Rayner says; but the man was
arrested. That being the case, I would ask the captain for what specific
offence he ordered Clancy to the guard-house."

Rayner again was pale as death. He glared at the doctor in amaze and
incredulity, while all the officers noted his agitation and were silent
in surprise. It was the colonel that came to the rescue:

"Captain Rayner had abundant reason, doctor. It was after taps, though
only just after, and, whether causing the trouble or not, the man is the
responsible party, not the woman. The captain was right in causing his
arrest."

Rayner looked up gratefully.

"I submit to your decision, sir," said the surgeon, "and I apologize for
anything I may have asked that was beyond my province. Now I wish to ask
a question for my own guidance."

"Go on, doctor."

"In case an enlisted man of this command desire to see an officer of his
company,--or any other officer, for that matter,--is it a violation of
any military regulation for him to go to his quarters for that purpose?"

Again was Rayner fearfully white and aged-looking. His lips moved as
though he would interrupt; but discipline prevailed.

"No, doctor; and yet we have certain customs of service to prevent the
men going at all manner of hours and on frivolous errands: a soldier
asks his first sergeant's permission first, and if denied by him, and he
have what he considers good reason, he can report the whole case."

"But suppose a man is not on company duty: must he hunt up his first
sergeant and ask permission to go and see some officer with whom he has
business?"

"Well, hardly, in that case."

"That's all, sir." And the doctor subsided.

Among all the officers, as the meeting adjourned, the question was,
"What do you suppose 'Pills' was driving at?"

There were two or three who knew. Captain Rayner went first to his
quarters, where he had a few moments' hurried consultation with his
wife; then they left the house together,--he to have a low-toned and
very stern talk to rather than with the abashed Clancy, who listened cap
in hand and with hanging head; she to visit the sick child of Mrs.
Flanigan, of Company K, whose quarters adjoined those to which the
Clancys had recently been assigned. When that Hibernian culprit returned
to his roof-tree, released from durance vile, he was surprised to
receive a kindly and sympathetic welcome from his captain's wife, who
with her own hand had mixed him some comforting drink and was planning
with Mrs. Clancy for their greater comfort. "If Clancy will only promise
to quit entirely!" interjected the partner of his joys and sorrows.

Later that day, when the doctor had a little talk with Clancy, the
ex-dragoon declared he was going to reform for all he was worth. He was
only a distress to everybody when he drank.

"All right, Clancy. And when you are perfectly yourself you can come and
see Lieutenant Hayne as soon as you like."

"Loot'nant Hayne is it, sir? Shure I'd be beggin' his pardon for the
vexation I gave him last night."

"But you have something you wanted to speak with him about. You said so
last night, Clancy," said the doctor, looking him squarely in the eye.

"Shure I was dhrunk, sir. I didn't mane it," he answered; but he shrank
and cowered.

The doctor turned and left him.

"If it's only when he's drunk that conscience pricks him and the truth
will out, then we must have him drunk again," quoth this unprincipled
practitioner.

That same afternoon Miss Travers found that a headache was the result of
confinement to an atmosphere somewhat heavily charged with electricity.
Mrs. Rayner seemed to bristle every time she approached her sister.
Possibly it was the heart, more than the head, that ached, but in either
case she needed relief from the exposed position she had occupied ever
since Kate's return from the Clancys' in the morning. She had been too
long under fire, and was wearied. Even the cheery visits of the garrison
gallants had proved of little avail, for Mrs. Rayner was in very ill
temper, and made snappish remarks to them which two of them resented and
speedily took themselves off. Later Miss Travers went to her room and
wrote a letter, and then the sunset gun shook the window, and twilight
settled down upon the still frozen earth. She bathed her heated
forehead and flushed cheeks, threw a warm cloak over her shoulders, and
came slowly down the stairs. Mrs. Rayner met her at the parlor door.

"Kate, I am going for a walk, and shall stop and see Mrs. Waldron."

"Quite an unnecessary piece of information. I saw him as well as you. He
has just gone there."

Miss Travers flushed hot with indignation:

"I have seen no one; and if you mean that Mr. Hayne has gone to Major
Waldron's, I shall not."

"No: I'd meet him on the walk: it would only be a trifle more public."

"You have no right to accuse me of the faintest expectation of meeting
him anywhere. I repeat, I had not thought of such a thing."

"You might just as well do it. You cannot make your antagonism to my
husband much more pointed than you have already. And as for meeting Mr.
Hayne, the only advice I presume to give now is that for your own sake
you keep your blushes under better control than you did the last time
you met--that I know of." And, with this triumphant insult as a parting
shot, Mrs. Rayner wheeled and marched off through the parlor.

What was a girl to do? Nellie Travers was not of the crying kind, and
was denied a vast amount of comfort in consequence. She stood a few
moments quivering under the lash of injustice and insult to which she
had been subjected. She longed for a breath of pure, fresh air; but
there would be no enjoyment even in that now. She needed sympathy and
help, if ever girl did, but where was she to find it? The women who most
attracted her and who would have warmly welcomed her at any time--the
women whom she would eagerly have gone to in her trouble--were
practically denied to her. Mrs. Rayner in her quarrel had declared war
against the cavalry, and Mrs. Stannard and Mrs. Ray, who had shown a
disposition to welcome Nellie warmly, were no longer callers at the
house. Mrs. Waldron, who was kind and motherly to the girl and loved to
have her with her, was so embarrassed by Mrs. Rayner's determined snubs
that she hardly knew how to treat the matter. She would no longer visit
Mrs. Rayner informally, as had been her custom, yet she wanted the girl
to come to her. If she went, Miss Travers well knew that on her return
to the house she would be received by a volley of sarcasms about her
preference for the society of people who were the avowed enemies of her
benefactors. If she remained in the house, it was to become in person
the target for her sister's undeserved sneers and censure. The situation
was becoming simply unbearable. Twice she began and twice she tore to
fragments the letter for which Mr. Van Antwerp was daily imploring, and
this evening she once more turned and slowly sought her room, threw off
her wraps, and took up her writing-desk. It was not yet dark. There was
still light enough for her purpose, if she went close to the window.
Every nerve was tingling with the sense of wrong and ignominy, every
throb of her heart but intensified the longing for relief from the
thraldom of her position. She saw only one path to lead her from such
crushing dependence. There was his last letter, received only that day,
urging, imploring her to leave Warrener forthwith. Mrs. Rayner had
declared to him her readiness to bring her East provided she would fix
an early date for the wedding. Was it not a future many a girl might
envy? Was he not tender, faithful, patient, devoted as man could be? Had
he not social position and competence? Was he not high-bred, courteous,
refined,--a gentleman in all his acts and words? Why could she not love
him, and be content? There on the desk lay a little scrap of note-paper;
there lay her pen; a dozen words only were necessary. One moment she
gazed longingly, wistfully, at the far-away, darkening heights of the
Rockies, watching the last rose-tinted gleams on the snowy peaks; then
with sudden impulse she seized her pen and drew the portfolio to the
window-seat. As she did so, a soldierly figure came briskly down the
walk; a pale, clear-cut face glanced up at her casement; a quick light
of recognition and pleasure flashed in his eyes; the little forage-cap
was raised with courteous grace, though the step never slackened, and
Miss Travers felt that her cheek, too, was flushing again, as Mr. Hayne
strode rapidly by. She stood there another moment, and then--it had
grown too dark to write.

When Mrs. Rayner, after calling twice from the bottom of the stairs,
finally went up into her room and impatiently pushed open the door, all
was darkness except the glimmer from the hearth:

"Nellie, where are you?"

"Here," answered Miss Travers, starting up from the sofa. "I think I
must have been asleep."

"Your head is hot as fire," said her sister, laying her firm white hand
upon the burning forehead. "I suppose you are going to be downright
ill, by way of diversion. Just understand one thing, Nellie: that doctor
does not come into my house."

"What doctor?--not that I want one," asked Miss Travers, wearily.

"Dr. Pease, the post surgeon, I mean. Of course you have heard how he is
mixing himself in my husband's affairs and making trouble with various
people."

"I have heard nothing, Kate."

"I don't wonder your friends are ashamed to tell you. Things have come
to a pretty pass, when officers are going around holding private
meetings with enlisted men!"

"I hardly know the doctor at all, Kate, and cannot imagine what affairs
of your husband's he can interfere with."

"It was he that put up Clancy to making the disturbance at Mr. Hayne's
last night and getting into the guard-house, and tried to prove that he
had a right to go there and that the captain had no right to arrest
him."

"Was Clancy trying to see Mr. Hayne?" asked Miss Travers, quickly.

"How should I know?" said her sister, pettishly. "He was drunk, and
probably didn't know what he was doing."

"And Captain Rayner arrested him for--for trying to see Mr. Hayne?"

"Captain Rayner arrested him for being drunk and creating a disturbance,
as it was his duty to arrest any soldier under such circumstances,"
replied her sister, with majestic wrath, "and I will not tolerate it
that you should criticise his conduct."

"I have made no criticism, Kate. I have simply made inquiry; but I have
learned what no one else could have made me believe."

"Nellie Travers, be careful what you say, or what you insinuate. What do
you mean?"

"I mean, Kate, that it is my belief that there is something at the
bottom of those stories of Clancy's strange talk when in the hospital. I
believe he thinks he knows something which would turn all suspicion from
Mr. Hayne to a totally different man. I believe that, for reasons which
I cannot fathom, you are determined Mr. Hayne shall not see him or hear
of it. It was you that sent Captain Rayner over there last night. Mrs.
Clancy came here at tattoo, and, from the time she left, you were at the
front door or window. You were the first to hear her cries, and came
running in to tell the captain to go at once. Kate, _why_ did you stand
there listening from the time she left the kitchen, unless you expected
to hear just what happened over there behind the company barracks?"

Mrs. Rayner would give no answer. Anger, rage, retaliation, all in turn
were pictured on her furious face, but died away before the calm and
unconquerable gaze in her sister's eyes. For the first time in her life
Kate Rayner realized that her "baby Nell" had the stronger will of the
two. For one instant she contemplated vengeance. A torrent of invective
leaped readily to her lips. "Outrage," "ingrate," "insult," were the
first three distinguishable epithets applied to her sister or her
sister's words; then, "See if Mr. Van Antwerp will tolerate such
conduct. I'll write this very day," was the impotent threat that
followed; and finally, utterly defeated, thoroughly convinced that she
was powerless against her sister's reckless love of "fair play at any
price," she felt that her wrath was giving way to dismay, and turned and
fled, lest Nellie should see the flag of surrender on her paling cheeks.




XIII.


Two nights after this, as Captain Buxton was sulkily going the rounds of
the sentries he made a discovery which greatly enlivened an otherwise
uneventful tour as officer of the day. It had been his general custom on
such occasions to take the shortest way across the parade to the
guard-house, make brief and perfunctory inspection there, then go on
down the hill to the creek valley and successively visit the sentries
around the stables. If the night were wet or cold, he went back the same
way, ignoring the sentries at the coal-and store-sheds along Prairie
Avenue. This was a sharply cold night, and very dark, but equally still.
It was between twelve and one o'clock--nearer one than twelve--as he
climbed the hill on his homeward way, and, instead of taking the short
cut, turned northward and struck for the gloomy mass of sheds dimly
discernible some forty yards from the crest. He had heard other officers
speak of the fact that Mr. Hayne's lights were burning until long after
midnight, and that, dropping in there, they had found him seated at his
desk with a green shade over his eyes, studying by the aid of two
student-lamps; "boning to be a general, probably," was the comment of
captains of Buxton's calibre, who, having grown old in the service and
in their own ignorance, were fiercely intolerant of lieutenants who
strove to improve in professional reading instead of spending their time
making out the company muster-rolls and clothing-accounts, as they
should do. Buxton wanted to see for himself what the night-lights meant,
and was plunging heavily ahead through the darkness, when suddenly
brought to a stand by the sharp challenge of the sentry at the
coal-shed. He whispered the mystic countersign over the levelled bayonet
of the infantryman, swearing to himself at the regulation which puts an
officer in such a "stand-and-deliver" attitude for the time being, and
then, by way of getting square with the soldier for the sharply military
way in which his duty as sentry had been performed, the captain
proceeded to catechise him as to his orders. The soldier had been well
taught, and knew all his "responses" by rote,--far better than Buxton,
for that matter, as the latter was anything but an exemplar of
perfection in tactics or sentry duty; but this did not prevent Buxton's
snappishly telling him he was wrong in several points and contemptuously
inquiring where he had learned such trash. The soldier promptly but
respectfully responded that those were the exact instructions he had
received at the adjutant's school, and Buxton knew from experience that
he was getting on dangerous ground. He would have stuck to his point,
however, in default of something else to find fault with, but that the
crack of a whip, the crunching of hoofs, and a rattle of wheels out in
the darkness quickly diverted his attention.

"What's that, sentry?" he sharply inquired.

"A carriage, sir. Leastwise, I think it must be."

"Why don't you know, sir? It must have been on your post."

"No, sir; it was 'way off my post. It drove up to Lieutenant Hayne's
about half an hour ago."

"Where'd it come from?" asked the captain, eagerly.

"From town, sir, I suppose." And, leaving the sentry to his own
reflections, which, on the whole, were not complimentary to his superior
officer, Captain Buxton strode rapidly through the darkness to
Lieutenant Hayne's quarters. Bright lights were still burning within,
both on the ground-floor and in a room above. The sentries were just
beginning the call of one o'clock when he reached the gate and halted,
gazing inquisitively at the house front. Then he turned and listened to
the rattle of wheels growing faint in the distance as the team drove
away towards the prairie town. If Hayne had gone to town at that hour of
the night it was a most unusual proceeding, and he had not the
colonel's permission to absent himself from the post: of that the
officer of the day was certain. Then, again, he would not have gone and
left all his lights burning. No: that vehicle, whatever it was, had
brought somebody out to see him,--somebody who proposed to remain
several hours; otherwise the carriage would not have driven away. In
confirmation of this theory, he heard voices, cheery voices, in laughing
talk, and one of them made him prick up his ears. He heard the piano
crisply trilling a response to light, skilful fingers. He longed for a
peep within, and regretted that he had dropped Mr. Hayne from the list
of his acquaintance. He recognized Hayne's shadow, presently, thrown by
the lamp upon the curtained window, and wished that his visitor would
come similarly into view. He heard the clink of glasses, and saw the
shadow raise a wineglass to the lips, and Sam's Mongolian shape flitted
across the screen, bearing a tray with similar suggestive objects. What
meant this unheard-of conviviality on the part of the ascetic, the
hermit, the midnight-oil-burner, the scholarly recluse of the garrison?
Buxton stared with all his eyes and listened with all his ears, starting
guiltily when he heard a martial footstep coming quickly up the path,
and faced the intruder rather unsteadily. It was only the corporal of
the guard, and he glanced at his superior, brought his fur-gauntleted
hand in salute to the rifle on his shoulder, and passed on. The next
moment Buxton fairly gasped with amaze: he stared an instant at the
window as though transfixed, then ran after the corporal, called to him
in low, stealthy tone to come back noiselessly, drew him by the sleeve
to the front of Hayne's quarters, and pointed to the parlor window. Two
shadows were there now,--one easily recognizable as that of the young
officer in his snugly-fitting undress uniform, the other slender,
graceful, feminine.

"What do you make that other shadow to be, corporal?" he whispered,
hoarsely and hurriedly. "_Look!_" And with that exclamation a shadowed
arm seemed to encircle the slender form, the moustached image to bend
low and mingle with the outlined luxuriance of tress that decked the
other's head, and then, together, with clasping arms, the shadows moved
from view.

"What was the other, corporal?" he repeated.

"Well, sir, I should say it was a young woman."

Buxton could hardly wait until morning to see Rayner. When he passed the
latter's quarters half an hour later, all was darkness; though, had he
but known it, Rayner was not asleep. He was at the house before
guard-mounting, and had a confidential and evidently exciting talk with
the captain; and when he went, just as the trumpets were sounding, these
words were heard at the front door:

"She never left until after daylight, when the same rig drove her back
to town. There was a stranger with her then."

That morning both Rayner and Buxton looked hard at Mr. Hayne when he
came in to the _matinee_; but he was just as calm and quiet as ever,
and, having saluted the commanding officer, took a seat by Captain Gregg
and was soon occupied in conversation with him. Not a word was said by
the officer of the day about the mysterious visitor to the garrison the
previous night. With Captain Rayner, however, he was again in
conversation much of the day, and to him, not to his successor as
officer of the day, did he communicate all the details of the previous
night's adventure and his theories thereanent.

Late that night, having occasion to step to his front door, convinced
that he heard stealthy footsteps on his piazza, Mr. Hayne could see
nobody in the darkness, but found his front gate open. He walked around
his little house; but not a man was visible. His heart was full of a new
and strange excitement that night, and, as before, he threw on his
overcoat and furs and took a rapid walk around the garrison, gazing up
into the starry heavens and drinking in great draughts of the pure,
bracing air. Returning, he came down along the front of officers' row,
and as he approached Rayner's quarters his eyes rested longingly upon
the window he knew to be hers now; but all was darkness. As he rapidly
neared the house, however, he became aware of two bulky figures at the
gate, and, as he walked briskly past, recognized the overcoats as those
of officers. One man was doubtless Rayner, the other he could not tell;
for both, the instant they recognized his step, seemed to avert their
heads. Once home again, he soon sought his room and pillow; but, long
before he could sleep, again and again a sweet vision seemed to come to
him: he _could not_ shut out the thought of Nellie Travers,--of how she
looked and what she said that very afternoon.

He had gone to call at Mrs. Waldron's soon after dark. He was at the
piano, playing for her, when he became conscious that another lady had
entered the room, and, turning, saw Nellie Travers. He rose and bowed to
her, extending his hand as he did so, and knowing that his heart was
thumping and his color rising as he felt the soft, warm touch of her
slender fingers in his grasp. She, too, had flushed,--any one could see
it, though the lamps were not turned high, nor was the firelight strong.

"Miss Travers has come to take tea very quietly with me, Mr.
Hayne,--she is so soon to return to the East,--and now I want you to
stay and join us. No one will be here but the major; and we will have a
lovely time with our music. You will, won't you?"

"So soon to return to the East!" How harsh, how strange and unwelcome,
the words sounded! How they seemed to oppress him and prevent his reply!
He stood a moment dazed and vaguely worried: he could not explain it. He
looked from Mrs. Waldron's kind face to the sweet, flushed, lovely
features there so near him, and something told him that he could never
let them go and find even hope or content in life again. How, why had
she so strangely come into his lonely life, radiant, beautiful,
bewildering as some suddenly blazing star in the darkest corner of the
heavens? Whence had come this strange power that enthralled him? He
gazed into her sweet face, with its downcast, troubled eyes, and then,
in bewilderment, turned to Mrs. Waldron:

"I--I had no idea Miss Travers was going East again just now. It seems
only a few days since she came."

"It is over a month; but all the same this is a sudden decision. I knew
nothing of it until yesterday.--You said Mrs. Rayner was better to-day,
Nellie?"

"Yes, a little; but she is far from well. I think the captain will go,
too, just as soon as he can arrange for leave of absence," was the
low-toned answer. He had released, or rather she had withdrawn, her
hand, and he still stood there, fascinated. His eyes could not quit
their gaze. She going away?--She? Oh, it _could_ not be! What--what
would life become without the sight of that radiant face, that slender,
graceful, girlish form?

"Is not this very unexpected?" he struggled to say. "I thought--I heard
you were to spend several months here."

"It _was_ so intended, Mr. Hayne; but my sister's health requires speedy
change. She has been growing worse ever since we came, and she will not
get well here."

"And when do you go?" he asked, blankly.

"Just as soon as we can pack; though we may wait two or three days for
a--for a telegram."

There was a complete break in the conversation for a full quarter of a
minute,--not such a long time in itself, but unconventionally long under
such circumstances. Then Mrs. Waldron suddenly and remarkably arose:

"I'll leave you to entertain Mr. Hayne a few moments, Nellie. I am the
slave of my cook, and she knows nothing of Mr. Hayne's being here to tea
with us: so I must tell her and avert disaster."

And with this barefaced--statement on her lips and conscience, where it
rested with equal lightness, that exemplary lady quitted the room. In
the sanctity of the connubial chamber that evening, some hours later,
she thus explained her action to her silent spouse:

"Right or wrong, I meant that those two young people should have a
chance to know each other. I have been convinced for three weeks that
she is being forced into this New York match, and for the last week that
she is wretchedly unhappy. You say you believe him a wronged and injured
man, only you can't prove it, and you have said that nothing could be
too good for him in this life as a reward for all his bravery and
fortitude under fearful trials. Then Nellie Travers isn't too good for
him, sweet as she is, and I don't care who calls me a matchmaker."

But with Mrs. Waldron away the two appeared to have made but halting
progress towards friendship. With all her outspoken pluck at school and
at home, Miss Travers was strangely ill at ease and embarrassed now. Mr.
Hayne was the first to gain self-control and to endeavor to bring the
conversation back to a natural channel. It was a struggle; but he had
grown accustomed to struggles. He could not imagine that a girl whom he
had met only once or twice should have for him anything more than the
vaguest and most casual interest. He well knew by this time how deep and
vehement was the interest she had aroused in his heart; but it would
never do to betray himself so soon. He strove to interest her in
reference to the music she would hear, and to learn from her where they
were going. This she answered. They would go no farther East than St.
Louis or Chicago. They might go South as far as Nashville until mid-May.
As for the summer, it would depend on the captain and his leave of
absence. It was all vague and unsettled. Mrs. Rayner was so wretched
that her husband was convinced that she ought to leave for the States as
soon as possible, and of course "she" must go with her. All the
gladness, brightness, vivacity he had seen and heard of as her marked
characteristics seemed gone; and, yet, she wanted to speak with
him,--wanted to be with him. What could be wrong? he asked himself. It
was not until Mrs. Waldron's step was heard returning that she nerved
herself to sudden, almost desperate, effort. She startled him with her
vehemence:

"Mr. Hayne, there is something I must tell you before I go. If no
opportunity occur, I'll write it."

And those were the words that had been haunting him all the evening, for
they were not again alone, and he had no chance to ask a question. What
_could_ she mean? For years he had been living a life of stern
self-denial; but long before his promotion the last penny of the
obligation that, justly or otherwise, had been laid upon his shoulders
was paid with interest. He was a man free and self-respecting, strong,
resolute, and possessed of an independence that never would have been
his had his life run on in the same easy, trusting, happy-go-lucky style
in which he had spent the first two years of his army career. But in his
isolation he had allowed himself no thought of anything that could for a
moment distract him from the stern purpose to which he had devoted every
energy. He would win back, command, _compel_, the respect of his
comrades,--would bring to confusion those who had sought to pull him
down; and until that stood accomplished he would know no other claim. In
the exile of the mountain-station he saw no women but the wives of his
senior officers; and they merely bowed when they happened to meet him:
some did not even do that. Now at last he had met and yielded to the
first of two conquerors before whom even the bravest and the strongest
go down infallibly,--Love and Death. Suddenly, but irresistibly, the
sweet face and thrilling tones of that young girl had seized and filled
his heart, to the utter exclusion of every other passion; and just in
proportion to the emptiness and yearning of his life before their
meeting was the intensity of the love and longing that possessed him
now. It was useless to try and analyze the suddenness and subtilty of
its approach: the power of love had overmastered him. He could only
realize that it was here and he must obey. Late into the morning hours
he lay there, his brain whirling with its varied and bewildering
emotions. Win her he must, or the blackness and desolation of the past
five years would be as nothing compared with the misery of the years to
come. Woo her he would, and not without hope, if ever woman's eyes gave
proof of sympathy and trust. But now at last he realized that the time
had come when for her sake--not for his--he must adopt a new course.
Hitherto he had scorned and repelled all overtures that were not
prefaced by an expression of belief in his utter innocence in the past.
Hitherto he had chosen to live the life of an anchorite, and had abjured
the society of women. Hitherto he had refused the half-extended proffers
of comrades who had sought to continue the investigation of a chain of
circumstances that, complete, might have proved him a wronged and
defrauded man. The missing links were not beyond recovery in skilful
hands; but in the shock and horror which he felt on realizing that it
was not only possible but certain that a jury of his comrade officers
could deem him guilty of a low crime, he hid his face and turned from
all. _Now_ the time had come to reopen the case. He well knew that a
revulsion of feeling had set in which nothing but his own stubbornness
held in check. He knew that he had friends and sympathizers among
officers high in rank. He had only a few days before heard from Major
Waldron's lips a strong intimation that it was his duty to "come out of
his shell" and reassert himself. "You must remember this, Hayne," said
he: "you had been only two years in service when tried by court-martial.
You were an utter stranger to every member of that court. There was
nothing but the evidence to go upon, and that was all against you. The
court was made up of officers from other regiments, and was at least
impartial. The evidence was almost all from your own, and was presumably
well founded. You would call no witnesses for defence. You made your
almost defiant statement; refused counsel; refused advice; and what
could the court do but convict and sentence? Had I been a member of the
court I would have voted just as was done by the court; and yet I
believe you now an utterly innocent man."

So, apparently, did the colonel regard him. So, too, did several of the
officers of the cavalry. So, too, would most of the youngsters of his
own regiment if he would only give them half a chance. In any event, the
score was wiped out now; he could afford to take a wife if a woman
learned to love him, and what wealth of tenderness and devotion was he
not ready to lavish on one who would! But he would offer no one a
tarnished name. First and foremost he must now stand up and fight that
calumny,--"come out of his shell," as Waldron had said, and give people
a chance to see what manner of man he was. God helping him, he would,
and that without delay.




XIV.


"The best-laid schemes o' mice an' men gang aft a-gley." Mrs. Rayner,
ill in mind and body, had yielded to her lord's entreaties and
determined to start eastward with her sister without delay. Packing was
already begun. Miss Travers had promised herself that she would within
thirty-six hours put Mr. Hayne in possession of certain facts or
theories which in her opinion bore strongly upon the "clearing up" of
the case against him; Mr. Hayne had determined that he would see Major
Waldron on the coming day and begin active efforts towards the
restoration of his social rights; the doctor had about decided on a new
project for inducing Clancy to unbosom himself of what he knew; Captain
Rayner--tired of the long struggle--was almost ready to welcome anything
which should establish his subaltern's innocence, and was on the point
of asking for six months' leave just as soon as he had arranged for
Clancy's final discharge from service: he had reasons for staying at the
post until that Hibernian household was fairly and squarely removed; and
Mrs. Clancy's plan was to take Mike to the distant East, "where she had
frinds." There were other schemes and projects, no doubt, but these
mainly concerned our leading characters, and one and all they were put
to the right-about by the events of the following day.

The colonel, with his gruff second in command, Major Stannard, had been
under orders for several days to proceed on this particular date to a
large town a day's journey eastward by rail. A court-martial composed
mainly of field-officers was ordered there to assemble for the trial of
an old captain of cavalry whose propensity it was not so much to get
drunk as never to get drunk without concomitant publicity and discovery.
It was a rare thing for the old war-dog to take so much as a glass of
wine; he went for months without it; but the instant he began to drink
he was moved to do or say something disreputable, and that was the
trouble now. He was an unlucky old trooper, who had risen from the
lowest grades, fought with credit, and even, at times, commanded his
regiment, during the war; but war records could not save him when he
wouldn't save himself, and he had to go. The court was ordered, and the
result was a foregone conclusion. The colonel, his adjutant, and Major
Stannard were to drive to town during the afternoon and take the
east-bound train, leaving Major Waldron in command of the post; but
before guard-mounting a telegram was received which was sent from
department head-quarters the evening before, announcing that one of the
officers detailed for the court was seriously ill, and directing Major
Waldron to take his place. So it resulted in the post being left to the
command of the senior captain present for duty; and that man was Captain
Buxton. He had never had so big a command before in all his life.

Major Waldron of course had to go home and make his preparations. Mr.
Hayne, therefore, had brief opportunity to speak with him. It was seen,
however, that they had a short talk together on the major's piazza, and
that when they parted the major shook him warmly and cordially by the
hand. Rayner, Buxton, Ross, and some juniors happened to be coming down
along the walk at the moment, and, seeing them, as though with pointed
meaning the major called out, so that all could hear,--

"By the way, Hayne, I wish you would drop in occasionally while I'm gone
and take Mrs. Waldron out for a walk or drive: my horses are always at
your service. And--a--I'll write to you about that matter the moment
I've had a chance to talk with the colonel,--to-morrow, probably."

And Hayne touched his cap in parting salute, and went blithely off with
brightened eye and rising color.

Buxton glowered after him a moment, and conversation suddenly ceased in
their party. Finally he blurted out,--

"Strikes me your major might do a good deal better by himself and his
regiment by standing up for its _morale_ and discipline than by openly
flaunting his favoritism for convicts in our faces. If I were in your
regiment I'd cut _him_."

"You wouldn't have to," muttered one of the group to his neighbor: "the
cut would have been on the other side long ago." And the speaker was
Buxton's own subaltern.

Rayner said nothing. His eyes were troubled and anxious, and he looked
after Hayne with an expression far more wearied than vindictive.

"The major is fond of music, captain," said Mr. Ross, with mischievous
intent. "He hasn't been to the club since the night you sang 'Eileen
Alanna.' That was about the time Hayne's piano came."

"Yes," put in Foster, "Mrs. Waldron says he goes and owls Hayne now
night after night just to hear him play."

"It would be well for him, then, if he kept a better guard on Mr.
Hayne's _other_ visitors," said Buxton, with a black scowl. "I don't
know how you gentlemen in the Riflers look upon such matters, but in the
----th the man who dared to introduce a woman of the town into his
quarters would be kicked out in short order."

"You don't mean to say that anybody accuses Hayne of that, do you?"
asked Ross, in amaze.

"I do,--_just_ that. Only, I say this to you, it has but just come to
light, and only one or two know it. To prove it positively he's got to
be allowed more rope; for he got her out of the way last time before we
could clinch the matter. If he suspects it is known he won't repeat it;
if kept to ourselves he will probably try it again,--and be caught. Now
I charge you all to regard this as confidential."

"But, Captain Buxton," said Ross, "this is so serious a matter that I
don't like to believe it. Who can prove such a story?"

"Of course not, Mr. Ross. You are quite ready to treat a man as a thief,
but can't believe he'll do another thing that is disreputable. That is
characteristic of your style of reasoning," said Buxton, with biting
sarcasm.

"You can't wither me with contempt, Captain Buxton. I have a right to my
opinion, and I have known Mr. Hayne for years, and if I _did_ believe
him guilty of one crime five years ago I'm not so ready to believe him
guilty of another now. This isn't--isn't like Hayne."

"No, of course not, as I said before. Now, will you tell me, Mr. Ross,
just why Mr. Hayne chose that ramshackle old shanty out there on the
prairie, all by himself, unless it was to be where he could have his
chosen companions with him at night and no one be the wiser?"

"I don't pretend to fathom his motives, sir; but I don't believe it was
for any such purpose as you seem to think."

"In other words, you think I'm circulating baseless scandal, do you?"

"I have said nothing of the kind; and I protest against your putting
words into my mouth I never used."

"You intimated as much, anyhow, and you plainly don't believe it."

"Well, I don't believe--that is, I don't see how it could happen."

"Couldn't the woman drive out from town after dark, send the carriage
back, and have it call for her again in the morning?" asked Buxton.

"Possibly. Still, it isn't a proved fact that a woman spent the night at
Hayne's, even if a carriage was seen coming out. You've got hold of some
Sudsville gossip, probably," replied Ross.

"I have, have I? By God, sir, I'll teach you better manners before we
get through with this question. Do you know who saw the carriage, and
who saw the woman, both at Hayne's quarters?"

"Certainly I don't! What I don't understand is how you should have been
made the recipient of the story."

"Mr. Ross, just govern your tongue, sir, and remember you are speaking
to your superior officer, and don't venture to treat my statements with
disrespect hereafter. _I saw it myself!_"

"_You!_" gulped Ross, while amaze and incredulity shot across his
startled face.

"You!" exclaimed others of the group, in evident astonishment and
dismay. Rayner alone looked unchanged. It was no news to him, while to
every other man in the party it was a shock. Up to that instant the
prevailing belief had been, with Ross, that Buxton had found some
garrison gossip and was building an edifice thereon. His positive
statement, however, was too much for the most incredulous.

"Now what have you to say?" he asked, in rude triumph.

There was no answer for a moment; then Ross spoke:

"Of course, Captain Buxton, I withdraw any expression of doubt. It never
occurred to me that you could have seen it. May I ask when and how?"

"The last time I was officer of the day, sir; and Captain Rayner is my
witness as to the time. Others, whom I need not mention, saw it with me.
There is no mistake, sir. The woman was there." And Buxton stood
enjoying the effect.

Ross looked white and dazed. He turned slowly away, hesitated, looked
back, then exclaimed,--

"You are sure it was--it was not some one that had a right to be there?"

"How could it be?" said Buxton, gruffly. "You know he has not an
acquaintance in town, or here, who could be with him there at night."

"Does the commanding officer know of it?" asked Mr. Royce, after a
moment's silence.

"_I_ am the commanding officer, Mr. Royce," said Buxton, with majestic
dignity,--"at least I will be after twelve o'clock; and you may depend
upon it, gentlemen, this thing will not occur while I am in command
without its receiving the exact treatment it deserves. Remember, now,
not a word of this to anybody. You are as much interested as I am in
bringing to justice a man who will disgrace his uniform and his regiment
and insult every lady in the garrison by such an act. This sort of thing
of course will run him out of the service for good and all. We simply
have to be sure of our ground and make the evidence conclusive. Leave
that to me the next time it happens. I repeat, say nothing of this to
any one."

But Rayner had already told his wife.

Just as Major Waldron was driving off to the station that bright April
afternoon and his carriage was whirling through the east gate, the
driver caught sight of Lieutenant Hayne running up Prairie Avenue,
waving his hand and shouting to him. He reined in his spirited bays with
some difficulty, and Hayne finally caught up with them.

"What is it, Hayne?" asked Waldron, with kindly interest, leaning out of
his carriage.

"They will be back to-night, sir. Here is a telegram that has just
reached me."

"I can't tell you how sorry I am not to be here to welcome them; but
Mrs. Waldron will be delighted, and she will come to call the moment you
let her know. Keep them till I get back, if you possibly can."

"Ay, ay, sir. Good-by."

"Good-by, Hayne. God bless you, and--good luck!"

A little later that afternoon Mrs. Rayner had occasion to go into her
sister's room. It was almost sunset, and Nellie had been summoned
down-stairs to see visitors. Both the ladies were busy with their
packing,--Mrs. Rayner, as became an invalid, superintending, and Miss
Travers, as became the junior, doing all the work. It was rather trying
to pack all the trunks and receive visitors of both sexes at odd hours.
Some of her garrison acquaintances would have been glad to come and
help, but those whom she would have welcomed were not agreeable to the
lady of the house, and those the lady of the house would have chosen
were not agreeable to her. The relations between the sisters were
somewhat strained and unnatural, and had been growing more and more so
for several days past. Mrs. Rayner's desk was already packed away. She
wanted to send a note, and bethought her of her sister's portfolio.
Opening it, she drew out some paper and envelopes, and with the latter
came an envelope sealed and directed. One glance at its superscription
sent the blood to her cheek and fire to her eye. Was it possible? Was it
credible? Her pet, her baby sister, her pride and delight,--until she
found her stronger in will,--her proud-spirited, truthful Nell, was
beyond question corresponding with Lieutenant Hayne! Here was a note
addressed to him. How many more might not have been exchanged?
Ruthlessly now she explored the desk, searching for something from him,
but her scrutiny was vain. Oh, what could she say, what could she do, to
convey to her erring sister an adequate sense of the extent of her
displeasure? How could she bring her to realize the shame, the guilt,
the scandal, of her course? She, Nellie Travers, the betrothed wife of
Steven Van Antwerp, corresponding secretly with this--this scoundrel,
whose past, crime-laden as it had been, was as nothing compared to the
present with its degradation of vice? Ah! she had it! What would ever
move her as that could and must?

When the trumpets rang out their sunset call and the boom of the evening
gun shook the windows in Fort Warrener and Nellie Travers came running
up-stairs again to her room, she started at the sight that met her eyes.
There stood Mrs. Rayner, like Juno in wrath inflexible, glaring at her
from the commanding height of which she was so proud, and pointing in
speechless indignation at the little note that lay upon the open
portfolio.

For a moment neither spoke. Then Miss Travers, who had turned very
white, but whose blue eyes never flinched and whose lips were set and
whose little foot was tapping the carpet ominously, thus began:

"Kate, I do not recognize your right to overhaul my desk or supervise my
correspondence."

"Understand this first, Cornelia," said Mrs. Rayner, who hated the
baptismal name as much as did her sister, and used it only when she
desired to be especially and desperately impressive: "I found it by
accident. I never dreamed of such a possibility as this. I never, even
after what I have seen and heard, could have believed you guilty of
this; but, now that I have found it, I have the right to ask, what are
its contents?"

"I decline to tell you."

"Do you deny my right to inquire?"

"I will not discuss that question now. The other is far graver. I will
not tell you, Kate, except this: there is no word there that an engaged
girl should not write."

"Of that I mean to satisfy myself, or rather--"

"You will not open it, Kate. No! Put that letter down! You have never
known me to prevaricate in the faintest degree, and you have no excuse
for doubting. I will furnish a copy of that for Mr. Van Antwerp at any
time; but you cannot see it."

"You still persist in your wicked and unnatural intimacy with that man,
even after all that I have told you. Now for the last time hear me: I
have striven not to tell you this; I have striven not to sully your
thoughts by such a revelation; but, since nothing else will check you,
tell it I must, and what I tell you my husband told me in sacred
confidence, though soon enough it will be a scandal to the whole
garrison."

And when darkness settled down on Fort Warrener that starlit April
evening and the first warm breeze from the south came sighing about the
casements and one by one the lights appeared along officers' row, there
was no light in Nellie Travers's window. The little note lay in ashes on
the hearth, and she, with burning, shame-stricken cheeks, with a black,
scorching, gnawing pain at her heart, was hiding her face in her pillow.

And yet it was a jolly evening, after all,--that is, for some hours and
for some people. As Mrs. Rayner and her sister were so soon to go,
probably by the morrow's train if their section could be secured, the
garrison had decided to have an informal dance as a suitable farewell.
Their announcement of impending departure had come so suddenly and
unexpectedly that there was no time to prepare anything elaborate, such
as a german with favors, etc.; but good music and an extemporized supper
could be had without trouble. The colonel's wife and most of the cavalry
ladies, on consultation, had decided that it was the very thing to do,
and the young officers took hold with a will: they were always ready for
a dance. Now that Mrs. Rayner was really going, the quarrel should be
ignored, and the ladies would all be as pleasant to her as though
nothing had happened,--provided, of course, she dropped her absurd airs
of injured womanhood and behaved with courtesy. The colonel had had a
brief talk with his better half before starting for the train, and
suggested that it was very probable that Mrs. Rayner had seen the folly
of her ways by that time,--the captain certainly had been behaving as
though he regretted the estrangement,--and if encouraged by a
"let's-drop-the-whole-thing" sort of manner she would be glad to
reciprocate. He felt far less anxiety herein than he did in leaving the
post to the command of Captain Buxton. So scrupulously had he been
courteous to that intractable veteran that Buxton had no doubt in his
own mind that the colonel looked upon him as the model officer of the
regiment. It was singularly unfortunate that he should have to be left
in command, but his one or two seniors among the captains were away on
long leave, and there was no help for it. The colonel, seriously
disquieted, had a few words of earnest talk with him before leaving the
post, cautioning him so particularly not to interfere with any of the
established details and customs that Buxton got very much annoyed, and
showed it.

"If your evidence were not imperatively necessary before this court, I
declare I believe I'd leave you behind," said the colonel to his
adjutant. "There is no telling what mischief Captain Buxton won't do if
left to himself."

It must have been near midnight, and the hop was going along
beautifully, and Captain Rayner, who was officer of the day, was just
escorting his wife in to supper, and Nellie, although looking a trifle
tired and pale, was chatting brightly with a knot of young officers when
a corporal of the guard came to the door: "The commanding officer's
compliments, and he desires to see the officer of the day at once."

There was a general laugh. "Isn't that Buxton all over? The colonel
would never think of sending for an officer in the dead of night, except
for a fire or alarm; but old Bux. begins putting on frills the moment he
gets a chance. Thank God, _I'm_ not on guard to-night!" said Mr. Royce.

"What _can_ he want with you?" asked Mrs. Rayner, pettishly. "The idea
of one captain ordering another around like this!"

"I'll be back in five minutes," said Rayner, as he picked up his sword
and disappeared.

But ten minutes--fifteen--passed, and he came not. Mrs. Rayner grew
worried, and Mr. Blake led her out on the rude piazza to see what they
could see, and several others strolled out at the same time. The music
had ceased, and the night air was not too cold. Not a soul was in sight
out on the starlit parade. Not an unusual sound was heard. There was
nothing to indicate the faintest trouble; and yet Captain Buxton, the
commanding officer, had been called out by his "striker" or
soldier-servant before eleven o'clock, had not returned at all, and in
little over half an hour had sent for the officer of the day. What did
it mean? Questioning and talking thus among themselves, somebody said,
"Hark!" and held up a warning hand.

Faint, far, muffled, there sounded on the night air a shot, then a
woman's scream; then all was still.

"Mrs. Clancy again!" said one.

"That was not Mrs. Clancy: 'twas a far different voice," answered Blake,
and tore away across the parade as fast as his long legs would carry
him.

"Look! The guard are running too!" cried Mrs. Waldron. "What can it be?"
And, sure enough, the gleam of the rifles could be seen as the men ran
rapidly away in the direction of the east gate. Mrs. Rayner had grown
ghastly, and was looking at Miss Travers, who with white lips and
clinched hands stood leaning on one of the wooden posts and gazing with
all her eyes across the dim level. Others came hurrying out from the
hall. Other young officers ran in pursuit of the first starters. "What's
the matter? What's happened?" were the questions that flew from lip to
lip.

"I--I must go home," faltered Mrs. Rayner. "Come, Nellie!"

"Oh, don't go, Mrs. Rayner. It can't be anything serious."

But, even as they urged, a man came running towards them.

"Is the doctor here?" he panted.

"Yes. What's the trouble?" asked Dr. Pease, as he squeezed his burly
form through the crowded door-way.

"You're wanted, sir. Loot'nant Hayne's shot; an' Captain Rayner he's
hurt too, sir."




XV.


Straight as an arrow Mr. Blake had sped across the parade, darted
through the east gate, and, turning, had arrived breathless at the
wooden porch of Hayne's quarters. Two bewildered-looking members of the
guard were at the door. Blake pushed his way through the little hall-way
and into the dimly-lighted parlor, where a strange scene met his eyes:
Lieutenant Hayne lay senseless and white upon the lounge across the
room; a young and pretty woman, singularly like him in feature and in
the color of her abundant tresses, was kneeling beside him, chafing his
hands, imploring him to speak,--to look at her,--unmindful of the fact
that her feet were bare and that only a loose wrapper was thrown over
her white night-dress; Captain Rayner was seated in a chair, deathly
white, and striving to stanch the blood that flowed from a deep gash in
his temple and forehead; he seemed still stunned as by the force of the
blow that had felled him; and Buxton, speechless with amaze and heaven
only knows what other emotions, was glaring at a tall, athletic stranger
who, in stocking-feet, undershirt, and trousers, held by three
frightened-looking soldiers and covered by the carbine of a fourth, was
hurling defiance and denunciation at the commanding officer. A revolver
lay upon the floor at the feet of a corporal of the guard, who was
groaning in pain. A thin veil of powder-smoke floated through the room.
As Blake leaped in,--his cavalry shoulder-knots and helmet-cords
gleaming in the light,--a flash of recognition shot into the stranger's
eyes, and he curbed his fearful excitement and stopped short in his
wrath.

"What devil's work is this?" demanded Blake, glaring intuitively at
Buxton.

"These people resisted my guards, and had to take the consequences,"
said Buxton, with surly--yet shaken--dignity.

"What were the guards doing here? What, in God's name, are you doing
here?" demanded Blake, forgetful of all consideration of rank and
command in the face of such evident catastrophe.

"I _ordered_ them here,--to enter and search."

A pause.

"Search what?--what for?"

"For--a woman I had reason to believe he had brought out here from
town."

"_What?_ You infernal idiot! Why, she's his own sister, and this
gentleman's wife!"

The silence, broken only by the hard breathing of some of the excited
men and the moaning cry of the woman, was for a moment intense.

"Isn't this Mr. Hurley?" asked Blake, suddenly, as though to make sure,
and turning one instant from his furious glare at his superior officer.
The stranger, still held, though no longer struggling, replied between
his set teeth,--

"Certainly. I've told him so."

"By heaven, Buxton, is there no limit to your asininity? What fearful
work will you do next?"

"I'll arrest _you_, sir, if you speak another disrespectful word!"
thundered Buxton, recovering consciousness that as commanding officer he
could defend himself against Blake's assault.

"Do it and be---- you know what I _would_ say if a lady were not
present! Do it, if you think you can stand having this thing ventilated
by a court. Pah! I can't waste words on you. Who's gone for the doctor?
Here, you men, let go of Mr. Hurley now. Help me, Mr. Hurley, please.
Get your wife back to her room. Bring me some water, one of you." And
with that he was bending over Hayne and unbuttoning the fatigue-uniform
in which he was still dressed. Another moment, and the doctor had come
in, and with him half the young officers of the garrison. Rayner was led
away to his own quarters. Buxton, dazed and frightened now, ordered the
guards back to their post, and stood pondering over the enormity of his
blunder. No one spoke to him or paid the faintest attention other than
to elbow him out of the way occasionally. The doctor never so much as
noticed him. Blake had briefly recounted the catastrophe to those who
first arrived, and as the story went from mouth to mouth it grew no
better for Buxton. Once he turned short on Mr. Foster and in aggrieved
and sullen tone remarked,--

"I thought you fellows in the Riflers said he had no relations."

"We weren't apt to be invited to meet them if he had; but I don't know
that anybody was in position to know anything about it. What's that got
to do with this affair, I'd like to hear?"

At last somebody took him home. Mrs. Waldron, meantime, had arrived and
been admitted to Mrs. Hurley's room. The doctor refused to go to Captain
Rayner's, even when a messenger came from Mrs. Rayner herself. He
referred her to his assistant, Dr. Grimes. Hayne had regained
consciousness, but was sorely shaken. He had been floored by a blow from
the butt of a musket; but the report that he was shot proved happily
untrue. His right hand still lay near the hilt of his light sword: there
was little question that he had raised his weapon against a superior
officer and would have used it with telling effect.

Few people slept that night along officers' row. Never had Warrener
heard of such excitement. Buxton knew not what to do. He paced the floor
in agony of mind, for he well understood that there was no shirking the
responsibility. From beginning to end he was the cause of the whole
catastrophe. He had gone so far as to order his corporal to fire, and he
knew it could be proved against him. Thank God, the perplexed corporal
had shot high, and the other men, barring the one who had saved Rayner
from a furious lunge of the lieutenant's sword, had used their weapons
as gingerly and reluctantly as possible. At the very least, he knew, an
investigation and fearful scandal must come of it. Night though it was,
he sent for the acting adjutant and several of his brother captains,
and, setting refreshments before them, besought their advice. He was
still commanding officer _de jure_, but he had lost all stomach for its
functions. He would have been glad to send for Blake and beg his pardon
for submitting to his insubordinate and abusive language, if that course
could have stopped inquiry; but he well knew that the whole thing would
be noised abroad in less than no time. At first he thought to give
orders against the telegraph-operator's sending any messages concerning
the matter; but that would have been only a temporary hinderance: he
could not control the instruments and operators in town, only three
miles away. He almost wished he had been knocked down, shot, or stabbed
in the _melee_; but he had kept in the rear when the skirmish began, and
Rayner and the corporal were the sufferers. They had been knocked
"endwise" by Mr. Hurley's practised fists after Hayne was struck down by
the corporal's musket. It was the universal sentiment among the officers
of the ----th as they scattered to their homes that Buxton had "wound
himself up this time, anyhow;" and no one had any sympathy for him,--not
one. The very best light in which he could tell the story only showed
the affair as a flagrant and inexcusable outrage.

Captain Rayner, too, was in fearful plight. He had simply obeyed orders;
but all the old story of his persecution of Hayne would now be revived;
all men would see in his participation in the affair only additional
reason to adjudge him cruelly persistent in his hatred of the young
officer, and, in view of the utter ruthlessness and wrong of this
assault, would be more than ever confident of the falsity of his
position in the original case. As he was slowly led up-stairs to his
room and his tearful wife and silent sister-in-law bathed and cleansed
his wound, he saw with frightful clearness how the crush of
circumstances was now upon him and his good name. Great heaven! how
those words of Hayne's five years before rang, throbbed, burned, beat
like trip-hammers through his whirling brain! It seemed as though they
followed him and his fortunes like a curse. He sat silent, stunned,
awe-stricken at the force of the calamity that had befallen him. How
could he ever induce an officer and a gentleman to believe that he was
no instigator in this matter?--that it was all Buxton's doing, Buxton's
low imagination that had conceived the possibility of such a crime on
the part of Mr. Hayne, and Buxton's blundering, bull-headed abuse of
authority that had capped the fatal climax? It was some time before his
wife could get him to speak at all. She was hysterically bemoaning the
fate that had brought them into contact with such people, and from time
to time giving vent to the comforting assertion that never had there
been a cloud on their domestic or regimental sky until that wretch had
been assigned to the Riflers. She knew from the hurried and guarded
explanations of Dr. Grimes and one or two young officers who helped
Rayner home that the fracas had occurred at Mr. Hayne's,--that there had
been a mistake for which her husband was not responsible, but that
Captain Buxton was entirely to blame. But her husband's ashen face told
her a story of something far deeper: she knew that now he was involved
in fearful trouble, and, whatever may have been her innermost thoughts,
it was the first and irresistible impulse to throw all the blame upon
her scapegoat. Miss Travers, almost as pale and quite as silent as the
captain, was busying herself in helping her sister; but she could with
difficulty restrain her longing to bid her be silent. She, too, had
endeavored to learn from her escort on their hurried homeward rush
across the parade what the nature of the disturbance had been. She, too,
had suggested Clancy, but the officer by her side set his teeth as he
replied that he wished it had been Clancy. She had heard, too, the
message brought by a cavalry trumpeter from Mr. Blake: he wanted Captain
Ray to come to Mr. Hayne's as soon as he had seen Mrs. Ray safely home,
and would he please ask Mrs. Stannard to come with him at the same time?
Why should Mr. Blake want Mrs. Stannard at Mr. Hayne's? She saw Mr.
Foster run up and speak a few words to Mrs. Waldron, and heard that lady
reply, "Certainly. I will go with you now." What could it mean? At last,
as she was returning to her sister's room after a moment's absence, she
heard a question at which her heart stood still. It was Mrs. Rayner who
asked,--

"But the creature was there, was she not?"

The answer sounded more like a moan of anguish:

"The creature was his sister. It was her husband who--"

But, as Captain Rayner buried his battered face in his hands at this
juncture, the rest of the sentence was inaudible. Miss Travers had heard
quite enough, however. She stood there one moment, appalled, dropped
upon the floor the bandage she had been making, turned and sought her
room, and was seen no more that night.

Over the day or two that followed this affair the veil of silence may
best be drawn, in order to give time for the sediment of truth to settle
through the whirlpool of stories in violent circulation. The colonel
came back on the first train after the adjournment of the court, and
could hardly wait for that formality. Contrary to his custom of
"sleeping on" a question, he was in his office within half an hour after
his return to the post, and from that time until near tattoo was busily
occupied taking the statements of the active participants in the affair.
This was three days after its occurrence; and Captain Rayner, though up
and able to be about, had not left his quarters. Mrs. Rayner had
abandoned her trip to the East, for the present at least. Mr. Hayne
still lay weak and prostrate in his darkened room, attended hourly by
Dr. Pease, who feared brain-fever, and nursed assiduously by Mrs.
Hurley, for whom Mrs. Waldron, Mrs. Stannard, and many other ladies in
the garrison could not do enough to content themselves. Mr. Hurley's
wrist was badly sprained and in a sling; but the colonel went purposely
to call upon him and to shake his other hand, and he begged to be
permitted to see Mrs. Hurley, who came in pale and soft-eyed and with a
gentle demeanor that touched the colonel more than he could tell. Her
cheek flushed for a moment as he bent low over her hand and told her how
bitterly he regretted that his absence from the post had resulted in so
grievous an experience: it was not the welcome he and his regiment would
have given her had they known of her intended visit. To Mr. Hurley he
briefly said that he need not fear but that full justice would be meted
out to the instigator or instigators of the assault; but, as a something
to make partial amends for their suffering, he said that nothing now
could check the turn of the tide in their brother's favor. All the
cavalry officers except Buxton, all the infantry officers except Rayner,
had already been to call upon him since the night of the occurrence, and
had striven to show how distressed they were over the outrageous
blunders of their temporary commander. Buxton had written a note
expressive of a desire to see him and "explain," but was informed that
explanations from him simply aggravated the injury; and Rayner, crushed
and humiliated, was fairly in hiding in his room, too sick at heart to
want to see anybody, and waiting for the action of the authorities in
the confident expectation that nothing less than court-martial and
disgrace would be his share of the outcome. He would gladly have
resigned and gone at once, but that would have been resigning under
virtual charges: he _had_ to stay, and his wife had to stay with him,
and Nellie with her. By this time Nellie Travers did not want to go. She
had but one thought now,--to make amends to Mr. Hayne for the wrong her
thoughts had done him. It was time for Mr. Van Antwerp to come to the
wide West and look after his interests; but Mrs. Rayner had ceased to
urge, while he continued to implore her to bring Nellie East at once.
Almost any man as rich and independent as Steven Van Antwerp would have
gone to the scene and settled matters for himself. Singularly enough,
this one solution of the problem seemed never to occur to him as
feasible.

Meantime, the colonel had patiently unravelled the threads and had
brought to light the whole truth and nothing but the truth. It made a
singularly simple story, after all but that was so much the worse for
Buxton. The only near relation Mr. Hayne had in the world was this one
younger sister, who six years before had married a manly, energetic
fellow, a civil engineer in the employ of an Eastern railway. During
Hayne's "mountain-station" exile Hurley had brought his wife to Denver,
where far better prospects awaited him. He won promotion in his
profession, and was now one of the principal engineers employed by a
road running new lines through the Colorado Rockies. Journeying to Salt
Lake, he came around by way of Warrener, so that his wife and he might
have a look at the brother she had not seen in years. Their train was
due there early in the afternoon, but was blocked by drifts and did not
reach the station until late at night. There they found a note from him
begging them to take a carriage they would find waiting for them and
come right out and spend the night at his quarters: he would send them
back in abundant time to catch the westward train in the morning. He
could not come in, because that involved the necessity of asking his
captain's permission, and they knew his relations with that captain. It
was her shadow Buxton had seen on the window-screen; and as none of
Buxton's acquaintances had ever mentioned that Hayne had any relations,
and as Hayne, in fact, had had no one for years to talk to about his
personal affairs, nobody but himself and the telegraph-operator at the
post really knew of their sudden visit. Buxton, being an unmitigated
cad, had put the worst interpretation on his discovery, and, in his
eagerness to clinch the evidence of conduct unbecoming an officer and a
gentleman upon Mr. Hayne, had taken no wise head into his confidence.
Never dreaming that the shadow could be that of a blood-relation, never
doubting that a fair, frail companion from the frontier town was the
explanation of Mr. Hayne's preference for that out-of-the way house and
late hours, he stated his discovery to Rayner as a positive fact, going
so far as to say that his sentries had recognized her as she drove away
in the carriage. If he had not been an ass as well as a cad, he would
have interviewed the driver of the carriage; but he had jumped at his
theory, and his sudden elevation to the command of the post gave him
opportunity to carry out his virtuous determination that no such
goings-on should disgrace his administration. He gave instructions to
certain soldier clerks and "daily-duty" men employed in the
quartermaster, commissary, and ordnance offices along Prairie Avenue to
keep their eyes open and let him know of any visitors coming out to
Hayne's by night, and if a lady came in a carriage he was to be called
at once. Mr. Hurley promised that on their return from Salt Lake they
would come back by way of Warrener and spend two days with Hayne, since
only an hour or two had they enjoyed of his company on their way West;
and the very day that the officers went off to the court came the
telegram saying the Hurleys would arrive that evening. Hayne had already
talked over their prospective visit with Major Waldron, and the latter
had told his wife; but all intercourse of a friendly character was at an
end between them and the Rayners and Buxtons; there were no more gossipy
chats among the ladies. Indeed, it so happened that only to one or two
people had Mrs. Waldron had time to mention that Mr. Hayne's sister was
coming, and neither the Rayners nor Buxtons had heard of it; neither had
Nellie Travers, for it was after the evening of her last visit that Mrs.
Waldron was told.

Hayne ran with his telegram to the major, and the latter had introduced
himself and Major Stannard to Mrs. Hurley when, after a weary wait of
some hours, the train arrived. Blake, too, was there, on the lookout for
some friends, and he was presented to Mrs. Hurley while her husband was
attending to some matters about the baggage. The train went on eastward,
carrying the field-officers with it. Blake had to go with his friends
back to the post, and Mr. and Mrs. Hurley, after the former had attended
to some business and seen some railway associates of his at the hotel,
took the carriage they had had before and drove out to the garrison,
where Private Schweinkopf saw the lady rapturously welcomed by
Lieutenant Hayne and escorted into the house, while Mr. Hurley remained
settling with the driver out in the darkness. It was not long before the
commanding officer _pro tem_, was called from the hop-room, where the
dance was going on delightfully, and notified that the mysterious
visitor had again appeared, with evident intention of spending the
night, as the carriage had returned to town. "Why, certainly," reasoned
Buxton. "It's the very night he would choose, since everybody will be at
the hop: no one will be apt to interfere, and everybody will be
unusually drowsy and less inclined to take notice in the morning." Here
was ample opportunity for a brilliant stroke of work. He would first
satisfy himself she was there, then surround the house with sentries so
that she could not escape, while he, with the officer of the day and the
corporal of the guard, entered the house and confronted him and her.
_That_ would wind up Mr. Hayne's career beyond question: nothing short
of dismissal could result. Over he went, full of his project, listened
at Hayne's like the eaves-dropping sneak he was, saw again the shadow of
the graceful form and heard the silvery, happy laugh, and then it was
he sent for Rayner. It was near midnight when he led his forces to the
attack. A light was now burning in the second story, which he thought
must be Sam's; but the lights had been turned low in the parlor, and the
occupants had disappeared from sight and hearing. By inquiry he had
ascertained that Hayne's bedroom was just back of the parlor. A man was
stationed at the back door, others at the sides, with orders to arrest
any one who attempted to escape; then softly he stepped to the front
door, telling Rayner to follow him, and the corporal of the guard to
follow both. To his surprise, the door was unlocked, and a light was
burning in the hall. Never knocking, he stepped in, marched through the
hall into the parlor, which was empty, and, signalling "Come on" to his
followers, crossed the parlor and seized the knob of the bedroom door.
It was locked. Rayner, looking white and worried, stood just behind him,
and the corporal but a step farther back. Before Buxton could knock and
demand admission, which was his intention, quick footsteps came flying
down the stairs from the second story, and the trio wheeled about in
surprise, to find Mr. Hayne, dressed in his fatigue uniform, standing at
the threshold and staring at them with mingled astonishment,
incredulity, and indignation. A sudden light seemed to dawn upon him as
he glanced from one to the other. With a leap like a cat he threw
himself upon Buxton, hurled him back, and stood at the closed door
confronting them with blazing eyes and clinching fists.

"Open that door, sir!" cried Buxton. "You have a woman hidden there.
Open, or stand aside."

"You hounds! I'll kill the first man who dares enter!" was the furious
answer; and Hayne had snatched from the wall his long infantry sword and
flashed the blade in the lamplight. Rayner made a step forward, half
irresolute. Hayne leaped at him like a tiger. "Fire! Quick!" shouted
Buxton, in wild excitement. Bang! went the carbine, and the bullet
crashed through the plaster overhead, and, seeing the gleaming steel at
his superior's throat, the corporal had sent the heavy butt crashing
upon the lieutenant's skull only just in time: there would have been
murder in another second. The next instant he was standing on his own
head in the corner, seeing a multitude of twinkling, whirling stars,
from the midst of which Captain Rayner was reeling backward over a chair
and a number of soldiers were rushing upon a powerful picture of
furious manhood,--a stranger in shirt-sleeves, who had leaped from the
bedroom.

Told as it was--as it had to be--all over the department, there seemed
but one thing to say, and that referred to Buxton: "Well! _isn't_ he a
phenomenal ass?"




XVI.


Mr. Hayne was up and around again. The springtime was coming, and the
prairie roads were good and dry, and the doctor had told him he must
live in the open air awhile and ride and walk and drive. He stood in no
want of "mounts," for three or four of his cavalry friends were ready to
lend him a saddle-horse any day. Mr. and Mrs. Hurley, after making many
pleasant acquaintances, had gone on to Denver, and Captain Buxton was
congratulating himself that he, at least, had not run foul of the
engineer's powerful fists. Buxton was not in arrest, for the case had
proved a singular "poser." It occurred during the temporary absence of
the colonel: _he_ could not well place the captain under arrest for
things he had done when acting as post commander. In obedience to his
orders from department head-quarters, he made his report of the affair,
and indicated that Captain Buxton's conduct had been inexcusable. Rayner
had done nothing but, as was proved, reluctantly obey the captain's
orders, so he could not be tried. Hayne, who had committed one of the
most serious crimes in the military catalogue,--that of drawing and
raising a weapon against an officer who was in discharge of his duty
(Rayner),--had the sympathy of the whole command, and nobody would
prefer charges against him. The general decided to have the report go up
to division head-quarters, and thence it went with its varied comments
and endorsements to Washington: and now a court of inquiry was talked
of. Meantime, poor bewildered Buxton was let severely alone. What made
him utterly miserable was the fact that in his own regiment, the ----th,
nobody spoke of it except as something that everybody knew was sure to
happen the moment he got in command. If it hadn't been that 'twould have
been something else. The only certainty was that Buxton would never lose
a chance of making an ass of himself. Instead of being furious with him,
the whole regiment--officers and men--simply ridiculed and laughed at
him. He had talked of preferring charges against Blake for
insubordination, and asked the adjutant what he thought of it. It was
the first time he had spoken to the adjutant for weeks, and the
adjutant rushed out of the office to tell the crowd to come in and "hear
Buxton's latest." It began to look as though nothing serious would ever
come of the affair, until Rayner reappeared and people saw how very ill
he was. Dr. Pease had been consulted; and it was settled that he as well
as his wife must go away for several months and have complete rest and
change. It was decided that they would leave by the 1st of May. All this
Mr. Hayne heard through his kind friend Mrs. Waldron.

One day when he first began to sit up, and before he had been out at
all, she came and sat with him in his sunshiny parlor. There had been a
silence for a moment as she looked around upon the few pictures and upon
that bareness and coldness which, do what he will, no man can eradicate
from his abiding-place until he calls in the deft and dainty hand of
woman.

"I shall be so glad when you have a wife, Mr. Hayne!" was her quiet
comment.

"So shall I, Mrs. Waldron," was the response.

"And isn't it high time we were beginning to hear of a choice? Forgive
my intrusiveness, but that was the very matter of which the major and I
were talking as he brought me over."

"There is something to be done first, Mrs. Waldron," he answered. "I
cannot offer any woman a clouded name. It is not enough that people
should begin to believe that I was innocent and my persecutors utterly
in error, if not perjured. I must be able to show who was the real
culprit, and that is not easy. The doctor and I thought we saw a way not
long ago; but it proved delusive." And he sighed deeply. "I had expected
to see the major about it the very day he got back from the court; but
we have had no chance to talk."

"Mr. Hayne," she said, impulsively, "a woman's intuition is not always
at fault. Tell me if you believe that any one on the post has any
inkling of the truth. I have a reason for asking."

"I _did_ think it possible, Mrs. Waldron. I cannot be certain now; and
it's too late, anyway."

"How, too late? What's too late?"

He paused a moment, a deeper shadow than usual on his face; then he
lifted his head and looked fairly at her:

"I should not have said that, Mrs. Waldron. It can never be too late.
But what I mean is that--just now I spoke of offering no woman a
clouded name. Even if it were unclouded, I could not offer it where I
would."

"Because you have heard of the engagement?" was the quick, eager
question. There was no instant of doubt in the woman as to where the
offering would be made, if it only could.

"I knew of the engagement only a day ago," he answered, with stern
effort at self-control. "Blake was speaking of her, and it came out all
of a sudden."

He turned his head away again. It was more than Mrs. Waldron could
stand. She leaned impetuously towards him, and put her hand on his:

"Mr. Hayne, that is no engagement of heart to heart. It is entirely a
thing of Mrs. Rayner's doing; and I _know_ it. She is
poor,--dependent,--and has been simply sold into bondage."

"And you think she cares nothing for the position, the wealth and social
advantages, this would give her? Ah, Mrs. Waldron, consider."

"I _have_ considered. Mr. Hayne, if I were a man, like you, that child
should never go back to him. And they are going next week. You _must_
get well."

It was remarked that Mr. Hayne was out surprisingly quick for a fellow
who had been so recently threatened with brain-fever. The Rayners were
to go East at once, so it was said, though the captain's leave of
absence had not yet been ordered. The colonel could grant him seven days
at any time, and he had telegraphic notification that there would be no
objection when the formal application reached the War Department. Rayner
called at the colonel's office and asked that he might be permitted to
start with his wife and sister. His second lieutenant would move in and
occupy his quarters and take care of all his personal effects during
their absence; and Lieutenant Hayne was a most thorough officer, and he
felt that in turning over his company to him he left it in excellent
hands. The colonel saw the misery in the captain's face, and he was
touched by both looks and words:

"You must not take this last affair too much to heart, Captain Rayner.
We in the ----th have known Captain Buxton so many years that with us
there is no question as to where all the blame lies. It seems, too, to
be clearly understood by Mr. Hayne. As for your previous ideas of that
officer, I consider it too delicate a matter to speak of. You must see,
however, how entirely beyond reproach his general character appears to
have been. But here's another matter: Clancy's discharge has arrived.
Does the old fellow know you had requested it?"

"No, sir," answered Rayner, with hesitation and embarrassment. "We
wanted to keep him straight, as I told you we would, and he would
probably get on a big tear if he knew his service-days were numbered. I
didn't look for its being granted for forty-eight hours yet."

"Well, he will know it before night; and no doubt he will be badly cut
up. Clancy was a fine soldier before he married that harridan of a
woman."

"She has made him a good wife since they came into the Riflers, colonel,
and has taken mighty good care of the old fellow."

"It is more than she did in the ----th, sir. She was a handsome, showy
woman when I first saw her,--before my promotion to the regiment,--and
Clancy was one of the finest soldiers in the brigade the last year of
the war. She ran through all his money, though, and in the ----th we
looked upon her as the real cause of his break-down,--especially after
her affair with that sergeant who deserted. You've heard of him,
probably. He disappeared after the Battle Butte campaign, and we hoped
he'd run off with Mrs. Clancy; but he hadn't. She was there when we got
back, big as ever, and growing ugly."

"Do you mean that Mrs. Clancy had a lover when she was in the ----th?"

"Certainly, Captain Rayner. We supposed it was commonly known. He was a
fine-looking, black-eyed, dark-haired, dashing fellow, of good
education, a great swell among the men the short time he was with us,
and Mrs. Clancy made a dead set at him from the start. He never seemed
to care for _her_ very much."

"This is something I never heard of," said Rayner, with grave face, "and
it will be a good deal of a shock to my wife, for she had arranged to
take her East with Clancy and Kate, and they were to invest their money
in some little business at her old home."

"Yes: it was mainly on the woman's account we wouldn't re-enlist Clancy
in the ----th. We could stand him, but she was too much for us,--and for
the other sergeant, too. He avoided her before we started on the
campaign, I fancy. Odd! I can't think of his name.--Billings, what was
the name of that howling swell of a sergeant who was in Hull's troop at
Battle Butte,--time Hull was killed? I mean the man that Mrs. Clancy was
said to have eloped with."

"Sergeant Gower, sir," said the adjutant, without looking up from his
work. He did look up, however, when a moment after the captain hurriedly
left the office, and he saw that Rayner's face was deathly white: it was
ghastly.

"What took Rayner off so suddenly?" said the colonel, wheeling around in
his chair.

"I don't know, sir, unless there was something to startle him in the
name."

"Why should there be?"

"There are those who think that Gower got away with more than his horse
and arms, colonel: he was not at Battle Butte, though, and that is what
made it a mystery."

"Where was he then?"

"Back with the wagon-train, sir; and he never got in sight of the Buttes
or Rayner's battalion. You know Rayner had four companies there."

"I don't see how Gower could have taken the money, if that's what you
mean, if he never came up to the Buttes: Rayner swore it was there in
Hull's original package. Then, too, how could Gower's name affect him if
he had never seen him?"

"Possibly he has heard something. Clancy has been talking."

"I have looked into that," said the colonel. "Clancy denies knowing
anything,--says he was drunk and didn't know what he was talking about."

All the same it was queer, thought the adjutant, and he greatly wanted
to see the doctor and talk with him; but by the time his office-work was
done the doctor had gone to town, and when he came back he was sent for
to the laundress's quarters, where Mrs. Clancy was in hysterics and
Michael had again been very bad.

Soon after the captain's return to his quarters, it seems, a messenger
was sent from Mrs. Rayner requesting Mrs. Clancy to come and see her at
once. She was ushered up-stairs to madame's own apartment, much to Miss
Travers's surprise, and that young lady was further astonished, when
Mrs. Clancy reappeared, nearly an hour later, to see that she had been
weeping violently. The house was in some disorder, most of the trunks
being packed and in readiness for the start, and Miss Travers was
entertaining two or three young officers and waiting for her sister to
come down to luncheon. "The boys" were lachrymose over her prospective
departure,--at least they affected to be,--and were variously sprawled
about the parlor when Mrs. Clancy descended, and the inflamed condition
of her eyes and nose became apparent to all. There was much chaff and
fun, therefore, when Mrs. Rayner finally appeared, over the supposed
affliction of the big Irishwoman at the prospect of parting with her
patroness. Miss Travers saw with singular sensations that both the
captain and her usually self-reliant sister were annoyed and embarrassed
by the topic and strove to change it; but Foster's propensity for
mimicry and his ability to imitate Mrs. Clancy's combined brogue and
sniffle proved too much for their efforts. Kate was in a royally bad
temper by the time the youngsters left the house, and when Nellie would
have made some laughing allusion to the fun the young fellows had been
having over her morning caller, she was suddenly and tartly checked
with--

"We've had too much of that already. Just understand now that you have
no time to waste, if your packing is unfinished. We start to-morrow
afternoon."

"Why, Kate! I had no idea we were to go for two days yet! Of course I
can be ready; but why did you not tell me before?"

"I did not know it--at least it was not decided--until this morning,
after the captain came back from the office. There is nothing to prevent
our going, now that he has seen the colonel."

"There was not before, Kate; for Mr. Billings told me yesterday morning,
and I told you, that the colonel had said you could start at once, and
you replied that the captain could not be ready for several days,--three
at least."

"Well, now he _is_; and that ends it. Never mind what changed his mind."

It was unsafe to trifle with Nellie Travers, as Mrs. Rayner might have
known. She saw that something had occurred to make the captain eager to
start at once; and then there was that immediate sending for Mrs.
Clancy, the long, secret talk up in Kate's room, the evident mental
disturbance of both feminines on their respective reappearances, and the
sudden announcement to her. While there could be no time to make formal
parting calls, there were still some two or three ladies in the garrison
whom she longed to see before saying adieu; and then there was Mr.
Hayne, whom she had wronged quite as bitterly as anyone else had wronged
him. He was out that day for the first time, and she longed to see him
and longed to fulfil the neglected promise. _That_ she must do at the
very least. If she could not see him, she must write, that he might
have the note before they went away. All these thoughts were rushing
through her brain as she busied herself about her little room, stowing
away dresses and dropping everything from time to time to dart into her
sister's room in answer to some querulous call. Yet never did she leave
without a quick glance from her window up and down the row. For whom was
she looking?

It was just about dusk when she heard crying down-stairs,--a child, and
apparently in the kitchen. Mrs. Rayner was with the baby, and Miss
Travers started for the stairs, calling that she would go and see what
it meant. She was down in the hall before Mrs. Rayner's imperative and
repeated calls brought her to a full stop.

"What is it?" she inquired.

"You come back here and hold baby. I know perfectly what it is. It is
Kate Clancy; and she wants me. You can do nothing."

Too late, madame! The intervening doors were opened, and in marched
cook, leading the poor little Irish girl, who was sobbing piteously.
Mrs. Rayner came down the stairs with all speed, bringing her burly son
and heir in her arms. She would have ordered Nell aloft, but what excuse
could she give? and Miss Travers was already bending over the child and
striving to still her heart-breaking cries.

"What is it? Where's your father?" demanded Mrs. Rayner.

"Oh, ma'am, I don't know. I came here to tell the captain. Shure he's
discharged, ma'am, an' his heart's broke entirely, an' mother says we're
all to go with the captain to-morrow, an' he swears he'll kill himself
before he'll go, an' I can't find him, ma'am. It's almost dark now."

"Go back and tell your mother I want her instantly. We'll find your
father. Go!" she repeated, as the child shrank and hesitated.
"Here,--the front way!" And little Kate sped away into the shadows
across the dim level of the parade.

Then the sisters faced each other. There was a fire in the younger's eye
that Mrs. Rayner would have escaped if she could.

"Kate, it is to get Clancy away from the possibility of revealing what
he knows that you have planned this sudden move, and I _know_ it," said
Miss Travers. "You need not answer."

She seized a wrap from the hat-rack and stepped to the door-way. Mrs.
Rayner threw herself after her.

"Nellie, where are you going? What will you do?"

"To Mrs. Waldron's, Kate; if need be, to Mr. Hayne's."

       *       *       *       *       *

A bright fire was burning in Major Waldron's cosey parlor, where he and
his good wife were seated in earnest talk. It was just after sunset when
Mr. Hayne dropped in to pay his first visit after the few days in which
he had been confined to his quarters. He was looking thin, paler than
usual, and far more restless and eager in manner than of old. The
Waldrons welcomed him with more than usual warmth, and the major
speedily led the conversation up to the topic which was so near to his
heart.

"You and I must see the doctor and have a triangular council over this
thing, Hayne. Three heads are better than none; and if, as he suspects,
old Clancy really knows anything when he's drunk that he cannot tell
when he's sober, I shall depart from Mrs. Waldron's principles and join
the doctor in his pet scheme of getting him drunk again. '_In vino
veritas_,' you know. And we ought to be about it, too, for it won't be
long before his discharge comes, and, once away, we should be in the
lurch."

"There seems so little hope there, major. Even the colonel has called
him up and questioned him."

"Ay, very true, but always when the old sergeant was sober. It is when
drunk that Clancy's conscience pricks him to tell what he either knows
or suspects."

A light, quick footstep was heard on the piazza, the hall door opened,
and without knock or ring, bursting impetuously in upon them, there
suddenly appeared Miss Travers, her eyes dilated with excitement. At
sight of the group she stopped short, and colored to the very roots of
her shining hair.

"How glad I am to see you, Nellie!" exclaimed Mrs. Waldron, as all rose
to greet her. An embarrassed, half-distraught reply was her only answer.
She had extended both hands to the elder lady; but now, startled, almost
stunned, at finding herself in the presence of the very man she most
wanted to see, she stood with downcast eyes, irresolute. He, too, had
not stepped forward,--had not offered his hand. She raised her blue eyes
for one quick glance, and saw his pale, pain-thinned face, read anew the
story of his patience, his suffering, his heroism, and realized how she
too had wronged him and that her very awkwardness and silence might tell
him that shameful fact. It was more than she could stand.

"I came--purposely. I hoped to find you, Mr. Hayne. You--you remember
that I had something to tell you. It was about Clancy. You ought to see
him. I'm sure you ought, for he _must_ know--he or Mrs.
Clancy--something about your--your trouble; and I've just this minute
heard that they--that he's going away to-morrow; and you must find him
to-night, Mr. Hayne: indeed you must."

Who can paint her as she stood there, blushing, pleading, eager,
frightened, yet determined? Who can picture the wild emotion in his
heart, reflected in his face? He stepped quickly to her side with the
light leaping to his eyes, his hands extended as though to grasp hers;
but it was Waldron that spoke first:

"Where is he going?--how?"

"Oh, with us, major. We go to-morrow, and they go with us. My sister has
some reason--I cannot fathom it. She wants them away from here, and
Clancy's discharge came to-day. He _must_ see him first," she said,
indicating Mr. Hayne by the nod of her pretty head. "They say Clancy has
run off and got away from his wife. He doesn't want to be discharged.
They cannot find him now; but perhaps Mr. Hayne can.--Mr. Hayne, try to.
You--you must."

"Indeed we must, Hayne, and quick about it," said the major. "Now is our
chance, I verily believe. Let us get the doctor first; then little Kate
will best know where to look for Clancy. Come, man, get your overcoat."
And he hastened to the hall.

Hayne followed as though in a dream, reached the threshold, turned,
looked back, made one quick step toward Miss Travers with outstretched
hand, then checked himself as suddenly. His yearning eyes seemed
fastened on her burning face, his lips quivered with the intensity of
his emotion. She raised her eyes and gave him one quick look, half
entreaty, half command; he seemed ineffectually struggling to speak,--to
thank her. One moment of irresolution, then, without a word of any kind,
he sprang to the door. She carried his parting glance in her heart of
hearts all night long. There was no mistaking what it told.




XVII.


The morning report of the following day showed some items under the head
of "Alterations" that involved several of the soldier characters of this
story. Ex-Sergeant Clancy had been dropped from the column of present
"on daily duty" and taken up on that of absent without leave. Lieutenant
Hayne was also reported absent. Dr. Pease and Lieutenant Billings drove
into the garrison from town just before the cavalry trumpets were
sounding first call for guard-mounting, and the adjutant sent one of the
musicians to give his compliments to Mr. Royce and ask him to mount the
guard for him, as he had just returned and had important business with
the colonel. The doctor and the adjutant together went into the
colonel's quarters, and for the first time on record the commanding
officer was not at the desk in his office when the shoulder-straps began
to gather for the _matinee_.

Ten minutes after the usual time the adjutant darted in and plunged with
his characteristic impetuosity into the pile of passes and other papers
stacked up by the sergeant-major at his table. To all questions as to
where he had been and what was the matter with the colonel he replied,
with more than usual asperity of manner,--the asperity engendered of
some years of having to answer the host of questions propounded by
vacant minds at his own busiest hour of the day,--that the colonel would
tell them all about it himself; _he_ had no time for a word. The evident
manner of suppressed excitement, however, was something few failed to
note; and every man in the room felt certain that when the colonel came
there would be a revelation. It was with something bordering on
indignation, therefore, that the assemblage heard the words that
intimated to them that all might retire. The colonel had come in very
quietly, received the report of the officer of the day, relieved him,
and dismissed the new officer of the day with the brief formula, "Usual
orders, sir," then glanced quickly around the silent circle of grave,
bearded or boyish faces. His eyes rested for an instant with something
like shock and trouble upon one face, pale, haggard, with almost
bloodless lips, and yet full of fierce determination,--a face that
haunted him long afterwards, it was so full of agony, of suspense,
almost of pleading,--the face of Captain Rayner.

Then, dispensing with the customary talk, he quietly spoke the
disappointing words,--

"I am somewhat late this morning, gentlemen, and several matters will
occupy my attention: so I will not detain you further."

The crowd seemed to find their feet very slowly. There was visible
disinclination to go. Every man in some inexplicable way appeared to
know that there was a new mystery hanging over the garrison, and that
the colonel held the key. Every man felt that Billings had given him the
right to expect to be told all about it when the colonel came. Some
looked reproachfully at Billings, as though to remind him of their
expectations: Stannard, his old stand-by, passed him with a gruff
"Thought you said the colonel had something to tell us," and went out
with an air of injured and defrauded dignity. Rayner arose, and seemed
to be making preparations to depart with the others, and some of the
number, connecting him unerringly with the prevailing sensation,
appeared to hold back and wait for him to precede them and so secure to
themselves the satisfaction of knowing that, if it was a matter
connected with Rayner, they "had him along" and nothing could take place
without their hearing it. These men were very few, however; but Buxton
was one of them. Rayner's eyes were fixed upon the colonel and searching
for a sign, and it came,--a little motion of the hand and a nod of the
head that signified "Stay." Then, as Buxton and one or two of his stamp
still dallied irresolute, the colonel turned somewhat sharply to them:
"Was there any matter on which you wished to see me, gentlemen?" and, as
there was none, they _had_ to go. Then Rayner was alone with the
colonel; for Mr. Billings quickly arose, and, with a significant glance
at his commander, left the room and closed the door.

Mrs. Rayner, gazing from her parlor windows, saw that all the officers
had come out except one,--her husband,--and with a moan of misery she
covered her face with her hands and sank upon the sofa. With cheeks as
white as her sister's, with eyes full of trouble and perplexity, but
tearless, Nellie Travers stepped quickly into the room and put a
trembling white hand upon the other's shoulder:

"Kate, it is no time for so bitter an estrangement as this. I have done
simply what our soldier father would have done had he been here. I am
fully aware of what it must cost me. I knew when I did it that you would
never again welcome me to your home. Once East again, you and I can go
our ways; I won't burden you longer; but is it not better that you
should tell me in what way your husband or you can have been injured by
what I have done?"

Mrs. Rayner impatiently shook away the hand.

"I don't want to talk to you," was the blunt answer. "You have carried
out your threat and--ruined _us_: that's all."

"What _can_ you mean? Do you want me to think that because Mr. Hayne's
innocence may be established your husband was the guilty man? Certainly
your manner leads to that inference; though his does not, by any means."

"I don't want to talk, I tell you. You've had your way,--done your work.
You'll see soon enough the hideous web of trouble you've entangled
about my husband. Don't you dare say--don't you dare think"--and now she
rose with sudden fury--"that he was the--that he lost the money! But
that's what all others will think."

"If that were true, Kate, there would be this difference between his
trouble and Mr. Hayne's: Captain Rayner would have wife, wealth, and
friends to help him bear the cross; Mr. Hayne has borne it five long
years unaided. I pray God the truth _has_ been brought to light."

What fierce reply Mrs. Rayner might have given, who knows? but at that
instant a quick step was heard on the piazza, the door opened suddenly,
and Captain Rayner entered with a rush. The pallor had gone; a light of
eager, half-incredulous joy beamed from his eyes, he threw his cap upon
the floor, and his wife had risen and thrown her arms about his neck.

"Have they found him?" was her breathless question. "_What_ has
happened? You look so different."

"Found him? Yes; and he has told everything?"

"Told--what?"

"Told that he and Gower were the men. They took it all."

"_Clancy!_--and Gower! The thieves, do you mean? Is that--is _that_ what
he confessed?" she asked, in wild wonderment, in almost stupefied amaze,
releasing him from her arms and stepping back, her eyes searching his
face.

"Nothing else in the world, Kate. I don't understand it at all. I'm all
a-tremble yet. It clears Hayne utterly. It at least explains how I was
mistaken. But what--what could she have meant?"

Mrs. Rayner stood like one in a dream, her eyes staring, her lips
quivering; and Nellie, with throbbing pulses and clasping hands, looked
eagerly from husband to wife, as though beseeching some explanation.

"What did she mean? What _did_ she mean? I say again," asked Rayner,
pressing his hand to his forehead and gazing fixedly at his wife.

A moment longer she stood there, as though a light--a long-hidden
truth--were slowly forcing itself upon her mind. Then, with impulsive
movement, she hurried through the dining-room, threw open the kitchen
door, and startled the domestics at their late breakfast.

"Ryan," she called to the soldier-servant who rose hastily from the
table, "go and tell Mrs. Clancy I want her instantly. Do you understand?
Instantly!" And Ryan seized his forage-cap and vanished.

It was perhaps ten minutes before he returned. When he did so it was
apparent that Mrs. Rayner had been crying copiously, and that Miss
Travers, too, was much affected. The captain was pacing the room with
nervous strides in mingled relief and agitation. All looked up expectant
as the soldier re-entered. He had the air of a man who knew he bore
tidings of vivid and mysterious interest, but he curbed the excitement
of his manner until it shone only through his snapping eyes, saluted,
and reported with professional gravity:

"Mrs. Clancy's clean gone, sir."

"Gone where?"

"Nobody knows, sir. She's just lit out with her trunk and best clothes
some time last night."

"Gone to her husband in town, maybe?"

"No, sir. Clancy's all right: he was caught last evening, and hadn't
time to get more'n half drunk before they lodged him. Lootenant Hayne
got him, sir. They had him afore a justice of the peace early this
morning--"

"Yes, I know all that. What I want is _Mrs._ Clancy. What has become of
her?"

"Faith, I don't know, sir, but the women in Sudsville they all say she's
run away, sir,--taken her money and gone. She's afraid of Clancy's
peaching on her."

"By heavens! the thing is clearing itself!" exclaimed Rayner to his
gasping and wild-eyed wife. "I must go to the colonel at once with his
news." And away he went.

And then again, as the orderly retired, and the sisters were left alone,
Nellie Travers with trembling lips asked the question,--

"Have I done so much harm, after all, Kate?"

"Oh, Nellie! Nellie! forgive me, for I have been nearly mad with
misery!" was Mrs. Rayner's answer, as she burst into a fresh paroxysm of
tears. "That--that woman has--has told me fearful lies."

There was a strange scene that day at Warrener when, towards noon, two
carriages drove out from town and, entering the east gate, rolled over
towards the guard-house. The soldiers clustered about the barrack
porches and stared at the occupants. In the first--a livery hack from
town--were two sheriff's officers, while cowering on the back seat, his
hat pulled down over his eyes, was poor old Clancy, to whom clung
faithful little Kate. In the rear carriage--Major Waldron's--were Mr.
Hayne, the major, and a civilian whom some of the men had no difficulty
in recognizing as the official charged with the administration of
justice towards offenders against the peace. Many of the soldiers
strolled slowly up the road, in hopes of hearing all about the arrest,
and what it meant, from straggling members of the guard. All knew it
meant something more than a mere "break" on the part of Clancy; all felt
that it had some connection with the long-continued mystery that hung
about the name of Lieutenant Hayne. Then, too, it was being noised
abroad that Mrs. Clancy had "skipped" and between two suns had fled for
parts unknown. _She_ could be overhauled by telegraph if she had left on
either of the night freights or gone down towards Denver by the early
morning passenger-train; it would be easy enough to capture her if she
were "wanted," said the garrison; but what did it mean that Clancy was
pursued by officers of the post and brought back under charge of
officers of the law? He had had trouble enough, poor fellow!

The officer of the guard looked wonderingly at the carriages and their
occupants. He saluted Major Waldron as the latter stepped briskly down.

"You will take charge of Clancy, Mr. Graham," said the major. "His
discharge will be recalled: at least it will not take effect to-day. You
will be interested in knowing that his voluntary confession fully
establishes Mr. Hayne's innocence of the charges on which he was tried."

Mr. Graham's face turned all manner of colors. He glanced at Hayne, who,
still seated in the carriage, was as calmly indifferent to him as ever:
he was gazing across the wide parade at the windows in officers' row.
Little Kate's sobs as the soldiers were helping her father from the
carriage suddenly recalled his wandering thoughts. He sprang to the
ground, stepped quickly to the child, and put his arms about her.

"Clancy, tell her to come with us. Mrs. Waldron will take loving care of
her, and she shall come to see you every day. The guard-house is no
place for her to follow you. Tell her so, man, and she will go with
us.--Come, Katie, child!" And he bent tenderly over the sobbing little
waif.

"Thank ye, sir. I know ye'll be good to her. Go with the lootenant, Kate
darlin'; go. Shure I'll be happier then."

And, trembling, he bent and kissed her wet cheeks. She threw her arms
around his neck and clung to him in an agony of grief. Gently they
strove to disengage her clasping arms, but she shrieked and struggled,
and poor old Clancy broke down. There were sturdy soldiers standing by
who turned their heads away to hide the unbidden tears, and with a
quiver in his kind voice the major interposed:

"Let her stay awhile: it will be better for both. Don't put him in the
prison-room, Graham. Keep them by themselves for a while. We will come
for her by and by." And then, before them all, he held forth his hand
and gave Clancy's a cordial grasp:

"Cheer up, man. You've taken the right step at last. You are a free man
to-day, even if you are a prisoner for the time being. Better this a
thousand times than what you were."

Hayne, too, spoke a few kind words in a low tone, and gave the old
soldier his hand at parting. Then the guard closed the door, and father
and daughter were left alone. As the groups around the guard-house began
to break up and move away, and the officers, re-entering the carriages,
drove over to head-quarters, a rollicking Irishman called to the
sergeant of the guard,--

"Does he know the ould woman's skipped, sargent? Shure you'd better tell
him. 'Twill cheer him, like."

But when, a few moments after, the news was imparted to Clancy, the
effect was electric and startling. With one bound and a savage cry he
sprang to the door. The sergeant threw himself upon him and strove to
hold him back, but was no match for the frenzied man. Deaf to Kate's
entreaties and the sergeant's commands, he hurled him aside, leaped
through the door-way, shot like a deer past the lolling guardsmen on the
porch, and, turning sharply, went at the top of his speed down the hill
towards Sudsville before man could lay hand on him. The sentry on Number
One cocked his rifle and looked inquiringly at the officer of the guard,
who came running out. With a wild shriek little Kate threw herself upon
the sentry, clasping his knees and imploring him not to shoot. The
lieutenant and the sergeant both shouted, "Never mind! Don't fire!" and
with others of the guard rushed in pursuit. But, old and feeble as he
was, poor Clancy kept the lead, never swerving, never flagging, until he
reached the door-way of his abandoned cot; this he burst in, threw
himself upon his knees by the bedside, and dragged to light a little
wooden chest that stood by an open trap in the floor. One look sufficed:
the mere fact that the trap was open and the box exposed was enough.
With a wild cry of rage, despair, and baffled hatred, he clinched his
hands above his head, rose to his full height, and with a curse upon his
white lips, with glaring eyes and gasping breath, turned upon his
pursuers as they came running in, and hurled his fists at the foremost.
"Let me follow her, I say! She's gone with it all,--his money! Let me
go!" he shrieked; and then his eyes turned stony, a gasp, a clutch at
his throat, and, plunging headlong, he fell upon his face at their feet.

Poor little Kate! The old man was, indeed, free at last.




XVIII.


There had been a scene of somewhat dramatic nature at the colonel's
office but a short time before, and one that had fewer witnesses.
Agitated, nervous, and eventually astonished as Captain Rayner had been
when the colonel had revealed to him the nature of Clancy's confession,
he was far more excited and tremulous when he returned a second time.
The commanding officer had been sitting deep in thought. It was but
natural that a man should show great emotion on learning that the
evidence he had given, which had condemned a brother officer to years of
solitary punishment, was now disproved. It was to be expected that
Rayner should be tremulous and excited. He had been looking worse and
worse for a long time past; and now that it was established that he must
have been mistaken in what he thought he saw and heard at Battle Butte,
it was to be expected that he should show the utmost consternation and
an immediate desire to make amends. He _had_ shown great emotion; he was
white and rigid as the colonel told him Clancy had made a full
confession; but the expression on his face when informed that the man
had admitted that he and Sergeant Gower were the only ones guilty of the
crime--that Clancy and Gower divided the guilt as they had the
money--was a puzzle to the colonel. Captain Rayner seemed daft: it was a
look of wild relief, half unbelief, half delight, that shot across his
haggard features. It was evident that _he had not heard at all what he
expected_. This was what puzzled the colonel. He had been pondering over
it ever since the captain's hurried departure "to tell his wife."

"We--we had expected--made all preparations to take this afternoon's
train for the East," he stammered. "We are all torn up, all ready to
start, and the ladies ought to go; but I cannot feel like going in the
face of this."

"There is no reason why you should not go, captain. I am told Mrs.
Rayner should leave at once. If need be, you can return from Chicago.
Everything will be attended to properly. Of course you will know what
to do towards Mr. Hayne. Indeed, I think it might be best for you to
go."

But Rayner seemed hardly listening; and the colonel was not a man to
throw his words away.

"You might see Mrs. Rayner at once, and return by and by," he said; and
Rayner gladly escaped, and went home with the wonderful news he had to
tell his wife.

And now a second time he was back, and was urging upon the commanding
officer the necessity of telegraphing and capturing Mrs. Clancy. In
plain words he told the colonel he believed that she had escaped with
the greater part of the money. The colonel smiled:

"That was attended to early this morning, captain. Hayne and the major
asked that she be secured, and the moment we found her fled it confirmed
their suspicions, and Billings sent despatches in every direction. She
can't get away! She was his temptress, and I mean to make her share all
the punishment."

"Colonel," exclaimed Rayner, while beads of sweat stood out on his
forehead, "she is worse,--a thousand times worse! The woman is a fiend.
She is the devil in petticoats--and ingenuity. My God! sir, I have been
in torment for weeks past,--my poor wife and I. I have been criminally,
cowardly weak; but I did not know what to do,--where to turn,--how to
take it,--how to meet it. Let me tell you." And now great tears were
standing in his eyes and beginning to trickle down his cheeks. He dashed
them away. His lips were quivering, and he strode nervously up and down
the matted floor. "When you refused to left Clancy re-enlist in the
----th, two years after Battle Butte, he came to me and told me a story.
He, too, had declared, as I did, that he had seen the money-packages in
Hayne's hands; and he said the real reason he was kicked out of the
----th was because the officers and men took sides with Hayne and
thought he had sworn his reputation away. He begged me not to 'go back
on him' as his own regiment had, and I thought he was being persecuted
because he told the truth. God knows I fully believed Hayne guilty for
more than three years,--it is only within the last year or so I began to
have doubts; and so I took Clancy into B Company and soon made Mrs.
Clancy a laundress. But she made trouble for us all, and there was
something uncanny about them. She kept throwing out mysterious hints I
could not understand when rumors of them reached me; and at last came
the fire that burned them out, and then the stories of what Clancy had
said in his delirium; and then she came to my wife and told her a yarn
that--she swore to its truth, and nearly drove Mrs. Rayner wild with
anxiety. She swore that when Clancy got to drinking he imagined he had
seen _me_ take that money from Captain Hull's saddle-bags and replace
the sealed package: she said he was ready to swear that he and
Gower--the deserter--and two of our men, honorably discharged now and
living on ranches down in Nebraska, could all swear--would all swear--to
the same thing,--that I was the thief. 'Sure you know it couldn't be so,
ma'am; and yet he wants to go and tell Mr. Hayne,' she would say:
'there's the four of 'em would swear to it, though Gower's evidence
would be no good; but the two men could hurt the captain.' Her ingenuity
was devilish; for one of the men I had severely punished once in the
Black Hills, and both hated me and had sworn they would get even with me
yet. God help me, colonel! seeing every day the growing conviction that
Hayne was innocent, that somebody else _must_ be guilty, I thought, what
if this man _should_, in drunken gratitude to Hayne for saving his life,
go to him and tell him this story, then back it up before the officials
and call in these two others? I was weak, but it appalled me. I
determined to get him out of the way of such a possibility. I got his
discharge, and meantime strove to prevent his drinking or going near
Hayne. _She_ knew the real story he _would_ tell. This was her devilish
plan to keep me on watch against him. I never dreamed the real truth.
She swore to me that three hundred dollars was all the money they had. I
believed that when he confessed it would be what she declared. I never
dreamed that Clancy and his confederate were the thieves: I never
believed the money was taken until after Hayne received it. I saw how
Hayne's guilt was believed in even in the face of contradictory evidence
before the court. What would be the tendency if three men together were
to swear against me, now that everybody thought him wronged? I know very
well what you will think of my cowardice. I know you and your officers
will say I should have given him every chance,--should have courted
investigation; and I meant to do so, but first I wanted to hear from
those discharged men in Nebraska. The whole scheme would have been
exploded two months ago had I not been a coward; but night after night
something kept whispering to me, 'You have wrecked and ruined a
friendless young soldier's life. You shall be brought as low.'"

The colonel was, as he afterwards remarked, hardly equal to the
occasion. He had as much contempt for moral weakness in a soldier as he
had for physical cowardice; but Rayner's almost abject recital of his
months of misery really left him nothing to say. Had the captain sought
to defend or justify any detail of his conduct, he would have pounced on
him like a panther. Twice the adjutant, sitting an absorbed and silent
listener, thought the chief on the verge of an outbreak; but it never
came. For some minutes after Rayner ceased the colonel sat steadily
regarding him. At last he spoke:

"You have been so frank in your statement, captain, that I feel you
fully appreciate how such deplorable weakness must be regarded in an
officer. It is unnecessary for me to speak of that. The full particulars
of Clancy's confession are not yet with me. Major Waldron has it all in
writing, and Mr. Billings has merely told me the general features. Of
course you shall have a copy of it in good time. As you go East to-day
and have your wife and household to think for, it may be as well that
you do not attempt to see Mr. Hayne before starting. And this matter
will not be discussed."

And so it happened that when the Rayners drove to the station that
bright afternoon, and a throng of ladies and officers gathered to see
them off, some of the youngsters going with them into town to await the
coming of the train, Nellie Travers had been surrounded by chattering
friends of both sexes, constantly occupied, and yet constantly looking
for the face of one who came not. For an hour before their departure
every tongue in garrison that wagged at all--and few there were that
wagged not--was discoursing on the exciting events of the
morning,--Hayne's emancipation from the last vestige of suspicion,
Clancy's capture, confession, and tragic death, Mrs. Clancy's flight and
probable future. At Rayner's, people spoke of these things very
guardedly, because every one saw that the captain was moved to the
depths of his nature. He was solemnity itself, and Mrs. Rayner watched
him with deep anxiety, fearful that he might be exposed to some
thoughtless or malicious questioning. Her surveillance was needless,
however: even Ross made no allusion to the events of the morning, though
he communicated to his fellows in the subsequent confidences of the
club-room that Midas looked as though he'd been pulled through a series
of knot-holes. "Looks more's though he were going to his own funeral
than on leave," he added.

As for Hayne, he had been closeted with the colonel and Major Waldron
for some time after his return,--a conference that was broken in upon
by the startling news of Clancy's death. Then he had joined his friend
the doctor at the hospital, and was still there, striving to comfort
little Kate, who could not be induced to leave her father's rapidly
stiffening form, when Mrs. Waldron re-entered the room. Drawing the
child to her side and folding her motherly arms about her, she looked up
in Hayne's pale face:

"They are going in five minutes. Don't you mean to see her?"

"Not there,--not under his roof or in that crowd. I will go to the
station."

"I must run over and say good-by in a moment,--when the carriage goes
around. Shall--shall I say you will come?"

There was a light in his blue eyes she was just beginning to notice now
as she studied his face. A smile flickered one instant about the corners
of his mouth, and then he held out his hand:

"She knows by this time, Mrs. Waldron."

An hour later Mrs. Rayner was standing on the platform at the station,
Ross and others of her satellites hanging about her; Captain Rayner was
talking in subdued tones with one or two of the senior officers; Miss
Travers, looking feverishly pretty, was chatting busily with Royce and
Foster, though a close observer could have noted that her dark eyes
often sought the westward prairie over which wound the road to the
distant post. It was nearly train-time, and three or four horsemen could
be seen at various distances, while, far out towards the fort, long
skirmish-lines and fluttering guidons were sweeping over the slopes in
mimic war-array.

"I have missed all this," she said, pointing to the scene; "and I do
love it so that it seems hard to go just as all the real soldier life is
beginning."

"Goodness knows you've had offers enough to keep you here," said Foster,
with not the blithest laugh in the world. "Any girl who will go East and
marry a 'cit' and leave six or seven penniless subs sighing behind her,
I have my opinion of: she's eminently level-headed," he added, with
rueful and unexpected candor.

"I have hopes of Miss Travers yet," boomed Royce, in his ponderous
basso,--"not personal hopes, Foster; you needn't feel for your
pistol,--but I believe that her heart is with the army, like the
soldier's daughter she is." And, audacious as was the speech and
deserving of instant rebuke, Mr. Royce was startled to see her reddening
vividly. He would have plunged into hasty apology, but Foster plucked
his sleeve:

"Look who's coming, you galoot! She hasn't heard a word either of us has
said."

And though Nellie Travers, noting the sudden silence, burst into an
immediate and utterly irrelevant lament over the loss of the Maltese
kitten,--which had not been seen all that day and was not to be found
when they came away,--it was useless. The effort was gallant, but the
flame in her cheeks betrayed her as, throwing his reins to the orderly
who followed him, Mr. Hayne dismounted at the platform and came directly
towards her. To Mrs. Rayner's unspeakable dismay, he walked up to the
trio, bowed low over the little gloved hand that was extended in answer
to the proffer of his own, and next she saw that Royce and Foster had,
as though by tacit consent, fallen back, and, _coram publico_, Mr. Hayne
was sole claimant of the regards of her baby sister. There was but one
comfort in the situation: the train was in sight. Forgetful, reckless
for the moment, of what was going on around her, she stood gazing at the
pair. No woman could fail to read the story; no woman could see his
face, his eyes, his whole attitude and expression, and not read therein
that old, old story that grows sweeter with every century of its life.
That he should be inspired with sudden, vehement love for her exquisite
Nell was something she could readily understand; but what--what meant
_her_ downcast eyes, the flutter of color on her soft and rounded cheek,
the shy uplifting of the fringed lids from time to time as though in
response to eager question or appeal? Heavens! would that train _never_
come? The whistle was sounding in the distance, but it would take ages
to drag those heavy Pullmans up the grade from the bridge where they had
yet to stop. She could almost have darted forward, seized her sister by
the wrist, and whispered again the baleful reminder that of late had had
no mention between them,--"Thou art another's;" but in her distress her
weak blue eyes sought her husband's face. He saw it all, and shook his
head. Then there was nothing to be done.

As the train came rumbling finally into the station, she saw him once
more clasp her sister's hand; then, with one long look into the sweet
face that was hidden from her jealous eyes, he raised his forage-cap and
stepped quickly back to where his horse was held. Her husband hastened
to her side:

"Kate, I must speak to him. I don't care how he may take it; I cannot
go without it."

They all watched the tall captain as he strode across the platform.
Every man in uniform seemed to know instinctively that Rayner at last
was seeking to make open reparation for the bitter wrong he had done.
One or two strove to begin a general chat and affect an interest in
something else, for Mrs. Rayner's benefit, but she, with trembling lips,
stood gazing after her husband and seemed to beg for silence. Then all
abandoned other occupation, and every man stood still and watched them.
Hayne had quickly swung into saddle, and had turned for one more look,
when he saw his captain with ashen face striding towards him, and heard
him call his name.

"By Jove!" muttered Ross, "what command that fellow has over himself!"
for, scrupulously observant of military etiquette, Mr. Hayne on being
addressed by his superior officer had instantly dismounted, and now
stood silently facing him. Even at the distance, there were some who
thought they could see his features twitching; but his blue eyes were
calm and steady,--far clearer than they had been but a moment agone when
gazing good-by into the sweet face they worshipped. None could hear what
passed between them. The talk was very brief; but Ross almost gasped
with amaze, other officers looked at one another in utter astonishment,
and Mrs. Rayner fairly sobbed with excitement and emotion, when Mr.
Hayne was seen to hold forth his hand, and Rayner, grasping it eagerly
in both his own, shook it once, then strode hastily away towards the
rear of the train. His eyes were filled with tears he could not repress
and could not bear to show.

That evening, as the train wound steadily eastward into the shadows of
the night, and they looked out in farewell upon the slopes they had last
seen when a wintry gale swept fiercely over the frozen surface and the
shallow ravines were streaked with snow, Kate Rayner, after a long talk
with her husband, and abandoning her boy to the sole guardianship of his
nurse, settled herself by Nellie's side, and Nellie knew that she either
sought confidences or had them to impart. Something of the old,
quizzical look was playing about the corner of her pretty mouth as her
elder sister, with feminine indirectness, began her verbal skirmishing
with the subject. It was some time before the question was reached which
led to her real objective:

"Did he--did Mr. Hayne tell you much about Clancy?"

"Not much. There was no time."

"You had fully ten minutes, I'm sure. It seemed even longer."

"Four by the clock, Kate."

"Well, four, then. He must have had something of greater interest."

No answer. Cheeks reddening, though.

"Didn't he?"--persistently.

"I will tell you what he told me of Clancy, Kate. Mrs. Clancy had
utterly deceived you as to what he had to tell, had she not?"

"Utterly." And now it was Mrs. Rayner's turn to color painfully.

"Mr. Hayne tells me that Clancy's confession really explained how
Captain Rayner was mistaken. It was not so much the captain's fault,
after all."

"So Mr. Hayne told him. You knew they--you saw Mr. Hayne offer him his
hand, didn't you?"

"I did not see: I knew he would." More vivid color, and much hesitation
now.

"_Knew_ he would! Why, Nellie, what do you mean? He didn't tell you that
he was to see Captain Rayner. He couldn't have known."

"But I knew, Kate; and I told him how the captain had suffered."

"But how could you know that he would shake hands with him?"

"He promised me."

The silence was unbroken for a moment. Nellie Travers could hear the
beating of her own heart as she nestled closer to her sister and stole a
hand into hers. Mrs. Rayner was trying hard to be dutiful, stern,
unbending, to keep _her_ faith with the distant lover in the East,
whether Nell was true or no; but she had been so humbled, so changed, so
shaken, by the events of the past few weeks, that she felt all her old
spirit of guardianship ebbing away. "Must I give you up, Nell? and must
he, too?--Mr. Van Antwerp?"

"He has not answered my last letter, Kate. It is nearly a week since I
have heard from him."

"What did you write, Nellie?"

"What I had done twice before,--that he ought to release me."

"And--is Clancy's the only confession you have heard to-day?"

"The only one." A pause: then, "I know what you mean, Kate; but he is
not the man to--to offer his love to a girl he knows is pledged to
another."

"But if you were free, Nellie? Tell me."

"I have no right to say, Kate; but"--and two big tears were welling up
into her brave eyes, as she clasped her hands and stretched them
yearningly before her--"shall I tell you what I think a girl would say
if she were free and had won his love?"

"What, Nellie?"

"She would say, 'Ay.' No woman with a heart could leave a man who has
borne so much and come through it all so bravely."

Poor Mrs. Rayner! Humbled and chastened as she was, what refuge had she
but tears, and then--prayer?




XIX.


Within the week succeeding the departure of the Rayners and Miss
Travers, Lieutenant Hayne's brother-in-law and his remarkably attractive
sister were with him in garrison and helping him fit up the new quarters
which the colonel had rather insisted on his moving into and occupying,
even though two unmarried subalterns had to move out and make way for
him. This they seemed rather delighted to do. There was a prevailing
sentiment at Warrener that nothing was too good for Hayne nowadays; and
he took all this adulation so quietly and modestly that there was
difficulty in telling just how it affected him. Towards those who had
known him well in the days of his early service he still maintained a
dignity and reserve of manner that kept them at some distance. To
others, especially to the youngsters in the ----th as well as to those
in the Riflers, he unbent entirely, and was frank, unaffected, and
warm-hearted. He seemed to bask in the sunshine of the respect and
consideration accorded him on every side. Yet no one could say he seemed
happy. Courteous, grave far beyond his years, silent and thoughtful, he
impressed them all as a man who had suffered too much ever again to be
light-hearted. Then it was more than believed he had fallen deeply in
love with Nellie Travers; and that explained the rarity and sadness of
his smile. To the women he was a centre of intense and romantic
interest. Mrs. Waldron was an object of jealousy because of the priority
of her claims to his regard. Mrs. Hurley--the sweet sister who so
strongly resembled him--was the recipient of universal attention from
both sexes. Hayne and the Hurleys, indeed, would have been invited to
several places an evening could they have accepted. And yet, with it
all, Mr. Hayne seemed at times greatly preoccupied. He had a great deal
to think of.

To begin with, the widow Clancy had been captured in one of the mining
towns, where she had sought refuge, and brought back by the civil
authorities, nearly three thousand dollars in greenbacks having been
found in her possession. She had fought like a fury and proved too much
for the sheriff's posse when first arrested, and not until three days
after her incarceration was the entire amount brought to light. There
was no question what ought to be done with it. Clancy's confession
established the fact that almost the entire amount was stolen from
Captain Hull nearly six years before, the night previous to his tragic
death at Battle Butte. Mrs. Clancy at first had furiously declared it
all a lie; but Waldron's and Billings's precaution in having Clancy's
entire story taken down by a notary public and sworn to before him
eventually broke her down. She made her miserable, whining admissions to
the sheriff's officers in town,--the colonel would not have her on the
post even as a prisoner,--and there she was still held, awaiting further
disclosures, while little Kate was lovingly cared for at Mrs. Waldron's.
Poor old Clancy was buried and on the way to be forgotten.

What proved the hardest problem for the garrison to solve was the fact
that, while Mr. Hayne kept several of his old associates at a distance,
he had openly offered his hand to Rayner. This was something the Riflers
could not account for. The intensity of his feeling at the time of the
court-martial none could forget: the vehemence of his denunciation of
the captain was still fresh in the memory of those who heard it. Then
there were all those years in which Rayner had continued to crowd him to
the wall; and finally there was the almost tragic episode of Buxton's
midnight visitation, in which Rayner, willingly or not, had been in
attendance. Was it not odd that in the face of all these considerations
the first man to whom Mr. Hayne should have offered his hand was Captain
Rayner? Odd indeed! But then only one or two were made acquainted with
the full particulars of Clancy's confession, and none had heard Nellie
Travers's request. Touched as he was by the sight of Rayner's haggard
and trouble-worn face, relieved as he was by Clancy's revelation of the
web that had been woven to cover the tracks of the thieves and ensnare
the feet of the pursuers, Hayne could not have found it possible to
offer his hand; but when he bent over the tiny glove and looked into her
soft and brimming eyes at the moment of their parting he could not say
no to the one thing she asked of him: it was that if Rayner came to say,
"Forgive me," before they left, he would not repel him.

There was one man in garrison whom Hayne cut entirely, and for whom no
one felt the faintest sympathy; and that, of course, was Buxton. With
Rayner gone, he hardly had an associate, though the _esprit de corps_ of
the ----th prompted the cavalry officers to be civil to him when he
appeared at the billiard-room. As Mr. Hurley was fond of the game, an
element of awkwardness was manifest the first time the young officers
appeared with their engineer friend. Hayne had not set foot in such a
place for five years, and quietly declined all invitations to take a cue
again. It was remembered of him that he played the prettiest game of
French caroms of all the officers at the station when he joined the
Riflers as a boy. Hurley could only stay a very short time, and the
subalterns were doing their best to make it lively for him. Some,
indeed, showed strong inclination to devote themselves to Mrs. Hurley;
but she was too busy with her brother's household affairs to detect
their projects. Hurley had turned very red and glared at Buxton the
first time the two met at the club-room, but the bulky captain speedily
found cover under which to retire, and never again showed himself in
general society until the engineer with the scientific attainments as a
boxer as well as road-builder was safely out of the post.

And yet there came a day very soon when Mr. Hayne wished that he could
go to Buxton's quarters. He had in no wise changed his opinion of the
man himself, but the Rayners had not been gone a fortnight before Mrs.
Buxton began to tell the ladies of the charming letters she was
receiving from Mrs. Rayner,--all about their travels. There were many
things he longed to know, yet could not ask.

There came to him a long and sorrowful letter from the captain himself,
but, beyond a few matters relating to the company and the transfer of
its property, it was all given up to a recapitulation of the troubles of
the past few years and to renewed expressions of his deep regret. Of the
ladies he made but casual mention. They were journeying down the
Mississippi on one of its big steamers when he wrote, and Mrs. Rayner
was able to enjoy the novelties of the trip, and was getting better, but
still required careful nursing. Miss Travers was devoted to her. They
would go to New Orleans, then possibly by sea around to New York,
arriving there about the 5th of June: that, however, was undecided. He
closed by asking Hayne to remind Major Waldron that his copy of Clancy's
confession had not yet reached him, and he was anxious to see it in
full.

"The one thing lacking to complete the chain is Gower," said the major,
as he looked up over his spectacles. "It would be difficult to tell what
became of him. We get tidings of most of the deserters who were as
prominent among the men as he appears to have been; but I have made
inquiry, and so has the colonel, and not a word has ever been heard of
him since the night he appeared before Mrs. Clancy and handed over the
money to her. He was a strange character, from all accounts, and must
have had some conscience, after all. Do you remember him at all, Hayne?"

"I remember him well. We made the march from the Big Horn over to Battle
Butte together, and he was a soldier one could not help remarking. Of
course I never had anything to say to him; but we heard he was an expert
gambler when the troop was over there at Miners' Delight."

"Of course his testimony isn't necessary. Clancy and his wife between
them have cleared you, after burying you alive five years. But nothing
but his story could explain his singular conduct,--planning the whole
robbery, executing it with all the skill of a professional jail-bird,
deserting and covering several hundred miles with his plunder, then
daring to go to the old fort, find Mrs. Clancy, and surrender every
cent, the moment he heard of your trial. What a fiend that woman was! No
wonder she drove Clancy to drink!"

"Will you send copies of her admission with Clancy's affidavits?" asked
Hayne.

"Here they are in full," answered the major. "The colonel talks of
having them printed and strewn broadcast as warnings against 'snap
judgment' and too confident testimony in future."

Divested of the legal encumbrances with which such documents are usually
weighted, Clancy's story ran substantially as follows:

"I was sergeant in K troop, and Gower was in F. We had been stationed
together six months or so when ordered out on the Indian campaign that
summer. I was dead-broke. All my money was gone, and my wife kept
bothering me for more. I owed a lot of money around head-quarters, too,
and Gower knew it, and sometimes asked me what I was going to do when we
got back from the campaign. We were not good friends, him and I. There
was money dealings between us, and then there was talk about Mrs. Clancy
fancying him too much. The paymaster came up with a strong escort and
paid off the boys late in October, just as the expedition was breaking
up and going for home, and all the officers and men got four months'
pay. There was Lieutenant Crane and twenty men of F troop out on a
scout, but the lieutenant had left his pay-rolls with Captain Hull, and
the men had all signed before they started, and so the captain he drew
it all for them and put each man's money in an envelope marked with his
name, and the lieutenant's too, and then crowded it all into some bigger
envelopes. I was there where I could see it all, and Gower was watching
him close. 'It's a big pile the captain's got,' says he. 'I'd like to be
a road-agent and nab him.' When I told him it couldn't be over eleven
hundred dollars, he says, 'That's only part. He has his own pay, and six
hundred dollars company fund, and a wad of greenbacks he's been carryin'
around all summer. It's nigh on to four thousand dollars he's got in his
saddle-bags this day.'

"And that night, instead of Lieutenant Crane's coming back, he sent word
he had found the trail of a big band of Indians, and the whole crowd
went in pursuit. There was four companies of infantry, under Captain
Rayner, and F and K troops,--what was left of them,--that were ordered
to stay by the wagons and bring them safely down; and we started with
them over towards Battle Butte, keeping south of the way the regiment
had gone to follow Mr. Crane. And the very next day Captain Rayner got
orders to bring his battalion to the river and get on the boat, while
the wagons kept on down the bank with us to guard them. And Mr. Hayne
was acting quartermaster, and he stayed with us; and him and Captain
Hull was together a good deal. There was some trouble, we heard, because
Captain Rayner thought another officer should have been made
quartermaster and Mr. Hayne should have stayed with his company, and
they had some words; but Captain Hull gave Mr. Hayne a horse and seemed
to keep him with him; and that night, in sight of Battle Butte, the
steamboat was out of sight ahead when we went into camp, and I was
sergeant of the guard and had my fire near the captain's tent, and twice
in the evening Gower came to me and said now was the time to lay hands
on the money and skip. At last he says to me, 'You are flat-broke, and
they'll all be down on you when you get back to the post. No man in
America wants five hundred dollars more than you do. I'll give you five
hundred in one hour from now if you'll get the captain out of his tent
for half an hour.' Almost everybody was asleep then; the captain was,
and so was Mr. Hayne, and he went on to tell me how he could do it. He'd
been watching the captain. It made such a big bundle, did the money, in
all the separate envelopes that he had done it all up different,--made a
memorandum of the amount due each man, and packed the greenbacks all
together in one solid pile,--his own money, the lieutenant's, and the
men's,--done it up in paper and tied it firmly and put big blotches of
green sealing-wax on it and sealed them with the seal on his
watch-chain. Says Gower, 'You get the captain out, as I tell you, and
I'll slip right in, get the money, stuff some other paper with a few
ones and twos in the package; his seal, his watch, and everything is
there in the saddle-bags under his head, and I can reseal and replace it
in five minutes, and he'll never suspect the loss until the command all
gets together again next week. By that time I'll be three hundred miles
away. Everybody will say 'twas Gower that robbed him, and you with your
five hundred will never be suspected.' I asked him how could he expect
the captain to go and leave so much money in his bags with no one to
guard it; and he said he'd bet on it if I did it right. The captain had
had no luck tracking Indians that summer, and the regiment was laughing
at him. He knew they were scattering every which way now, and was eager
to strike them. All I had to do was to creep in excited-like, wake him
up sudden, and tell him I was sure I had heard an Indian drum and their
scalp-dance song out beyond the pickets,--that they were over towards
Battle Butte, and he could hear them if he would come out on the
river-bank. 'He'd go quick,' says Gower, 'and think of nothing.'

"And--I wouldn't believe it, but he did. He sprang up and went right out
with me, just flinging his overcoat round him; and he never seemed to
want to come in. The wind was blowing soft-like from the southeast, and
he stood there straining his ears trying to hear the sounds I told him
of; but at last he gave it up, and we went back to camp, and he took his
lantern and looked in his saddle-bags, and I shook for fear; but he
seemed to find everything all right, and in the next ten minutes he was
asleep, and Gower came and whispered to me, and I went with him, and he
gave me five hundred dollars, in twenties. 'Now you're bound,' says he;
'keep the sentries off while I get my horse.' And that's the last I ever
saw of him. Then a strange thing happened. 'Twas hardly daylight when a
courier came galloping up, and I called the captain, and he read the
despatch, and says he, 'By heaven, Clancy, you were right after all.
There _are_ Indians over there. Why didn't I trust your ears? Call up
the whole command. The Riflers have treed them at Battle Butte, and
Captain Rayner has gone with his battalion. We are to escort the wagons
to where the boat lies beyond the bend, and then push over with all the
horsemen we can take.' It was after daylight when we got started, but we
almost ran the wagons 'cross country to the boat, and there Captain Hull
took F troop and what there was of his own, leaving only ten men back
with the wagons; and not till then was Gower missed; but all were in
such a hurry to get to the Indians that no one paid attention. Mr. Hayne
he begged the captain to let him go too: so the train was left with the
wagon-master and the captain of the boat, and away we went. You know all
about the fight, and how 'twas Mr. Hayne the captain called to and gave
his watch and the two packages of money when he was ordered to charge. I
was right by his side; and I swore--God forgive me!--that through the
crack and tear in the paper I could see the layers of greenbacks, when I
knew 'twas only some ones and twos Gower had slipped in to make it look
right; and Captain Rayner stood there and saw the packet, too, and
Sergeant Walshe and Bugler White; but them two were killed with him: so
that 'twas only Captain Rayner and I was left as witnesses, and never
till we got to Laramie after the campaign did the trouble come. I never
dreamed of anything ever coming of it but that every one would say Gower
stole the money and deserted; but when the captain turned the packages
over to Mr. Hayne, and then got killed, and Mr. Hayne carried the
packages, with the watch, seal, saddle-bags, and all, in to Cheyenne,
and never opened them till he got there,--two weeks after, when we were
all scattered,--then they turned on him, his own officers did, and said
he stole it and gambled or sent it away in Cheyenne.

"I had lost much of my money then, and Mrs. Clancy got the rest, and it
made me crazy to think of that poor young gentleman accused of it all;
but I was in for it, and knew it meant prison for years for me, and
perhaps they couldn't prove it on him. I got to drinking then, and told
Captain Rayner that the ----th was down on me for swearing away the
young officer's character; and then he took me to Company B when the
colonel wouldn't have me any more in the ----th; and one night when Mrs.
Clancy had been raising my hair and I wanted money to drink and she'd
give me none, little Kate told me her mother had lots of money in a box,
and that Sergeant Gower had come and given it to her while they were
getting settled in the new post after the Battle Butte campaign, and he
had made her promise to give it to me the moment I got back,--that
somebody was in trouble, and that I must save him; and I believed Kate,
and charged Mrs. Clancy with it, and she beat me and Kate, and swore it
was all a lie; and I never could get the money. And at last came the
fire; and it was the lieutenant that saved my life and Kate's, and
brought back to her all that pile of money through the flames. It broke
my heart then, and I vowed I'd go and tell him the truth; but they
wouldn't let me. She told me the captain said he would kill me if I
blabbed, and she would kill Kate. I didn't dare, until they told me my
discharge had come; and then I was glad when the lieutenant and the
major caught me in town. When they promised to take care of little Kate
I didn't care what happened to me. The money Mrs. Clancy has--except
perhaps two hundred dollars--all belongs to Lieutenant Hayne, since he
paid off every cent that was stolen from Captain Hull."

Supplemented by Mrs. Clancy's rueful and incoherent admissions, Clancy's
story did its work. Mrs. Clancy could not long persist in her various
denials after her husband's confession was brought to her ears, and she
was totally unable to account satisfactorily for the possession of so
much money. Little Kate had been too young to grasp the full meaning of
what Gower said to her mother in that hurried interview; but her
reiterated statements that he came late at night, before the regiment
got home, and knocked at the door until he waked them up, and her mother
cried when he came in, he looked so different, and had spectacles, and a
patch on his cheek, and ranch clothes, and he only stayed a little
while, and told her mother he must go back to the mountains, the police
were on his track,--she knew now he spoke of having deserted,--and he
gave her mother lots of money, for she opened and counted it afterwards
and told her it must all go to papa to get some one out of trouble,--all
were so clear and circumstantial that at last the hardened woman began
to break down and make reluctant admissions. When an astute sheriff's
officer finally told her that he knew where he could lay hands on
Sergeant Gower, she surrendered utterly. So long as he was out of the
way,--could not be found,--she held out; but the prospect of dragging
into prison with her the man who had spurned her in years gone by and
was proof against her fascinations was too alluring. She told all she
could at his expense. He had ridden eastward after his desertion, and,
making his way down the Missouri, had stopped at Yankton and gone thence
to Kansas City, spending much of his money. He had reached Denver with
the rest, and there--she knew not how--had made or received more, when
he heard of the fact that Captain Hull had turned over his property to
Lieutenant Hayne just before he was killed, and that the lieutenant was
now to be tried for failing to account for it. He brought her enough to
cover all he had taken, but--here she lied--strove to persuade her to go
to San Francisco with him. She promised to think of it if he would leave
the money,--which he did, swearing he would come for her and it. That
was why she dared not tell Mike when he got home. He was so jealous of
her.

To this part of her statement Mrs. Clancy stoutly adhered; but the
officers believed Kate.

One other thing she told. Kate had declared he wore a heavy patch on his
right cheek and temple. Yes, Mrs. Clancy remembered it. Some scoundrels
had sought to rob him in Denver. He had to fight for life and money
both, and his share of the honors of the fray was a deep and clean cut
extending across the cheek-bone and up above the right ear.

As these family revelations were told throughout the garrison and
comment of every kind was made thereon, there is reason for the belief
that Mrs. Buxton found no difficulty in filling her letters with
particulars of deep interest to her readers, who by this time had
carried out the programme indicated by Captain Rayner. Mid-June had
come; the ladies, apparently benefited by the sea-voyage, had landed in
New York and were speedily driven to their old quarters at the
Westminster; and while the captain went to head-quarters of the
department to report his arrival on leave and get his letters, a card
was sent up to Miss Travers which she read with cheeks that slightly
paled:

"He is here, Kate."

"Nellie, you--you won't throw him over, after all he has done and borne
for you?"

"I shall keep my promise," was the answer.




XX.


"And so she's really going to marry Mr. Van Antwerp", said Mrs. Buxton
to Mrs. Waldron a few days later in the month of sunshine and roses.

"I did not think it possible when she left," was the reply. "Why do you
say so now?"

"Oh, Mrs. Rayner writes that the captain had to go to Washington on
some important family matters, and that she and Nellie were at the
sea-shore again, and Mr. Van Antwerp was with them from morning till
night. He looked so worn and haggard, she said, that Nellie could not
but take pity on him. Heavens! think of having five hundred thousand
dollars sighing its life away for you!--especially when he's handsome.
Mrs. Rayner made me promise to send it right back, because he would
never give her one before, but she sent his picture. It's splendid.
Wait, and I'll show you." And Mrs. Buxton darted into the house.

When she reappeared, three or four young cavalrymen were at the gate,
chatting with Mrs. Waldron, and the picture was passed from hand to
hand, exciting varied comment. It was a simple _carte de visite_, of the
style once spoken of as vignette,--only the head and shoulders being
visible,--but it was the picture of a strong, clear-cut face, with
thick, wavy black hair just tingeing with gray, a drooping moustache,
and long English whiskers. The eyes were heavy-browed, and, though
partially shaded by the gold-rimmed _pince-nez_, were piercing and fine.
Mr. Van Antwerp was unquestionably a fine-looking man.

"Here comes Hayne," said Royce. "Show it to him. He likes pictures;
though I wouldn't like this one if I were in his place."

Mr. Hayne stopped in some surprise when hailed, greeted Mrs. Waldron
warmly, and bowed courteously to Mrs. Buxton, who was watching him
narrowly.

"Want to see a picture of the man you ought to go and perforate?" asked
Webster, with that lofty indifference which youngsters have to the
ravages of the tender passion on subjects other than themselves.

"To whom do you refer?" asked Hayne, smiling gravely, and little
imagining what was in store for him.

"This," said Webster, holding out the card. Hayne took it, gave one
glance, started, seized it with both hands, studied it eagerly, while
his own face rapidly paled, then looked up with quick, searching eyes.

"Who is this?" he asked.

"The man who's engaged to Miss Travers,--Mr. Van Antwerp."

"This--_this_--Mr. Van Antwerp!" exclaimed Hayne, his face white as a
sheet. "Here, take it, Royce!" And in an instant he had turned and gone.

"Well, I'll be hanged if I knew he was _that_ hard hit," drawled
Webster. "Did you, Royce?"

But Royce did not answer.

A gorgeous moonlight is bathing the Jersey coast in sparkling silver.
The tumbling billows come thundering in to the shining strand, and
sending their hissing, seething, whirling waters, all shimmer and
radiance, to the very feet of the groups of spectators. There are
hundreds of people scattered here and there along the shingle, and among
the groups a pale-faced young man in tweed travelling-suit has made his
way to a point where he can command a view of all the passers-by. It is
nearly eleven o'clock before they begin to break up and seek the broad
corridors of the brilliantly-lighted hotel. A great military band of
nearly forty pieces is playing superbly at intervals, and every now and
then, as some stirring martial strains come thrilling through the air, a
young girl in a group near at hand beats time with her pretty foot and
seems to quiver with the influence of the soldier melodies. A tall,
dark-eyed, dark-haired man bends devotedly over her, but he, too, seems
to rise to his full height at times, and there is something in the
carriage and mien that tells that soldier songs have thrilled his veins
ere now. And this man the young traveller in gray watches as though his
eyes were fascinated. Standing in the shade of a little summer-house, he
never ceases his scrutiny of the group.

At last the musicians go, and the people follow. The sands are soon
deserted; the great piazzas are emptied of their promenaders; the halls
and corridors are still patronized by the few belated chaperons and
their giddy charges. The music-loving girl has gone aloft to her room,
and her aunt, the third member of the group that so chained the
attention of the young map in gray, lingers for a moment to exchange a
few words with their cavalier. He seems in need of consolation.

"Don't be, so down-hearted, Mr. Van Antwerp. It is very early in the
summer, and you have the whole season before you."

"No, Mrs. Rayner: it is very different from last year. I cannot explain
it, but I know there has been a change. I feel as--as I used to in my
old, wild days when a change of luck was coming. It's like the gambler's
superstition; but I cannot shake it off. Something told me she was lost
to me when, you boarded that Pacific Express last February. I was a fool
ever to have let her go."

"Is she still so determined?"

"I cannot shake her resolution. She says that at the end of the year's
time originally agreed upon she will keep her promise; but she will
listen to no earlier marriage. I have about given up all hope. Something
again--that fearful something I cannot shake off--tells me that my only
chance lay in getting her to go with me this month. Once abroad with
her, I could make her happy; but--"

He breaks off irresolutely, looking about him in the strange, hunted
manner she has noted once or twice already.

"You are all unstrung, Mr. Van Antwerp. Why not go to bed and try and
sleep? You will be so much brighter to-morrow."

"I cannot sleep. But don't let me keep you. I'll go out and smoke a
cigar. Good-night, Mrs. Rayner. Whatever comes of it all, I shall not
forget your kindness."

So he turns away, and she still stands at the foot of the staircase,
watching him uneasily. He has aged greatly in the past few months. She
is shocked to see how gray, how fitful, nervous, irritable, he has
become. As he moves towards the door-way, she notes how thin his cheek
has grown, and wonders at the irresolution in his movements when he
reaches the broad piazza. He stands there an instant, the massive
door-way forming a frame for a picture _en silhouette_, his tall spare
figure thrown black upon the silver sea beyond. He looks up and down the
now-deserted galleries, fumbles in his pockets for his cigar-case, bites
off with nervous clip the end of a huge "Regalia," strikes a light, and
before the flame is half applied to his weed throws it away, then turns
sharply and strides out of sight towards the office.

Another instant, and, as though in pursuit, a second figure, erect,
soldierly, with quick and bounding step strides across the glittering
moon-streak, and Mrs. Rayner's heart stands still.

Only for an instant, though. She has seen and recognized Lawrence Hayne.
Concealed from them he is following Mr. Van Antwerp, and there can be
but one purpose in his coming here,--Nellie. But what can he want with
her--her rightful lover? She springs from the lower step on which she
has been standing, runs across the tessellated floor, and stops short in
the door-way, gazing after the two figures. She is startled to find them
close at hand,--one, Van Antwerp, close to the railing, facing towards
her, his features ghastly in the moonlight, his left hand resting, and
supporting him, on one of the tall wooden pillars; the other, Hayne,
with white clinching fists, advancing upon him. Above the low boom and
roar of the surf she distinctly hears the clear tenor ring of his voice
in the tone of command she last heard under the shadow of the Rockies,
two thousand miles away:

"Halt!"

No wonder a gentleman in civil life looks amazed at so peremptory a
summons from a total stranger. In his high indignation will he not
strike the impertinent subaltern to earth? As a well-bred woman, it
occurs to her that she ought to rush out and avert hostilities by
introducing them, or something; but she has no time to act. The next
words simply take her breath away:

"Sergeant Gower, I arrest you as a deserter and thief! You deserted from
F troop, ----th Cavalry, at Battle Butte!"

She sees the fearful gleam on the dark man's face; there is a sudden
spring, a clinch, a straining to and fro of two forms,--one tall, black,
snaky, the other light, lithe, agile, and trained; muttered curse,
panting breath, and then, sure as fate, the taller man is being borne
backward against the rail. She sees the dark arm suddenly relax its
grasp of the gray form and disappear an instant. Then, there it comes
again, and with it a gleam of steel. With one shriek of warning and
terror she springs towards them,--just in time. Hayne glances up,
catches the lifted wrist, hurls his whole weight upon the tottering
figure, and over goes the Knickerbocker prone upon the floor. Hayne
turns one instant: "Go in-doors, Mrs. Rayner. This is no place for you.
Leave him to me."

And in that instant, before either can prevent, Steven Van Antwerp,
_alias_ Gower, springs to his feet, leaps over the balcony rail, and
disappears in the depths below. It is a descent of not more than ten
feet to the sands beyond the dark passage that underlies the piazza, but
he has gone down into the passage itself. When Mr. Hayne, running down
the steps, gains his way to the space beneath the piazza, no trace of
the fugitive can he find.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nor does Mr. Van Antwerp appear at breakfast on the following morning,
nor again to any person known to this story. An officer of the ----th
Cavalry, spending a portion of the following winter in Paris, writes
that he met him face to face one day in the galleries of the Louvre.
Being in civilian costume, of course, and much changed in appearance
since he was a youth in the straps of a second lieutenant, it was
possible for him to take a good long look at the man he had not seen
since he wore the chevrons of a dashing sergeant in the Battle Butte
campaign. "He has grown almost white," wrote the lieutenant, "and I'm
told he has abandoned his business in New York and never will return to
the United States."

Rayner, too, has grown gray. A telegram from his wife summoned him to
the sea-side from Washington the day after this strange adventure of
hers. He found her somewhat prostrate, his sister-in-law very pale and
quiet, and the clerks of the hotel unable to account for the
disappearance of Mr. Van Antwerp. Lieutenant Hayne, they said, had told
them he received news which compelled him to go back to New York at
once; but the gentleman's traps were all in his room. Mr. Hayne, too,
had gone to New York; and thither the captain followed. A letter came to
him at the Westminster which he read and handed in silence to Hayne. It
was as follows:

"By the time this reaches you I shall be beyond reach of the law and on
my way to Europe to spend what may be left of my days. I hope they may
be few; for the punishment that has fallen upon me is more than I can
bear, though no more than I deserve. You have heard that my college days
were wild, and that after repeated warnings my father drove me from
home, sending me to Wyoming to embark in the cattle-business. I
preferred gambling, and lost what he gave me. There was nothing then
left but to enlist; and I joined the ----th. Mother still believed me in
or near Denver, and wrote regularly there. The life was horrible to me
after the luxury and lack of restraint I had enjoyed, and I meant to
desert. Chance threw in my way that temptation. I robbed poor Hull the
night before he was killed, repacked the paper so that even the torn
edges would show the greenbacks, resealed it,--all just as I have had to
hear through her pure and sacred lips it was finally told and her lover
saved.

"God knows I was shocked when I heard in Denver he was to be tried for
the crime. I hastened to Cheyenne, not daring to show myself to him or
any one, and restored every cent of the money, placing it in Mrs.
Clancy's hands, as I dared not stay; but I had hoped to give it to
Clancy, who had not arrived. The police knew me, and I _had_ to go. I
gave every cent I had, and _walked_ back to Denver, then got word to
mother of my fearful danger; and, though she never knew I was a
deserter, she sent me money, and I came East and went abroad. Then my
whole life changed. I was appalled to think how low I had fallen. I
shunned companionship, studied, did well at Heidelberg; father forgave
me, and died; but God has not forgiven, and at the moment when I thought
my life redeemed this retribution overtakes me.

"If I may ask anything, it is that mother may never know the truth. I
will tell her that Nellie could not love me, and I could not bear to
stay."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some few weeks later that summer Miss Travers stood by the same balcony
rail, with an open letter in her hand. There was a soft flush on her
pretty, peachy cheek, and a far-away look in her sweet blue eyes.

"What news from Warrener, Nellie?" asked Mrs. Rayner.

"Fluffy has reappeared."

"Indeed! Where?"

"At Mr. Hayne's. He writes that as he returned, the moment he entered
the hall she came running up to him, arching her back and purring her
delight and welcoming him just as though she belonged there now; and--"

"And what, Nellie?"

"He says he means to keep her until I come to claim her."

                         THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Deserter, by Charles King

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DESERTER ***

***** This file should be named 16557.txt or 16557.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/5/5/16557/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

