The Project Gutenberg eBook, Adventures in Southern Seas, by George Forbes


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Adventures in Southern Seas
       A Tale of the Sixteenth Century


Author: George Forbes



Release Date: September 16, 2005  [eBook #16704]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES IN SOUTHERN SEAS***


E-text prepared by James Tenison



ADVENTURES IN SOUTHERN SEAS

A Tale of the Sixteenth Century

by

GEORGE FORBES

First published August 1920 by George
G. Harrap & Co. Ltd. 39-41 Parker
Street, Kingsway, London, W.C.2
Reprinted July 1924
Printed in Great Britain by Neill & Co. Ltd., Edinburgh







INTRODUCTORY

In the year 1801 was found by the chief coxswain of the "Naturalist" (a
ship commanded by Captain Hamelin on a voyage of discovery performed by
order of the Emperor Napoleon I), at Shark's Bay, on the coast of West
Australia, a pewter plate about six inches in diameter, bearing a
roughly engraved Dutch inscription, of which the following is a
translation:

  "1616

  "On the 25th of October arrived here the ship 'Endraght',
  of Amsterdam; first supercargo Gilles Miebas Van Luck;
  Captain Dirk Hartog, of Amsterdam. She set sail again
  on the 27th of the same month. Bantum was second
  supercargo; Janstins first pilot.

  "Peter Ecoores Van Bu, in the year 1616."

No connected account of the voyages of Dirk Hartog is extant, but the
report of the discovery of this pewter plate suggested the task of
compiling a narrative from the records kept by Dutch navigators, in
which Dirk Hartog is frequently referred to, and which is probably as
correct a history of Hartog's voyages as can be obtained. The
aborigines of New Holland, as Australia was then called, judging by the
description given of them by Van Bu, the author of the writing on the
pewter plate, appear to have been a more formidable race of savages
than those subsequently met with by Captain Cook on his landing at
Botany Bay, and the dimensions of the tribe among whom Van Bu was held
captive were certainly larger than those of the migratory tribes of
Australian blacks in more modern times. The "sea spider" described by
Van Bu in his second adventure was probably the octopus, which attains
to great size in the Pacific. The "hopping animals" are doubtless the
kangaroos, with which Australians are now familiar.

Captain Dampier, in 1699, first mentions the water serpents referred to
by Van Bu. "In passing," he says, "we saw three water serpents swimming
about in the sea, of a yellow colour, spotted with dark brown spots.
Next day we saw two water serpents, different in shape from such as we
had formerly seen; one very long and as big as a man's leg in girth,
having a red head, which I have never seen any before or since."

From an examination of the Dutch records, it would appear that a ship
named the "Arms of Amsterdam" drove past the south coast of New Guinea
in the year 1623. This  is, perhaps, the voyage described by Van Bu to
the Island of Gems. The gigantic mass of ice seen by Van Bu in the South
is particularly interesting, since it may have been the first sight of
the ice barrier from which glaciers in the Antarctic regions break off
into the sea.

The north portion of New Guinea was for the first time rightly explored
in the year 1678, by order of the Dutch East India Company, and found
almost everywhere to be enriched with very fine rivers, lakes, and
bays. About the north-western parts the natives were discovered to be
lean, and of middle size, jet-black, not unlike the Malabars, but the
hair of the head shorter and somewhat less curly than the Kafirs'. "In
the black of their eyes," says a report given of this voyage, "gleams a
certain tint of red, by which may, in some measure, be observed that
blood-thirsty nature of theirs which has at different times caused so
much grief from the loss of several of our young men, whom they have
surprised, murdered, carried into the woods, and there devoured. They
go entirely naked, without the least shame, except their rajahs or
petty kings, who are richly dressed. The heathens of Nova Guinea
believe there is some divinity in serpents, for which reason they
represent them upon their vessels."

The "Golden Sea-horse" is mentioned as one of the Dutch ships said to
have taken part in the discovery of Australia between the years 1616
and 1624. Other vessels noted are the "Endraght", "Zeewolf", "Arms of
Amsterdam", "Pera", and "Arnheim". All these vessels lay claim to
having touched at the 'Great Southern Continent' as well as at the
islands of the South Seas.

The 'Place of the Painted Hands', the objective of the third voyage of
Van Bu with Dirk Hartog to New Holland, is referred to by the late Mr
Lawrence Hargrave, who made a very interesting study of picture-writings
discovered in Australia, in a collection of pamphlets entitled "Lope de
Vega", now in the possession of the Mitchell Library at Sydney. "There
are picture-writings," he says, "which have remained for hundreds of
years without any archaeologist discovering their meaning. They are
not as ancient as those on the monuments of the Egyptians, but they are
equally interesting. If they are read in the light of a message to
posterity, they may yet reveal something of surprising interest. By whom
were they chiselled? What is their meaning? The more recent discoveries
show an oval encircling a cross--the symbol of Spanish conquest. On an
ironstone rock-face on the Shoalhaven River are many 'hands.' These have
been there to the memory of the oldest inhabitant. No aboriginal will go
near them.  Gold is still washed in this river, and possibly these
hands, or fingers, refer to the days worked here washing gold, or to the
number of 'quills' of gold obtained. You will understand these 'hands'
are not carved, but painted with some pigment that has withstood the
weather for some hundreds of years."

The Malays locate the Male and Female Islands visited by Van Bu, an
account of which appears in many ancient manuscripts from the twelfth
to the sixteenth century, as being the islands of Engarno, to the south
of Sumatra. Marco Polo speaks of them in his voyage round the world,
undertaken in 1271, and both Spanish and Dutch explorers refer to them
in the accounts of their travels of more recent date.

In "The Discovery of Australia" (a critical documentary and historic
investigation concerning the priority of discovery in Australasia by
Europeans before the arrival of Lieutenant James Cook in the Endeavour
in the year 1770), by George Collingridge, may be found accounts of
Spanish and Portuguese attempts at settlement upon the Great Southern
Continent--'Terra Australis'.

Staten Land was the name first given to New Zealand in honour of the
States of Holland, and the monstrous birds seen there were probably the
now extinct moa. The Cannibal Islands are doubtless Fiji. The data and
references to chronicles in this work are genuine, and the result of a
careful study of rare and (in some cases) unique books and manuscripts
in the Mitchell Wing of the Public Library at Sydney, said to be the
most comprehensive collection known of accounts of discoveries in South
Seas.

G. F.



CONTENTS

CHAPTER


I.       I FALL INTO CAPTIVITY
II.      THE BLACK CANNIBALS OF NEW HOLLAND
III.     THE ONLY WHITE MAN IN NEW HOLLAND
IV.      THE SEA SPIDER
V.       THE VOYAGE CONTINUED
VI.      THE FIGHT ON THE SANDS
VII.     THE SPIRIT OF DISCORD
VIII.    PEARL ISLAND
IX.      MUTINY
X.       I EMBARK ON A SECOND VOYAGE
XI.      A SECOND VOYAGE WITH HARTOG TO THE SOUTH
XII.     THE SEA SERPENT
XIII.    THE FLOATING ISLAND
XIV.     AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE
XV.      THE SEAWEED SEA
XVI.     THE ISLAND OF GEMS
XVII.    QUEEN MELANNIE
XVIII.   A QUEEN'S FAVOURITE
XIX.     I BECOME CHIEF COOK
XX.      THE SNAKE GOD
XXI.     A PLAN OF ESCAPE
XXII.    THE NIGHT OF THE SACRIFICE
XXIII.   AT THE MERCY OF THE SEA
XXIV.    HOW MY SECOND VOYAGE ENDED
XXV.     I ARRIVE AT AMSTERDAM
XXVI.    HAPPILY MARRIED
XXVII.   ONCE MORE TO THE SOUTH
XXVIII.  THE MOLUCCA ISLANDS
XXIX.    THE VOYAGE CONTINUED
XXX.     A SPANISH SETTLEMENT
XXXI.    THE PLACE OF THE PAINTED HANDS
XXXII.   MAROONED
XXXIII.  CAPTAIN MONTBAR
XXXIV.   WE AGAIN EXPLORE THE CAVES
XXXV.    I AM KIDNAPPED
XXXVI.   THE MALE AND FEMALE ISLANDS
XXXVII.  A TASK IS SET ME
XXXVIII. THE SLAYING OF THE GREAT CROCODILE
XXXIX.   I BECOME A VICTIM OF DOMESTIC INFELICITY
XL.      THE YELLOW PARCHMENT
XLI.     THE RUBY MOUNTAINS
XLII.    THE VALLEY OF SERPENTS
XLIII.   WE AGAIN LEAVE NEW HOLLAND
XLIV.    THE ISLANDS OF ARMENIO
XLV.     SUMATRA
XLVI.    MAHOMET ACHMET
XLVII.   KING TRINKITAT
XLVIII.  STATEN LAND
XLIX.    THE CANNIBAL ISLANDS
L.       AGAIN AT THE MOLUCCAS
LI.      GETTING BACK OUR OWN
LII.     CONCLUSION





ADVENTURES IN SOUTHERN SEAS



CHAPTER I

I FALL INTO CAPTIVITY


Let those who read this narrative doubt not its veracity. There be much
in Nature that we wot not of, and many strange countries to explore.
The monsters who roamed the earth in ancient times, as their fossil
bones attest, are still to be seen in those regions hitherto unvisited
by white men, and in the fathomless depths of uncharted seas leviathans
find a home.

Peter Ecoores Van Bu was born upon the island of Urk, in the Zuider
Zee, in the year 1596, and was brought up a fisher-lad until the coming
to the island of a priest, to whom my parents, ambitious for my
advancement, entrusted my education in the arts of reading and writing,
accomplishments in little vogue at this time. Hence it comes that I am
able to set down here a record of perils and adventures by sea and land
which may prove entertaining reading to those who have never travelled
beyond the limits of their own countries.

My parents, who had stinted themselves to provide my education, placed
me when I was eighteen years old in a merchant's office at Amsterdam,
where I became acquainted with Dirk Hartog, a famous navigator, who, a
year later, invited me to become his secretary and engraver of charts
on board the ship "Endraght", being then commissioned for a voyage of
discovery to the South, and having obtained a reluctant consent from my
master, De Decker, the merchant, to Hartog's proposal I gladly
abandoned the office desk for the sea.

The discovery of America by Christopher Columbus in 1492 had given rise
to a theory that a vast continent known as Terra Australis existed in
the South, and Portuguese and Spanish ships had made report from time
to time of this southern land. It was to confirm or dispel this belief
that the voyage of Dirk Hartog was made.

For many months after leaving Amsterdam we sailed south, touching at
some islands to obtain vegetable food and replenish our water-casks.
Worn out with hardship, our crew more than once showed signs of mutiny.
Sometimes for weeks together we lay becalmed in the tropics, when the
air hung like a pall of vapour from the sky, and the pitch boiled and
blistered in the seams of the deck-planks. In other seasons we were
driven by storm and stress. But at length, in spite of every obstacle,
an unbroken coast stretched before us far as the eye could reach.  For
three days we sailed past verdure-covered hills, white, sandy beaches,
and bluff headlands, until Hartog felt assured the Great South
Continent was at last in very truth before him.

The day upon which Hartog determined to land was bright and fine; the
place a sandy beach upon which the waves broke in frothy spume. We were
all keen to be ashore after so long a spell of the sea, and I reckoned
myself in luck to be chosen as one of the boat's crew to land the
captain.

"Let Peter come," said Hartog when the boat was alongside. "I would
have him engrave a plate to be set in some safe place, so that it may
be known that I, Dirk Hartog, landed here, to any who may come after
me."

When we had come to the shore Hartog, taking the boat's crew with him,
set off inland, leaving me to my work. The plate was soon finished,
when I fastened it to a rock out of reach of the waves.

It bore the following inscription:

     "1616

     "On the 25th of October arrived here the ship 'Endraght,' of
     Amsterdam; first supercargo Gilles Miebas Van Luck; Captain Dirk
     Hartog, of Amsterdam. She set sail again on the 27th of the same
     month. Bantum was second supercargo; Janstins first pilot.

     "Peter Ecoores Van Bu, in the year 1616."

I engraved the date upon which the ship was to sail according to
directions given me by the captain, though whether the "Endraght" did
sail at that time I cannot say, by reason of an adventure which befell
me.

When I had finished my work I began to think in what manner I might
employ myself until my companions returned, and, perceiving a grove of
trees not far distant from where I stood, I determined to rest a while
in the shade. As I penetrated these silent forests I beheld sights
wholly novel. Parrots and paroquets flew among the trees, as also large
white birds with sulphur crests, the like of which I had never seen
before. Presently I came to a stream which took its course through a
valley, and, kneeling, I was about to quench my thirst when I felt a
hand upon my shoulder. Springing to my feet, I was confronted by a band
of savages, many of whom held their spears its though about to strike.
They were all quite naked, their bodies marked with white streaks. I
tried to make them understand I came as a friend, and endeavoured to
retrace my steps to the open, where I hoped my shipmates might see me
and effect a rescue, but I now perceived that whichever way I turned my
path was barred by these wild men.  The savages now began to jabber to
each other in a jargon which I could not comprehend, and presently two
of them laid hold of me, one by each arm, and in spite of my protests
and such resistance as I made, forced me through the scrub inland. Some
of the tribe followed, others went on ahead, flitting like shadows
among the trees, the journey being performed at a rate which made it
hard for me to keep pace with them.

All day we continued to penetrate the bush toward the interior of the
country, and just before dark we came to a native village, where we
found the tribe assembled at their camp fires. There must have been
several hundred blacks in this camp, and many gathered round to look at
me, although they did not appear to regard me with as much curiosity as
might have been expected, from which I conjectured that white men were
not unknown to them.

After a meal of fish and wild duck, together with a pasty kind of bread
made from the bulrush root, which I found palatable, I was permitted to
lie down in one of their gunyahs upon a bed of freshly-picked leaves,
where, in spite of my anxieties, I soon fell asleep.

Toward morning I awoke to a full conviction of my sorry plight. The
camp was in darkness, save for the glow of the fires and the light of
the stars, which shine with a wonderful brilliancy in these southern
skies. The cry of some night bird came from the bush beyond the camp.
All else was still, but a crouching form at the entrance to the gunyah
warned me I was a prisoner. There was no need, however, to set a guard
upon me, for without a guide I knew I could never reach the coast, so
that even if I succeeded in making my escape from the savages, I must
perish miserably in the bush.

My thoughts now turned to home and friends whom it seemed unlikely I
would ever meet again. Dirk Hartog and the crew of the "Endraght",
though rough as became the hardy lives they led, had always shown a
kindly disposition toward me. They would miss me, and speak of me
perhaps, until, in the changing events of their adventurous career, I
would be forgotten. My parents also would mourn me as dead. But there
was one at Urk who would miss me more than friends or parents; Anna
Holstein, to whom I had plighted my troth, and to whom I looked to be
wed on my return. Anna was above me in station as the world goes. Her
father was the Governor of Urk, who would not willingly give his
daughter in marriage to a poor lad such its I. But who in love is wise?
Who reckons worldly wealth when love, the spirit and spring of the
universe, awakens in the soul? Like birds who call their mates with
love-learned songs, Anna and I loved each other, so that nothing bid,
death could part us. I had promised Anna I would return rich from my
voyage as others had done, when her father might be the more inclined
to look with favour upon my suit.  Well--here was the and of my
promises, and my hopes--death, or, still worse, life among a savage and
barbarous people.



CHAPTER II

THE BLACK CANNIBALS OF NEW HOLLAND


On the morning after my capture by the black cannibals of New Holland,
at daybreak, I was driven, out of the gunyah in which I had passed the
night, to be looked at by the tribe, who had now collected in great
numbers, and who encircled me with a ring of hazel eyes. Their
complexion was black, their hair woolly, and many of them were quite
naked, as though they lived in a state of brute nature. There did not
appear to be anyone in recognized authority among them, for they all
talked their outlandish jargon at the same time, and, presently, they
began to search me for such small articles of personal property as I
possessed. My engraving tools and a sailor's sewing kit, given me by
Anna, were taken from me, but to my great good fortune they did not rob
me of my dagger-knife, or my flint and steel which lay concealed in the
inner pocket of my leathern belt, nor of a lock of Anna's hair which I
carried in a silken bag round my neck; and in the possession of which I
found much comfort in my present predicament. My clothes did not
interest my captors, and I was thankful not to be deprived of them.

I was now startled to observe that some of the natives carried at their
girdles a human skull, but I subsequently learned that these trophies
were not, as I had at first supposed, the result of a massacre, but
were the drinking-cups of these people, who appeared to be the most
debased in the scale of humanity I had ever encountered.

During the morning, although I could see that a watch was kept upon me,
I was allowed my liberty, and, in spite of my wretched plight, I became
interested in observing the natives at their daily occupations, one of
which consisted in the capture of wild-fowl from a lagoon close to the
camp by the ingenious method of floating upon their quarry submerged up
to their necks in water, their heads covered by a mass of weeds and
bulrushes. When among the birds they suddenly drew some of them under
the surface without appearing to disturb the others.

And now a loud noise made by the beating of spears and waddies
attracted my attention, when I came to the conclusion some tribal
ceremony was in progress, and shortly afterward a number of youths were
led in procession through the camp. These young men presented a strong
and muscular appearance. Their naked bodies bore evidence of ill-usage;
purple weals and open sores upon their backs and shoulders appeared to
have been inflicted by the severe and long-continued stroke of the
lash.

After a dirge-like song had been sung, a number of the elder warriors
stepped forward, and with a piece of quartz formed a deep incision in
the nape or the neck of each youth, cutting broad gashes from shoulder
to hip, all the while repeating rapidly the following curious
incantation:

     "Kangar-marra--marra,
     Kano-marra-marra,
     Pilbirri-marra-marra."

A bunch of green leaves was then fastened round each middle and above
this a girdle of human hair. They then blackened with charcoal, and
their wounds plastered with clay in order to form the hands of gristle
which they regard as an ornament upon their flesh. During this
performance the lads showed no sign of pain, although their sufferings
must have been very severe. Further ceremonies then took place, in
which the women played a part too degrading to be here set down.

That night a feast was held, with dancing, in honour of the morning's
ceremonies. The night was warm and the moon shone with a wonderful
brilliancy, casting deep shadows upon the earth. In the distance rose a
pillar of sparks and fire, which marked the place where the performers
were preparing for the corroboree, a name given to their dancing by
these savages, and presently 200 men and 60 boys in nudity came from
among the forest trees. Each dancer was provided with a bunch of leaves
fastened above the knee, which, as they stamped in unison, made a loud
switching noise. These natives were painted from shoulder to hip, with
five or six stripes rising from the breast, their faces streaked with
white perpendicular lines, making it appear as the dancing of dead
men's bones. For some time the dancers continued to stamp to and fro,
and then, assembling at a fire that burned close by, they
simultaneously sat down. Other dancers then took their places, dressed
in fur cloaks, and wearing white and yellow feathers in their hair,
their black visages rendered hideous by fish-bones stuck through the
cartilage of the nose above their thick lips. These singular beings
stamped their way backward and forward, giving vent to yells of
excitement, and causing their bodies to tremble and twitch in the most
surprising manner. The last act of this strange drama represented the
warriors sitting cross-legged round the fire, when suddenly they
simultaneously stretched out their right arms as if pointing to some
distant object, at the same time displaying their teeth and rolling
their eyes, and then, springing to their feet, they uttered a shout
that echoed for miles over the surrounding country.

And now the preparations for a feast began. A number of women and young
girls brought baskets of fish, roasted birds, and prepared bulrush
root, whilst some very large eggs, such as I had never seen the like
before, with green shells were stacked upon the grass. Strange-looking
animals also, together with snakes and lizards, were stewed in clay
vessels, while the savages gathered round in gloating anticipation of
this repulsive food. When all was prepared one of the women gave a
peculiar cry, when there came from among the trees the young men who
had that morning undergone the baptism of initiation, each carrying
upon his shoulder a bundle wrapped in reeds and bulrushes. Arrived in
front of one who now acted as chief, much laid down his burden,
exposing the contents--the body of a native child!--half roasted and
drawn--the "long pig" of the cannibals!

Overcome by what I had seen, I sought my gunyah, where I passed the
night a prey to the most dismal forebodings. Next morning I became ill,
with violent pains and headache, which incapacitated me for some days,
during which time a lubra named Moira sat beside me, apparently anxious
to do what lay in her power to ease my sufferings.

Helped by the words I had learnt in my former intercourse with savages
at the islands we had visited in the early part of the voyage, I was
soon able to make myself understood to Moira, and to understand what
she said when I confided to her my desire to escape to the sea coast At
first she would only shake her head, but I became so insistent that at
length she consented to help me. A tribal ceremony was very shortly to
be celebrated, so Moira informed me, when the night would be favourable
for the success of our project, since the tribe would then be assembled
at the camp fires. On that night, moreover, there was no moon until
late, and we trusted to be able to slip away in the darkness
unobserved.

I had always been impatient of my captivity, but now that escape was in
sight I could scarcely control my desire to be rid of these savages. I
counted the days, dreading lest some change in the manner of my
captivity might prevent the carrying out of the plan we had formed; but
all went well until the time came when Moira whispered to me our chance
had come.

The tribe were assembled at the camp fire, engaged in one of their many
rites to propitiate the evil spirits whom alone they worship. Beyond
the glow, darkness complete and compelling hung like a pall. The stars
were hid by a curtain of clouds.

"Come," I whispered to Moira, and reckless of consequences, we fled
into the pitch black of the scrub.



CHAPTER III

THE ONLY WHITE MAN IN NEW HOLLAND


After leaving the blacks' camp I made my way through the forest, guided
by Moira, who could see in the dark. I was fearful lest we might be
pursued, in which case I resolved I would not be taken alive. Moira,
however, did not believe that we would be followed. Her people, she
told me, were afraid to enter the forest at night, when evil spirits
were supposed to be abroad, and indeed her own terror was so great that
I realized her devotion to me in having braved, for my sake, the
superstition in which she had been reared.

Moira was right in thinking we would not be followed, for no attempt
was made to follow us. But now a fresh anxiety arose. There were shapes
among the trees which were visible to Moira, though I could not see
them, which caused her such terror that I was obliged almost to carry
her, and I sometimes thought by the chill of her body that she had died
in my arms. With the dawn, however, the shapes disappeared, and Moira's
fears were dispelled.

Daylight found us several miles on our way to the coast, which we made,
as I reckoned, about noon, to the north of where I had first landed.
The cliffs here were high and rocky, the waves breaking at the foot in
fountains of spray. The sky was dull and overcast, which betokened a
storm. A number of white birds with yellow crests, such as I had seen
on my first landing, flew inland, and several fur-coated animals, with
heads resembling deer, and powerful tails, hopped across the stubble to
the shelter of the trees. The prospect was a dreary one, and a feeling
of melancholy oppressed me, which I found it hard to dispel.

Moira did her best to cheer me, but I could not rid myself of the dread
of being the only white man upon this desolate shore. When we had
walked for some distance we came to a sandy beach, where we found a
cave in which to shelter from the storm which now burst upon us.
For an hour or more the elements raged with a fury only to be equalled
in the tropics. Lightning flashed and thunder rolled, whilst rain fell
with the force of a deluge. Then, suddenly, the storm passed, and the
sun shone with renewed splendour, decking the dripping foliage with
myriads of raindrop gems.

We had depended for food since leaving the blacks' camp upon a supply
of dried fish and prepared bulrush root, which Moira had brought with
her in her dilly-bag, but we were now compelled to seek fresh means for
our support. Moira collected a quantity of shellfish, for the cooking
of which I made a fire of some dried wood. Moira showed the greatest
astonishment and some alarm at my flint and steel, which I now used for
the first time in her presence. Nothing would persuade her to touch it.
She regarded it as something beyond her comprehension, as a fetish to
be worshipped. When we had finished our meal we fell asleep, worn out
by the fatigues of the long journey.

And now began for me a life of dull monotony, with days devoted to
watching the ocean, and sleepless nights of anxiety and despair. I had
built a beacon upon the highest part of the cliff above our cave, to be
fired in case of sighting a ship, and every morning, with the dawn, I
mounted to this look-out to scan the horizon. Here I remained all day,
and when darkness drove me to the shelter of the cave I tried to
persuade myself that each night in this lonesome place would be my
last.

Had it not been for Moira I must have perished from want and neglect,
for I could not bring myself to do anything for my personal comfort
lest it might seem I had abandoned hope of rescue. But Moira was never
idle. She worked for both, and displayed such ingenuity in converting
to our use what Nature provided that we lacked nothing for our support.
To begin with, she made an oven of baked clay, in which to cook our
food. Next she plaited fishing lines from grass-tree fibre, and
fashioned hooks from the bones of slaughtered birds and animals, to
catch the fish which abounded near the rocks. With the aid of my
Sailor's knife she made a bow and arrows to shoot the hopping animals,
the flesh of which when roasted resembled venison, while their
fur-coated skins made us warm sleeping mats. She even succeeded, after
much labour, in constructing a canoe, in which to paddle along the
coast, and sometimes, when it was calm, for some distance out to sea;
nor did she appear to regret the loneliness of our lives. But I could
not bring myself to take part in her work. Hour after hour, in moody
silence, I paced the cliff beside the beacon, scanning the ocean, and
speculating upon my chances of rescue.

If I had not been so absorbed in my selfish thoughts I might possibly
have prevented a catastrophe which afterward caused me much
self-reproach. Moira had more than once told me that food had
mysteriously disappeared from a cave in which she kept a store of
meat for our use, and she showed me where the rocks in front of this
cave had been scraped of seaweed and mussel-shells as though by the
passage of some cumbersome body. But I gave no heed to her anxieties,
and although she urged me to shift our camp I would not leave the
beacon lest a ship might pass during my absence.

Of the dreadful consequences which followed my selfishness it now only
remains for me to tell.



CHAPTER IV

THE SEA SPIDER


I was occupied one midday, as usual, scanning the horizon from the top
of the cliff near the beacon in search of a passing vessel, when I
noticed Moira urging her canoe toward the shore at a rapid pace. In the
wake of the canoe a disturbance of the water betokened the presence of
some denizen of the deep, and Moira's action in making for the rocks at
top speed betrayed her terror of whatever it was that followed her.
Hastily descending the cliff I ran to her assistance, when I saw Moira
spring on to a flat rock upon which she generally landed from her
canoe. At the same moment a snaky tentacle rose out of the sea and
caught her, while other tentacles quickly enveloped her. The monster
now dragged its shiny bulk upon the rock, and except in a nightmare
surely no man had beheld such a creature before. It resembled a
monstrous spider, but out of all proportion to anything in Nature. Its
eyes, like white saucers with jet black centres, stared from its flat
head, and the tentacles with which it seized its prey were provided
with suckers to hold what they fastened upon.

Even in her extremity Moira thought more of my safety than her own. "Go
back!" she cried. "You cannot help me. The sea devil has the strength
of ten men."

Not heeding her warning I continued to advance to her assistance but as
I approached the sea-spider drew back into its native element, and
presently sank with its prey beneath the waves.

In my first feeling of dismay for what had happened, I could not
believe that Moira had been taken from me, and as I remembered my
ingratitude to her and thought of how surly I had become, absorbed in
my own trouble, I threw myself down upon the rocks in an agony of
remorse. Alas, poor Moira! Faithful friend! True heart, and loyal to
death! A thousand times I reproached myself with my neglect of her,
but my regrets were unavailing, and my repentance came too late.

It now became necessary if I would live to provide myself with food,
and in this enforced occupation I obtained some relief from the
dejection which had formerly obsessed me. I found no difficulty in
procuring fish, and I quickly became expert with Moira's bow and
arrows. Salt, also, I gathered from the rocks, and some roots which
Moira had shown me served as vegetables. Of water I had an abundance
from a fresh-water lagoon near by. So that I lacked nothing for my
support. But although my body was nourished, my mind became so
oppressed by solitude that, at times, I even thought of returning to
the blacks and conforming to their ways, and had it not been that I
knew them to be cannibals I might have spent the remainder of my life
among them, so intense had become my longing to meet with others of my
kind.

Another cause for anxiety now made me consider whether I had not better
move my habitation to some cave along the coast. Within a week from the
carrying off of Moira by the sea-spider, I began to miss supplies of
fish and flesh which I kept in the storehouse cave. Strange sounds,
also, as of some heavy body dragging itself over the rocks kept me
awake at night, and filled me with alarm. Could it be that the monster
was once more paying its visits to the cave? The sounds continued
during the night, but with the break of dawn they ceased.

One morning, however, when I had resolved upon moving my camp, on
mounting the cliff I sighted a vessel which I recognized as the
"Endraght", coming up the coast from the south. In a frenzy of
excitement I lighted the beacon and taking a silk handkerchief from my
neck I waved it to attract attention. A dread overpowered me that my
signals might not be observed, and had the ship passed without seeing
me I verily believe I would have cast myself from the cliff on which I
stood to certain death upon the rocks below.  But now I saw that the
vessel was heading for the shore, and presently a boat put off for the
beach. Carried away by the thought of my salvation, I waded knee deep
to meet my comrades, and climbing into the boat I soon found myself on
board the "Endraght".

So wild-looking and unkempt had I become that at first my shipmates did
not know me, but when they recognized me I was given a hearty welcome.

"Of a truth, Peter," said Hartog, smiling at my sorry appearance, "I
have small wonder the cannibals did not make a meal off one so skinny."
And, indeed, the hard life I had led on the island had reduced me to a
bag of bones. But when I had washed and trimmed my hair and after I had
clothed myself from my own sea-chest Hartog declared me fit to become,
once more, his secretary.

I sat late that night with my comrades, to whom I recounted my
adventures, and when I reflected upon the dangers I had passed I could
scarcely contain my joy at my rescue from a fate worse than death.



CHAPTER V

THE VOYAGE CONTINUED


Dirk Hartog, convinced that he had discovered the continent known as
Terra Australis, determined now to seek the gold and gems which this
fabled land was said to contain. The "Endraght" was accordingly brought
to anchor near to the mouth of a river on the coast, and preparations
were made to explore the stream in one of the ship's boats for some
distance along its banks. In the course of the afternoon we attempted a
landing, but as the boat neared the shore a number of natives ran down
to the water's edge with spears in their hands, and with loud cries
forbade our progress.  A present of some nails and beads thrown among
them seemed, for the moment, to produce a good effect, but on our
attempt to land being renewed the natives again showed signs of
opposition.  Hartog endeavoured to make them understand that no injury
was intended, but his friendly advances met with no success. A musket
was then fired amongst them, which was replied to by a flight of
spears, but no damage was done on either side. One of the natives then
threw a stone at our boat, which was answered by a discharge of small
shot, which struck him in the legs, causing him to jump like one of the
hopping animals I had seen on the island. When we pointed our muskets
again he and his companions made off into the bush. We then landed,
thinking the contest at an end, but we had scarcely quitted the boat
when the blacks returned, carrying shields for their defence. They
approached us and threw spears, but with no result. Another musket shot
convinced them their shields were no protection against our firearms,
when they again disappeared.

We then walked up to the blacks' camp and examined with much curiosity
the primitive nature of their dwellings. Then, leaving some beads and
pieces of cloth in exchange for some spears, which we took away with
us, we returned to our boat, observing on our way several light canoes,
each made of a single piece of bark, bent and laced up at both ends.
In the evening two boats' crews were sent away fishing, and they caught
in two hauls of the seine nearly three hundredweight of fish. Hartog,
after our first landing, made many friendly overtures to the natives,
who would not, however, hold any communication with us, from which we
came to the conclusion that other navigators had been here before us,
not so well disposed.

With regard to the gold and precious stones we expected to find, our
inspection of the blacks' camp convinced us that nothing of the kind
existed, at all events, in this part of the country.  Such ornaments or
utensils as the natives seemed to possess were of the crudest
description, made of wood or clay, or consisting of shells and pebbles
from the seashore. The stories of fabulous wealth, therefore, to be
found in this new land appeared to be myths. It was to seek for
treasure that the "Endraght" had been equipped by a number of merchants
at Amsterdam, of whom my master, De Decker, made one, and we realized
how disappointed they would be if we returned empty-handed. Our crew,
also, began to show signs of discontent, and to murmur at having been
brought so far on a fool's errand. It was only Dirk Hartog's
indomitable personality that prevented a mutiny.

It was this same sordid greed for gain which had caused Christopher
Columbus to be sent home in chains from America because he had failed
to find gold. The acquisition of new countries did not interest those
who equipped the navigators of this time. For this reason, no attempt
was made by Hartog to take possession of any of the countries we
visited. It was to find treasure he had been sent out, and should he
return without it he might look for a surly welcome.

Yet Hartog himself, I am convinced, with the spirit of a great
navigator, found satisfaction in having accomplished so long a voyage,
to reach the goal for which he sailed.

"Can I help it, Peter," he said to me one evening when we sat together
in his cabin examining the charts I had drawn under his directions,
"that the natives of this country are poor? Gold, ivory, precious
stones, spices even, seem not to exist in the South as they do in the
East. Did I make this country, that I should be held responsible for
what it contains?"

But, although he spoke thus, I could see he was bitterly disappointed
at finding the land we had come so far to seek little better than a
wilderness, and the people upon it so poor that they went entirely
naked, and devoured each other in order to satisfy their hunger. I
tried to cheer him by reminding him we might yet find chances to enrich
ourselves before returning home, but I could see he was troubled by the
thought that the voyage he had accomplished with so much skill and
daring might prove resultless in the accumulation of wealth.
In order to hearten the crew with fresh adventure, the course of the
"Endraght" was now directed toward the islands of the Pacific. These
islands were reported to abound in pearl shell, and whilst cruising
among them we looked forward to obtaining a supply of pearls which
might compensate the merchants at Amsterdam for the expense of our
voyage, and send us all home rich men.



CHAPTER VI

THE FIGHT ON THE SANDS


I must now tell of all incident I would willingly have left unrecorded,
but as I have undertaken to set down here, in the order of its
sequence, each event which took place upon my voyages with Dirk Hartog
on southern seas, I must not, as a faithful chronicler, omit to record
each happening in its order.

Now it so fell out that our first supercargo, Gilles Miebas Van Luck,
bore me a grudge, although I could recall no act on my part upon which
to attribute it, unless it be that I had gained the favour of the
captain, of which I could see Van Luck was jealous. From the first Van
Luck made no secret of his dislike of me, and more than once he
complained to Hartog that by reason of my youth; I being at the time of
sailing but nineteen years old, it would be more seemly if I took my
meals with the men in the forecastle instead of in the cabin. But
Hartog had overruled his objections. As his secretary he maintained I
was entitled to berth with the officers, and after my rescue from the
inhospitable shores of Terra Australis I continued to occupy my former
place at the captain's table, although I would as lief have messed with
the men sooner than have been the cause of a quarrel.

At length matters came to a climax, when Van Luck ordered me to set
about some menial work which I did not consider compatible with my
position as the captain's secretary, and which, therefore, I declined
to perform. In his rage at my refusal Van Luck came at me with a
belaying pin in his hand, but I had fought many a battle with the
fisher lads upon the sands at Urk, and was well able to take my own
part, so that when Van Luck was almost upon me I nimbly stepped aside,
and with a trick I had been taught by an old smuggler at Urk, I tripped
him as he passed so that he fell into the scuppers, when, with a
muttered oath, he scrambled to his feet, and, plucking a pistol from
his belt, he would have shot me had not Hartog at this moment appeared
on deck, and commanded him to throw down his arms.

"How now," said Hartog, "am I captain of this ship or not? What means
this mutiny? Come both of you to my cabin that I may hear the case and
see justice done."

Without so much as a look at either of us Hartog then descended to his
state room, whither we followed him in shamefaced silence, for when the
captain spoke we knew he must be obeyed.

When Hartog had heard what we had to say, and the argument advanced by
each on his own behalf, he delivered judgment in the following terms:

"You are both of you in the wrong," said he. "Peter should not have
refused to obey an order without referring the matter to me, and you
Van Luck ought not to have taken the law into your own hands when I,
your captain, am the proper judge upon such matters. Still I am willing
to overlook your dereliction of duty (though by every rule of the sea
you are both deserving of death at the yard arm) provided that at the
first suitable place, and time, you fight out your quarrel as man to
man, and pass me your words that, whatever the result, the survivor, or
victor, shall bear the other no ill will."

This was a favourite method of Hartog's for settling disputes that were
occasionally bound to arise among his crew upon so long a voyage. Order
upon the ship, he maintained, must, for the common safety, be rigidly
observed, but if bad blood arose between men of high spirit and hot
temper, the malcontents were landed at some convenient place where, in
the presence of the ship's company to see fair play, they fought the
matter out, afterwards returning on board with their ardour cooled, and
their anger properly chastened. This plan, on the whole, was found to
work well. Sometimes one and sometimes both of the combatants were
killed, but, as a rule, the matter was settled without the sacrifice of
life, and the parties returned from their blood-letting the better
friends.

After hearing Hartog's decision we both bowed and retired, and, in the
terms of our promise, resumed the ordinary routine of our duties as
though nothing out of the common had occurred. But the news of the
coming fight spread among the crew and became the subject of gossip
throughout the ship.

I was now near twenty-one and Van Luck was three years my senior, we
being all young men on board the "Endraght"; but I had led a hardy
life, and my spell ashore had taken off superfluous flesh, and left me
active and alert, with muscles like steel, an advantage not given to my
older antagonist, who had, perforce, lived a monotonous existence for
months past on shipboard. So I looked forward to the coming trial of
strength and endurance with some degree of confidence, notwithstanding
that Van Luck and his supporters promised me I would lose both my ears
as forfeit, if not my life, in the encounter.

The discussion over the right at length became so keen that Hartog,
fearing it might lead to further disputes, determined to get it over as
soon as possible, and for this purpose he altered the ship's course to
an island he sighted on the horizon which we made during the same
afternoon, when we came to anchor in a natural harbour formed by a
coral reef and opposite to a hard sandy beach well suited to the matter
in hand.

At daybreak the following morning we landed two boats' crews on the
beach, only the watch being left on board, who would nevertheless be
able to see the fight from over the ship's bulwarks. It was a fine
summer's morning, with little wind and no sea. The waves broke in crisp
diamond sparkles upon the sand, and the feathery palms and coconut
trees, with which the island abounded, imparted to the place a
fairy-like aspect such as the hand of man could never design. The
island appeared to be uninhabited and it seemed likely we would have
the arena to ourselves, although our men were armed in order to repel
attack.

When Hartog had taken up a position upon a spot he had selected
as suitable for the contest, he explained the conditions under which the
dispute was to be settled. The fight won to be to the death, or until
either party confessed himself vanquished or was unable to continue,
and in no case was malice to be shown after the event, whatever might
be the result. Having then proclaimed strict silence he ordered us to
make ready and begin. Both my opponent and I were now stripped to the
waist, our singlets being used as bandages for the right arm to protect
it from a chance wound from the dagger knives with which we were armed,
we being allowed no other weapon. My adversary was stouter than I, but
we were both of a height, and what I lacked in strength I made up for
in agility.

And know we began to circle each other, waiting an opportunity to
strike, which presently came to my opponent, who aimed a blow at me
which I caught when his blade was within an inch of my heart.  Putting
forth my strength I strove to force his hand so that with his own blade
he might kill or wound himself, but after a desperate struggle he broke
away. Not a word was spoken by the onlookers, and no sound was heard
save only the tread of our feet as we circled and waited for a chance
to strike again.

It now occurred to me that since my adversary had proved himself the
stronger when I had tried to force his hand, my better plan would be to
tire him if possible before taking the offensive again, and to this end
I led him on, always nimbly avoiding the strokes he aimed at me instead
of spending my strength by attempting to oppose them, and this method
proved so successful that I presently had the satisfaction of observing
in my opponent evident signs of exhaustion. Realizing his impotence,
and now beside himself with anger, Van Luck suddenly rushed upon me,
when, using a trick I had learnt, I tripped him so that he fell,
dropping his knife, which, before he could recover it, I secured.  By
all the rules of the game he was now at my mercy, and I called upon him
to surrender, but, with a scowl, he refused to give in.  The advantage
I had gained now entitled me to stab him to death where he stood, or to
cut off his ears if I had the mind to do it, but I could not bring
myself to kill, or maim, an unarmed man. I therefore threw down both
knives at Hartog's feet, and returned once more to the fight with bare
hands. My superior agility now began to tell in my favour, and I found
I was the better boxer and wrestler of the two, so that I rained blows
upon my opponent, some of which drew blood. He then tried to clinch
with me, but I had waited for this, and when he seized me in his
powerful grip I held myself as I had been taught to do by my friend the
smuggler, so that when he tried to throw me, he himself, by his own
weight and a dexterous twist I gave him, was hurled over my head some
distance along the sand, where he fell upon the broad of his back the
breath being knocked clean out of his body. For some time he lay to all
appearance dead, and it being evident he would not be able to continue
the fight, Hartog awarded me the victory, and, later, when Van Luck
regained consciousness, he ordered him to shake hands with me, which he
did with an ill grace, though of a surety I bore him no malice.

"Peter," said Hartog to me when we were alone together in his cabin
after the fight, "henceforth I look upon you as my comrade as well as
my secretary; but do not, on that account, believe I shall be less
strict to enforce discipline upon you equally with all under my
command. At the great distance we are from home it behoves some one to
be in authority, if we are ever to see the Netherlands again. Promise
me then to set a curb upon your temper, and when Van Luck is able to
resume his duties after the drubbing you have given him, let there be
no bad blood between you."

I gave my promise willingly, and I can honestly say that, on, my part,
I bore no grudge against Van Luck, nor against any man of the ship's
company, though I could see that Van Luck would never forgive me for
having bested him, nor could I disguise from myself the fact that there
were some among the crew who sided with him.



CHAPTER VII

THE SPIRIT OF DISCORD


The days which followed my fight with Van Luck were full of anxiety for
those who were responsible for the safety of the ship. It was evident
that a spirit of discord had begun to show itself among the crew, which
threatened a mutiny. Janstins, the pilot, whom we knew to be
trustworthy, did not attempt to hide the peril that was brewing in the
forecastle.

"Those lubbers for'ard," he said when Hartog, he, and I sat together
one evening in the cabin, "will make trouble if they can. They are a
pig-headed lot, and a dozen apiece at the gratings would do them no
harm. But while they outnumber us, as they do, three to one, we must
avoid a quarrel. Besides, if we got the upper hand, and drove the scum
into the sea, we'd be undermanned for the voyage, and unable to weather
the first storm that came upon us."

"What is it they want?" asked Hartog impatiently. "Am I a wizard to
conjure gold and jewels out of the wilderness? They knew the chances
they took when they set sail, and will have their wages paid in full,
whereas I shall receive nothing but abuse, so that in this they are in
better case than I, their captain."

"Granted you are right," answered Janstins, "yet these dunderheads will
not view the matter with such common sense. They believe that gold and
jewels are to be found, but we have not the wit to find them."

"Who has told them this?" demanded Hartog with a frown. "They must have
a leader amongst them whom we wot not of. If I find him I'll send him
adrift upon the sea to look for the treasure he speaks of with none to
hinder him."

It was the first time I had seen Hartog so deeply angered, aroused as
he was by the rumoured treachery that was being hatched against his
command, and when he spoke of the punishment most dreaded by seamen, of
being cast adrift in an open boat with three days' provisions, I knew
full well he would not hesitate to inflict this penalty upon whomsoever
might be found attempting to undermine his authority.

At these consultations held by the officers in the cabin, I noticed Van
Luck was never present. He made an excuse for his absence that, as
first officer, his place was on deck when the captain was below.
Although this could not be disputed, yet I bethought me he might have
found an opportunity to add his voice to our councils had he the
inclination to do it. But as yet I had no proof of treachery against
Van Luck, and although I suspected him, I was loath to voice my
suspicions lest my action might be attributed to malice for his scurvy
treatment of me.

As luck would have it, an incident now occurred which, for the time,
diverted the men's minds from the dangerous brooding in which they had
indulged. A dark line appeared on the horizon, which at first we took
for a breeze, but which, as it swept down upon us, proved to be a
prodigious number of flying fish. These delicate creatures rose out of
the water like silver clouds, and as they passed over our Vessel
numbers fell upon our decks. These fish are excellent eating, and of
those that fell aboard of us we soon had an ample supply. Hartog, as
much to give the crew some novel occupation as from any other motive,
set the men to work salting and drying the fish, so that we secured
three barrels full, as an addition to our ordinary fare, which was very
acceptable. The flying fish were pursued by a shoal of dolphins, which
continued to play round our ship for several days, and some of these we
captured with the line and converted into food.

In the excitement of the sport the sailors soon forgot their mutinous
conduct, and resumed something of their former cheerfulness. Like
children, seamen are easily led and readily influenced.

"I thank Providence," declared Hartog, "for the draught of fishes sent
to us at so opportune a time; but for their coming I doubt we would
have been at each other's throats ere this."

And indeed there is more in chance and circumstance than most believe.

I observed that Van Luck took no part in the fishing. The sport in
which the seamen were engaged appeared to afford him more irritation
than amusement.

I often wondered that Hartog did not note the surly demeanour of his
chief officer. But he did not appear to do so, and it was no part of my
duty to make mischief between the captain and his first mate.

When the fishing and salting were over, a breeze sprang up which
freshened to half a gale--before which we scudded under furled mizzen
and foresails. The men had now plenty to do, and there was no time for
brooding or lamenting over lost hopes. It is mostly during a calm, when
the ship rides motionless upon a painted sea, that mutinous and
rebellious thoughts arise among seamen. When the vessel is ploughing
her way through storm and stress, each man seems a part of the ship and
to have an interest in her voyage. It is then, too, that the word of
command carries weight and meaning, and the knowledge of common
dependence upon the captain makes for obedience and discipline, so that
while the gale lasted we had no fear of mutiny.

At the end of a week, during which time we covered many leagues of sea,
the weather moderated, when we found ourselves once more among the
islands of the South Seas, and the thoughts of being again on shore,
and the adventures that might be in store for us, put to flight less
wholesome and healthy thoughts.

By the time we came in sight of the islands Janstins had recovered his
spirits, and Hartog his good humour. Janstins, who was of a sanguine
disposition, began to speculate upon our chances of finding treasure,
and Hartog predicted that fortune stood upon the shores of one of these
pleasant islands to welcome us, and send us home rich men.

"It is not in nature, Peter," he said to me, "that precious stones and
metals exist only in the Old World. They are as much the elements of
the earth as rocks and water. It only needs a patient search to
discover a mine of wealth, as yet untouched by civilized man."

I did not like to discourage him, but, young as I was, I knew how
fickle a jade is fortune, giving to one with both hands, and from
another withholding that which he most deserves.

Besides, who could tell, among these countless islands or the Pacific,
upon, which one Nature had lavished her wealth?

As we approached the land I noticed that Van Luck appeared to have lost
the influence he had acquired over the crew, many of whom seemed now as
anxious to avoid him as before they had been inclined to follow him. He
was, therefore, left much to his own devices, which, from his surly
manner, did not seem to be pleasant company.

"I am resolved, Peter," said Hartog to me, "not to return home without
sufficient treasure, at all events, to pay for the expenses of this
voyage. So make up your mind to grow old among savages unless luck
brings us a ransom from this banishment. My reputation, nay more, my
honour, is pledged not to go back empty-handed, and I'd face greater
perils than any we have encountered sooner than tell those
money-grubbers at Amsterdam their principal would not be returned to
them with interest."

I could understand the captain's dilemma, but I sighed when I thought
of the time that might elapse before I would again see my betrothed.



CHAPTER VIII

PEARL ISLAND


For some weeks after sighting the South Sea Islands we continued to
cruise among them, visiting many places, some of which were unknown to
former navigators.

The weather at this time was calm and fine, but one day when in the
open sea a tempest drove us among a number of islands, most of which
appeared to be little better than barren rocks. As we approached,
however, we observed one of large size, mountainous, well wooded, and
fertile, and here we hoped to find the fresh water and vegetable food
of which we stood in need. On rounding a coral reef which made a
natural breakwater, we anchored in a quiet bay opposite a beach, and a
party of us made ready to go ashore.

The waters of this bay were blue as the sky above, and we could see in
the depths below a marine garden of seaweed and coral, and what
interested us more, a great quantity of pearl shell. As we rowed
towards the shore the beach became thronged with natives who appeared
by their gestures to be full of wonder at the sight of our vessel. The
people here were of a light coffee colour, with wavy hair. The men, of
large stature, well formed, and dressed with a degree of taste far in
advance of any of the savages we had hitherto met with. Elaborate
devices were tattooed upon the exposed parts of their bodies; a
petticoat of finely-plaited cloth reached from waist to knee; beautiful
necklets made from red and white coral hung round their necks; while
their hair was frizzled like a mop upon their heads, powdered red or
yellow.  The women were similarly attired, save that their petticoats
were longer and their hair hung straight, while the children went
entirely naked except for garlands of bright flowers. No weapons were
carried by these islanders, and upon landing we found them friendly,
and inclined to offer us hospitality.

The houses in the town to which they welcomed us are of a beehive
shape; the sides open during the day, but closed at nights by blinds
made from the leaves of the coconut tree. The floor is formed of
powdered white coral, and is very clean. The town was built in a
semi-circle facing the beach. In the centre was the king's house, a
building of the same construction as the others, but of larger size.
Beautifully-made mats and wooden bowls formed the only furniture in
these dwellings, some of the mats being trimmed with red feathers,
while others resembled shaggy white wool rugs, which, on closer
inspection, proved to be made from the bark of a dwarf hibiscus, with
which the islands abound, bearing a bright red flower. The food of the
islanders consists of fish, coconuts, taro, yams, and breadfruit, of
which there is a plentiful supply.

In return for their hospitality, Hartog distributed among the natives
pieces of bright-coloured cloth, beads, knives, and other trifles,
which, in the eyes of these simple savages, were so many wonders
hitherto undreamed of.

When we had been some days upon the island Hartog expressed to the king
his desire to obtain the pearl shells of which we could see an
abundance at the bottom of the bay, within easy reach of an expert
diver, and as these islanders were as much at home in the water as upon
land, we soon had a pile of shell upon the beach which some of the crew
set to work to open; but although we opened a great number of shells
very few pearls were found, and none of any special value.

When the king observed what we were in search of he offered Hartog for
his acceptance a number of pearls, some of large size and perfect
colour, which from time to time he had collected.

"'Twill be enough to satisfy the merchants," said Hartog to me when he
had safely locked up this treasure on board the "Endraght", "but
nothing over, unless we can add to the collection by our own
exertions." But although we continued to open shells for several days
no great haul of pearls was made.  The pearl shell we shipped, knowing
that it would fetch a good price at Amsterdam.

Hartog was so relieved at having secured something that would repay the
expenses of the voyage that he recovered his natural buoyancy of
spirits which had lately been oppressed by the prospect of returning
home empty-handed.

"'Tis wonderful, the power of money, Peter," he said to me one evening
when we were counting, in secret, the pearls which the king of the
island had given him; "we have come through some perils, as you know,
but I give you my word I was never so afraid of anything as of going
back without money's worth to satisfy the men who put their capital
into this voyage. It was that which broke the great heart of Columbus,
and I'd have become a pirate sooner than return empty-handed. The pious
rogues who sent us out, and who never miss their churchgoing, would not
have cared whence the money came so long as it filled their pouches."

Hartog had not confided the secret of the king's present to any but me,
as he feared the crew, disappointed in the treasure hunt which they had
been promised, might try to take forcible possession of it. He was so
absorbed in counting the pearls and in speculating upon their value
that he gave no heed to the possibility of being spied upon. But since
I was to have no share in them, the pearls did not interest me as much
as they did the captain, and I allowed my eyes to wander, when, in a
flash of summer lightning, I saw the face of Van Luck looking down upon
us from the skylight above our heads.

Making an excuse to go on deck, I stole cautiously up the
companion-stairs, expecting to catch Van Luck red-handed in the act of
playing the spy upon us, but when I reached the skylight I could see no
sign of him. From where I stood, however, I was able to observe the
captain counting the pearls, and I determined to warn him to have a cover
made for the skylight, or a blind inside that might be drawn to ensure
privacy. But I did not think it would be wise to say anything about my
suspicion. It would be hard to prove, and might be set down to malice,
though honestly I bore Van Luck no ill will.



CHAPTER IX

MUTINY


A month after leaving Pearl Island, when it became known to the crew of
the "Endraght" that a course had been set for home without having
obtained the treasure which had been the object of the voyage, the
spirit of discontent in the forecastle which had previously shown
itself, became so marked as to threaten a mutiny. Had it not been that
we held all the arms and ammunition aft, there would have been little
doubt of the seamen refusing duty. As it was, they went about their
work in so surly a manner, that if Hartog had not kept a check upon his
temper, a serious outbreak on more than one occasion would have
occurred.

"I cannot think what evil influence is at work among the men," said
Hartog to me one evening, when we sat together alone in the cabin, for
Van Luck, except at meals, seldom joined us. "As sailors, they ought to
know that treasure hunts often prove disappointing, and they will each
receive a good round sum in back pay when the crew is disbanded after
the voyage. What, then, would they gain by mutiny? Without a navigator
they would either lose the ship, or, if they succeeded in making a
port, they would become food for the gallows. Knowing sailors as I do,
I cannot understand, in present circumstances, what it is that fosters
rebellion, unless some influence is at work that we wot not of."

It was then that I thought it my duty to tell the captain of my
suspicions regarding Van Luck, and of how I had seen him looking down
upon us through the skylight at the counting of the pearls.

Hartog was amazed at such treachery on the part of his first officer.
His own nature was so open that he found it hard to credit deception in
others. My disclosures, however, enlightened him on much that was
taking place, and he bade me keep him advised of anything further I
might see or hear. To this end, I made frequent excuses for spending my
time in the forecastle among the men, pretending I found the
companionship in the cabin irksome. I had not been long among them
before I discovered a plot that was hatching to take the ship. Hartog
and I, together with those who would not join in the mutiny, were to be
set adrift with three days' provisions in one of the boats, when Van
Luck would navigate the "Endraght" to the nearest port, promising to
divide the pearls, the value of which he had greatly exaggerated,
equally among all hands, share and share alike.

To be forewarned is to be forearmed, and I had no sooner divulged the
plan of the mutineers to the captain than Hartog began to consider how
we might meet the situation. Janstins, the pilot, the ship's carpenter,
and three of the crew we knew we could depend upon, and they were
instructed where to find arms and ammunition, and told to rally to us
aft at the first signs of mutiny. Having completed these arrangements,
Hartog's next step was to bring matters to a climax, for he argued
rightly there was nothing to be gained, and much might be lost, by
delay.

Stepping boldly upon his quarterdeck, he now issued his orders in his
old peremptory style, and, upon one of the crew not moving smartly, he
threatened him with a dozen at the ship's gratings. The man turned
insolently, and demanded to know to whom Hartog was speaking, while, at
the same moment Van Luck, who was standing near, remonstrated with the
captain on the man's behalf. I had never seen Hartog really roused
before. In two quick strides he was beside Van Luck, and picking him up
as easily as if he had been a child, he flung him from the poop on to
the deck below. At the same moment the mutineers made a rush aft, but
those who were loyal to us were before them, and we presented such a
formidable front that the rebels fell back, taking Van Luck with them.
Hartog now turned the brass cannon, which had already been loaded upon
the mutineers where they crowded together in the fore part of the
vessel, swearing he would fire upon them if they did not instantly
surrender. A hurried consultation followed, after which Van Luck
stepped forward as spokesman. He complained that the crew had not been
fairly dealt by. They had suffered much hardship, he said, and it was
understood that all treasure obtained on the voyage was to be shared
among them, whereas it appeared that the captain was concealing a
parcel of pearls of sufficient value to make them all rich men. To this
Hartog replied as follows:

"I am captain of this vessel, and I claim the right to do as I please.
The pearls you speak of none of you helped to obtain, and they will be
used to pay the expenses of the voyage, including what may be found to
be due to each man as wages when the when the ship is paid off. As for
you, Van Luck, who have acted the spy and played traitor, you may
expect nothing from me but the fate you intended for those who have
stood by me. The others may now return to duty."

It was then seen that Van Luck had no followers, for rebels are ever
prone to abandon their leader when their cause is lost.

I would have pleaded with Hartog, even then, to spare Van Luck from
being cast adrift upon the sea, but I knew no word of mine would change
his purpose. Besides, an example must be made, and in the rough life we
led the administration of justice was the prerogative of the captain
alone. A boat was therefore prepared, three days' provisions were
placed on board of her, and Van Luck was sent upon what promised to be
his last voyage.

For as long as the boat remained in sight we could see that the
castaway made no effort, either with the sail or the oars, to shape a
course in any direction. He appeared to have abandoned hope, and to
have made up his mind to let the wind and the waves carry him
whithersoever they would. At length the boat appeared but a speck upon
the ocean, and finally it vanished beyond the horizon.

For some time after the quelling of the mutiny Hartog maintained strict
discipline among officers and crew, issuing his orders in the
peremptory manner of one accustomed to command, and seldom speaking to
any except upon matters connected with the ship. But when order was
restored his mood changed, and we resumed our friendly chats together
in the cabin. He never referred to Van Luck, whom he seemed to have
wiped from the slate of his recollection, nor did he again allude to
the mutiny. Once, when I touched upon it, he had cut me short, and I
could see from his manner that all reference to it must henceforth be
taboo. But I could not help sometimes recalling the picture of the boat
with the solitary man on board of her, drifting upon the grey waste of
sea, and I often wondered if Dirk Hartog had been able to obliterate
that picture from his mind.

We now once more sailed in familiar waters, and passed many vessels as
we neared home, where we arrived, without mishap, towards the end of
the year 1620, after an absence of nearly five years, which was not
regarded at that time as a voyage of unusual duration.



CHAPTER X

I EMBARK ON A SECOND VOYAGE


On my arrival at Amsterdam I obtained leave from my master, De Decker,
to visit my parents, and was received by them at my home at Urk with a
great show of affection, which, however, I found to be somewhat
lessened when it was known I had come back with empty pockets. My
father urged me to give up the sea, and to stick more closely to the
business of a merchant at Amsterdam, for which my education had fitted
me, and my mother extorted from me a half-willing promise that I would
follow my father's advice. I also met Anna Holstein, to whom I related
my adventures; nor did I conceal from her that my worldly condition was
not yet sufficiently improved to warrant my making formal proposals for
her hand in marriage.

My mother pronounced my appearance much improved, when she heard of my
attachment to Anna she declared me to be a fit mate for any lady in the
land.

"Of a truth, Peter," she said, "thou art become a proper man, like thy
father was before thee, and in my day a young man of spirit chose his
wife where he would. My own parents made objections to my being married
to your father without some payment to them in goods or money, to
compensate for the expense of my upbringing. But Abel Van Bu, thy
father, came to our house one June morning and bade me make ready to
marry him that very day, a clerk in holy orders being come to Urk to
mate together those islanders who were willing to be wed according to
the rites of the Church, and Abel's manner was so masterful that
neither I nor my parents dared say him nay. This is how I came to marry
your father, my son, and were I a man such as thou, art, I would take
the girl of my choosing, in the same manner as thy father did."

But although I laughingly agreed with my mother, I knew that such a way
of proceeding would not answer with Anna Holstein. Anna was rich. It
would have shamed me to go to her, a penniless husband. Still, love is
blind, and that Anna and I loved each other was not to be denied; so,
one evening, by the Zuider Zee, we once more plighted our troth.

It was then that Anna confided to me a trouble of which she had kept
the knowledge secret, fearing it might vex me, to the neglect of my
work at Amsterdam. I had become so absorbed in my love for her, that I
had given no thought to the question of others paying their court. Yet
that such should be the case was but natural. Anna was young,
beautiful, and wealthy, the only child of a proud noble, so that when
Count Hendrick Luitken proposed for her, Anna's father regarded his
suit with approval, and recommended him to his daughter's good graces.
But Anna, whose heart was wholly mine, had evaded the Count's
attentions, although she dared not openly reject him, lest the
clandestine love we bore each other might become known by reason of too
close questioning, so she had been compelled to play the part of a
wilful maid who did not know her own mind, and could not be made to see
how advantageous the alliance proposed for her would be.

"I could never marry anyone but you, Peter," she whispered to me, as we
sat together on the terrace of the palace by the Zuider Zee, after she
had confided to me her anxieties, "but I find it hard to keep up the
deception that I am heart-whole and fancy-free, and yet indifferent to
Count Hendrick's attentions. Indeed, my father openly upbraids me with
being fickle, inconstant, unmaidenly, and I know not what besides,
until I am driven to my wit's end to keep the peace between us. Yet I
doubt not, if he knew the truth, he would marry me willy-nilly to Count
Hendrick Luitken by force."

"Then it would be to a corpse he would marry you," I cried, "for sooner
than see you wedded to Count Luitken I would strangle him with my bare
hands if he refused to meet me as an equal in fair fight."

"Dear Peter," whispered Anna, as she nestled closer to me, "if I cannot
marry you I'll marry none other, and the Church does not now sanction
marriage vows given unwillingly. If they drive me to it I can at least
seek the cloister or the grave."

"Do not speak so, dear Anna," I entreated. "We are both young, and by
patience and industry I may yet win a place in the world."

But although I spoke hopefully I could see but little prospect of my
advancement at Amsterdam. My master, De Decker, the merchant, in whose
house I was employed, told me plainly that I need expect nothing more
than a clerkship so long as I remained in his service. His son, then a
boy at school, would inherit his business, and it might be many years
before I could hope to buy a partnership in it. De Decker's business at
this time, moreover, was not in a very flourishing condition. It
seemed, therefore, not improbable that I would lose my clerkship unless
it improved.

In these circumstances I was approached by Dirk Hartog some twelve
months after the return of the "Endraght", who offered to take me as
first officer on the "Arms of Amsterdam", a new vessel upon which he
was about to make a second voyage of discovery to the South.

"It is not because we met no luck with the 'Endraght' that there is
nothing to be gained, Peter," he said. "There is an island I have heard
of which, if we can strike it, will make us rich men.  Nothing venture,
nothing win, and there is little prospect here for a man like you to
make money by quill-driving."

His words impressed me, as well they might, for the love of adventure
was strong within me, and I reflected that in my present calling of a
merchant's clerk I could not hope to obtain an independence for many
years--perhaps not at all. De Decker, also, appeared anxious that I
should go. The sale of the pearls which the king of Pearl Island had
given Hartog had more than repaid the merchants for sending out the
"Endraght", and with the "Arms of Amsterdam" they hoped to accumulate
further treasure. I was influenced also by Hartog's description of the
Island of Gems, and the more I thought of the offer he had made me the
more I liked it. Finally, I agreed to sign on for this second voyage,
and, taking leave of Anna and my parents, I embarked upon the "Arms of
Amsterdam", and set sail once more for southern seas.



CHAPTER XI

A SECOND VOYAGE WITH HARTOG TO THE SOUTH


For three months after leaving the North Sea we sailed south, meeting
with no land until we sighted a group of islands which Hartog believed
to be the group that the Spaniard Cortes attempted to explore in 1519,
when one of his ships was burned by the hostile natives, while he and
his crew escaped with difficulty in the other vessel. These islands are
mountainous, well wooded, and apparently fertile. In most places that
we saw the trees were very thick, with spreading branches, in which we
perceived houses to be built, which looked like the nests of some large
bird. We approached the land with caution, for we knew from experience
that the tides in the vicinity of the South Sea Islands are very
irregular, and seem to be much affected by the prevailing winds and
currents. There is only one tide in the twenty-four hours. The
flood-tide sets to the north, and the ebb to the south. It therefore
behoved us to choose a safe anchorage, which, after consultation, we
finally decided upon, selecting a spot sheltered from the prevailing
wind, in deep water, close to a beach and opposite to a stream.

Two boats were then lowered and manned, Hartog taking charge of one and
I of the other. The natives, who had assembled in great numbers on the
beach, did not appear so surprised at the sight of our vessel as might
have been expected. As the boats drew near, some of them waded out to
meet us, showing no fear, but rather an anxiety to welcome us. They
were all entirely naked except for a strip of tapa cloth, which formed
a tee-band around the middle and hung down behind like a tail. This was
probably the reason for the reports given by the earlier navigators of
the existence of tailed men in these regions.

Some of the natives wore feathers in their hair, and all had fish bones
thrust through the cartilage of the nose, which gave them a ferocious
aspect. Even young boys wore sticks in the same fashion. The women were
attired in petticoats of white tapa cloth, which hung down in strips
from a girdle round their waists.

Before trusting ourselves among these savages we gave them, as peace
offerings, coloured beads and bright pieces of cloth. Our presents were
well received, but immediately on becoming possessed of them the
natives laid them at the feet of a young man who stood apart from the
crowd, surrounded by several tall and fierce-looking savages. From this
we concluded the young man to be the king of the country, though we
wondered he should be so young, as the leadership amongst savages
generally goes to the strongest.

We then showed the natives our water-casks, and, pointing to a stream
close by, made them understand we desired to fill them, to which they
offered no objection, so that we at once began to water the ship. When
we had finished our task we were invited by signs to go to the king,
and, being well armed against treachery, we boldly marched up in a body
to the king's house, which we found to be an immense building, nearly
300 feet long and 30 feet wide. It had a high peaked portico, supported
by posts 80 feet high, from which a thatched roof narrowed and tapered
away to the end, where it reached the level of the ground. The house
resembled nothing so much as an enormous telescope, and here the king
lived with his numerous wives and families, together with all his
relatives and immediate retainers.

From the knowledge I had picked up on my travels, particularly during
the time I was captive among the black cannibals of New Holland, I had
acquired the art of understanding, either by words or signs, what
savage people wished, by their language, to convey, which to most would
have been unintelligible, and from what I could gather it appeared that
the young king, who had but lately inherited his kingdom from his
father, whose tomb, perched on the top of a tree, was pointed out to
us, was threatened with war by a neighbouring chief, the former king's
hereditary enemy, and that if we would help him vanquish his opponent
he was willing to hand over to us the property of other white men which
had been left upon the island in years gone by.

When I had imparted this proposition, so far as I was able to
understand it, to Hartog, he expressed a wish to see the white men's
treasure, and on my repeating this request to the king's councillors,
we were invited to accompany them to a part of the island where we were
shown what were undoubtedly the remains of Cortes' vessel, the one that
was burnt and abandoned to the savages. There did not at first sight
appear to be anything of value among the ancient relics, but I noticed
some iron boxes, which had rusted at the locks, so that it became
difficult to open them. With the aid of a crowbar, however, which I
sent for from the ship, we were able to prise the lid off one of them,
when it was found to be filled with Spanish money, much gold coin being
amongst it. There were twelve iron boxes, and we reckoned that each box
contained money to the value of two thousand English pounds. At the
sight of this treasure Hartog readily consented to assist the king of
the islands against his enemies by every means in his power, and an
agreement was come to accordingly. Hartog then ordered the specie to be
taken on board, when we attended a council of the chiefs to ascertain
the part it was proposed for us to play in the war, I acting as
interpreter.

It then appeared that a number of canoes were expected shortly to
arrive from the adjacent islands. They would be met by the young king's
fleet, when a naval battle would take place; but the issue was
doubtful, since the hostile chief possessed many more canoes than the
young king did. It was to neutralize this disadvantage that our
services were required.

Now the "Arms of Amsterdam" was a more powerful vessel than the
"Endraght", mounting four guns, so we had little doubt but that we
would be able to render valuable assistance to the young king in the
defence of his country, and having pledged ourselves to support him we
returned to our ship, well pleased with our adventure.

Next day the beating of war drums and much commotion ashore announced
the approach of the enemy fleet, and having loaded our cannon we stood
out to meet them. Twenty war canoes belonging to the king, each
containing 100 men armed with spears and clubs, put off to take part in
the battle. They were far outnumbered, however, by the hostile fleet,
which now approached. At the sight of our ship the oncoming war canoes
appeared to hesitate, and for some minutes ceased rowing, but presently
they advanced again in the form of a crescent, evidently intending by
their superior line of battle to surround us. We were now midway
between the opposing fleets, and when the enemy canoes were well within
range Hartog delivered a broadside, which had the most remarkable
effect ever witnessed in a naval engagement. Not wishing to kill the
natives if it could be avoided, since the quarrel was not ours, Hartog
directed that the first broadside should be fired over the heads of the
advancing savages, but the result was the same as if we had sunk or
crippled the hostile fleet. At the flash and sound of the cannon, with
black smoke rolling across the water towards them, the savages turned
and fled, driving their canoes back to the place whence they had come
at a pace which sent the foam flying from the paddles. But the most
unexpected part of our interference was that the savages on board the
king's canoes appeared to be as terrified as were the enemy, for they
also turned and fled towards the shore. So we had the satisfaction of
seeing the opposing fleets flying from each other without blood being
shed.

Having thus brought matters to a satisfactory conclusion, and fulfilled
our agreement with the young king to drive off the enemy fleet, we
continued our voyage, well satisfied with our first transaction.



CHAPTER XII

THE SEA SERPENT


For some days after leaving Cortes' island the weather continued fine
and the sea calm, but a strong breeze then springing up from the
north-west made it necessary to shorten sail. While so engaged we
sighted a number of whales, which swam to meet us.  Never before had I
seen so strange a spectacle. Their vast numbers, their great bulk, and
their quick evolutions impressed me with wonder.

The whales in these parts are fearless of man. They have not yet
learned to regard him as an enemy. This fearlessness, however, although
remarkable, was not to our liking, for some of the whales came so close
to us that our decks were often deluged by the water which they spouted
upon them.

One day, some little time after this adventure, the weather having
moderated to a calm, a number of ripples appeared upon the sea, which
at first we took to be a breeze, but on drifting among them we found
the phenomenon to be caused by a number of water snakes, varying in
size from a few inches to many feet in length. Some of them appeared to
be asleep, whilst others reared their heads at us, although they made
no attempt to attack us.  Suddenly they disappeared, as though scared
by the approach of a common enemy.

We had now been for some days becalmed, and at length we began to fear
we had drifted into a dead sea, where the wind never rose, and the
currents ran in a circle. The sun by day blistered the decks so that
the tar bubbled in the seams. The nights were more tolerable, but the
air below had become so foul that the cabins were deserted for the
open. A musty smell rose out of the water, and made it hard to breathe
the oppressive atmosphere. We lay about the deck exhausted, like a
company of sick men.

One night the watch came aft to where Hartog and I were trying to
obtain some rest, with the report that a monstrous shape had been
noticed passing under the vessel, and on looking to leeward we could
see that the water was agitated by some large body. Hartog inclined to
the belief that the disturbance was caused by a number of whales, the
one following the other, but the men declared the shape they had seen
was a monster of amazing proportions. Both Hartog and the men were
equally resolved upon their respective theories; but while they were
arguing the matter, and the dawn being now come, all doubts were set
at rest by the appearance of a prodigy so incredible that I scarce
dare set down, in this plain tale, a description of it. Within fifty
yards from the vessel a serpent's head, not unlike those we had seen,
but infinitely larger, rose above the surface of the water, and
presently a great water-snake began to swim slowly round our ship in
decreasing circles. Its length could not have been less than 200 feet,
while its girth, in the middle, was almost that of a fair-sized whale,
tapering towards the head and tail. Lashing the sea around it into
foam, the serpent drew closer until it looked as though it would crush
the ship in its folds. Hartog, the only man amongst us who preserved
his presence of mind, ordered our guns to be loaded and fired at the
monster. This was done, but our broadside had no more effect upon the
leviathan than to cause it to swerve from its circling movement, when
it made off with incredible speed towards the horizon, whence it
returned apparently bent upon destroying us.

We now gave ourselves up for lost, when suddenly out of the sea rose
another huge bulk, resembling the sea-spider which had carried off poor
Moira, but ten times larger, when a combat ensued between the
leviathans which created waves around our vessel, and caused her to
rock and plunge as in a storm. The battle raged for the best part of an
hour, and sometimes when the monsters came near it seemed likely that
the ship would be swamped by the volume of water which they lashed into
the air. Suddenly the combat terminated by both monsters disappearing
into the depths without our being able to ascertain which had proved
the victor.

So that some record of this remarkable combat might be preserved, I set
down upon paper a description of it, intending to deposit it among the
public archives on my return home. I had read that such leviathans
existed, and had been seen by early Phoenician mariners, though I had
always regarded their existence more in the light of fable titan fact.

And now, a breeze springing up, we were once more enabled to continue
our voyage. Some of the crew were anxious to return home in order to
spend their share of the Spanish money found on Cortes' island, but
Hartog would not consent to such a proposal.  He had set his heart upon
finding the Island of Gems, of the existence of which he was firmly
convinced, though our chances of finding it among the numerous islands
of the South Seas appeared remote. The captain, however, would have his
way, and a course was set accordingly. We were soon again among the
islands, where we found the people more intelligent than those upon the
continent of New Holland. Their language, although consisting of many
dialects, possessed some universal key words, of which, by this time, I
had acquired a knowledge which enabled me to make myself understood of
the various tribes of savages we met with, and to understand also their
meaning when they wanted to convey it to us. To this I attributed the
friendly reception which, on the whole, was given to us. Attacks upon
strangers, made by these savages, are not so much from any natural
hostility towards them as from an inability to understand that they
intend no harm--consequently I was generally able to establish friendly
intercourse between us and the tribes we visited. Besides this, our
ship possessed such a powerful armament that, if molested, we had no
fear but that we would be able to protect ourselves.

We made many inquiries from the savages concerning the Island of Gems,
but none seemed to have heard of it.



CHAPTER XIII

THE FLOATING ISLAND


Soon after leaving the islands of the South Seas we encountered heavy
weather, a tempest, the worst we had experienced, driving us before it
to the south. The storm lasted for more than a week without abatement,
and during this time we covered many leagues of sea. Owing to the sun
being obscured, it was impossible to ascertain our whereabouts, but
Hartog reckoned we had passed through the Straits set down on an early
chart as named after Le Maire. But for skilful handling we would have
lost our ship, so prolonged was the gale, and when, at length, the
weather moderated, we found that much damage had been done to our
rigging and deck-gear. This made it necessary for us to effect repairs,
and while so engaged we continued to run before the wind to the south.
As we proceeded, the cold became intense, while the wind gradually
decreased. One morning, at sunrise, a snow-covered land rose before our
astonished eyes. The sun shining upon it produced an effect which, for
beauty, I had never seen, equalled. Immense ranges of mountains rose
from a flat surface, their summits lost in fleecy clouds, while from
one of the mountain tops, incredible as it may appear, belched smoke
and fire as from the crater of an active volcano. It may well be
believed with what astonishment we beheld a burning mountain in the
midst of snow and ice. We coasted for some distance along the shore of
this new continent, which formed an ice barrier rising in a long
perpendicular line from the sea, making a landing impossible.

When the repairs to our ship had been effected, we hauled our wind, and
stood away northward, when we found ourselves surrounded by masses of
floating ice. In no record of any voyage that Hartog or I knew of is
any mention made of this phenomenon, so we concluded we were the first
to see it. The farther we went the more numerous became the icebergs,
and the more difficult the navigation owing to fogs and mists. The
whole surface of the water as far as the eye could reach was covered by
dense masses of ice, and had not the breeze freshened so that we were
able to avoid the ice pack, we might never have made our way to the
open sea. Some of the icebergs were beautifully formed, and the
countless prisms of which they were composed glowed in the sun's rays
with the delicate colour of the rainbow.

Next day the wind had fallen to a calm, and we rode upon a sea of
glass. We had left the pack ice, but before us stretched an island of
such extent that the end of it could not be seen. This island rose to
the height of twenty feet. It was perfectly flat, with steep,
perpendicular sides, which made it inaccessible to man. From the
masthead, however, it was possible to observe its surface, which we saw
to be covered by a vast number of penguins, so we knew a landing must
be available somewhere, for these birds are wingless. This island was
composed entirely of ice, it being, as Hartog reckoned, a glacier which
had broken off from the main continent into the sea. It was drifting
north, and would gradually melt in the warmer atmosphere to which the
current was taking it, but many years must elapse before this would
happen.

That evening we remained in the vicinity of the island. The twilight of
this region in which we now found ourselves continued without fading
into night, and to add to the beauty of the scene an aureola appeared
in the sky. It was a sight, once seen, never to be forgotten. A world
of perpetual day.

With the return of sunlight Hartog determined, if possible, to effect a
landing, and leaving the "Arms of Amsterdam" in charge of Janstins, the
cutter was manned, in which the captain and I set out for the shore.
After pulling for some distance; and when almost out of sight of our
ship, we came to a kind of platform where the ice was broken, making it
possible to climb to the top of the island. We had no sooner set foot
there than we were surrounded by penguins. They came waddling towards
us in the most comical fashion, nor were they in the least afraid of
us.  The presence of man for the first time in these latitudes appeared
to inspire them more with curiosity than alarm.

The attentions shown us by these remarkable birds, however, soon caused
us considerable inconvenience. They crowded upon us in such numbers
that it was difficult to force our way through them, either farther on
to the island or back to the boat. Some of them stood four feet high,
and although they made no attempt to molest us, the bulk of their
bodies (the ones at the back pressing upon those in front) made it
difficult to push by. It was like passing along a densely-crowded
thoroughfare. So numerous became the penguins that Hartog ordered a
return to the boat. We did not like to kill these birds, as they
appeared harmless, and the trust they showed in us was surprising. When
we came to the landing place we found it covered with small fur-coated
seals, who also showed no fear of us, and made no attempt to escape
when we approached them. The skins of these creatures we knew to be
rare and of value, so we were impelled to slaughter some of them for
their fur coats, and also to give us a supply of fresh meat; but their
large brown eyes looked at us so sorrowfully when we attacked them that
we had not the heart to kill more than was necessary for our immediate
needs. It was too much like murder.

The penguins followed us down to the landing-place, until it was full
to overflowing. Some of the birds pushed the others into the water in
their eagerness to witness the killing of the seals, which they
appeared to be discussing with much interest.

A breeze springing up, we returned to the ship, and toward evening,
still steering northward, the floating island was lost to view.

We were now in better spirits than heretofore. We had filled our water
tanks from the ice floes, and supplied ourselves with sufficient fresh
seal meat to last until we came to a warmer climate, to begin again our
search for the Island of Gems. The men we had with us upon this voyage
were a better class than were the crew of the "Endraght", and we had no
fear of mutiny.  There were grumblings occasionally at the length of
the voyage, but these vanished at each fresh adventure. Sailors, as a
rule, are easily led, and if there is no evil influence at work among
them they seldom incline to mutiny when they know that the safety of
all depends upon discipline and obedience to the captain's orders.



CHAPTER XIV

AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE


Most of the islands we visited on our return to the South Seas we found
to be inhabited. But some, although well-wooded, and possessing a
luxuriant vegetation, were unoccupied except by sea-fowl. It was toward
one of these islands we now directed our course in order to fill our
water tanks, when we observed a solitary figure upon the beach whose
hair and beard hung down in a tangled mass upon his chest and
shoulders, while the skins of some small fur-coated animal, roughly
sewn together, made him a covering for his body unlike any we had seen
adopted by savage tribes. His attitude, moreover, as he stood upon the
beach, shading his eyes and gazing intently at us as we rowed towards
the shore, suggested the European rather than, the savage, and upon
coming close up to him we knew him to be some castaway marooned upon
the island. He appeared to have lost the power of speech, although he
made guttural sounds when he saw us, and, what was more remarkable, he
seemed to recognize us.

It then came to me in a flash that this solitary man was none other
than Van Luck, whom we had last seen drifting away from the "Endraght"
upon his lonely voyage after the mutiny, and, in pity at the sight of
his forlorn condition, I held out my hand to him in reconciliation. So
great, however, was his hatred of me, which he had probably nursed,
that, instead of taking my hand, he rushed upon me and tried to
strangle me, in which he might have succeeded had not others of our
party come to my assistance. He seemed demented, and he had acquired
such strength during his exile that it was as much as four men could do
to hold him down. But, notwithstanding his unprovoked attack upon me, I
felt I could not abandon him again to his solitude. I therefore ordered
him to be taken on board our vessel, where Hartog would be the judge of
his ultimate fate.

Hartog's surprise at seeing his old officer in such a deplorable
condition was equal to my own, but the terrible change which years of
solitude had wrought in Van Luck appealed to the humane side of the
captain's nature so forcibly that he determined to give the castaway a
chance of redemption.

After some days, during which Van Luck was cared for, he began to
regain some semblance to his former self. He also, by degrees,
remembered his native tongue, but he spoke in a halting manner like a
child. While we remained at this island we visited the cave in which
Van Luck had lived during the time he had been marooned. It contained
nothing belonging to the boat in which he had been set adrift, from
which we inferred the boat had been lost at the time when he was washed
ashore. He seemed to have subsisted chiefly upon turtles, of which
there were numbers basking upon the beach, and also upon a small
species of squirrel, of the skins of which, roughly sewn together, his
robe was made, but we could find no sign of a fire, so we concluded he
had devoured his food raw. There were streams and springs on the
islands from which to quench his thirst, but his sufferings must have
been very severe during his enforced solitude, nor was it a matter for
wonder that his mind had become deranged.

But although Hartog took pity upon Van Luck to the extent of taking him
off the island, he would not admit him to his old place in the cabin at
the officers' mess, so he lived with the seamen in the forecastle,
where his jealousy wanted to send me on our first voyage. This,
however, did not seem to trouble him.  He seldom spoke, but went about
such work as was given him without complaint. Sometimes he would stand
for hours watching the sea, with his hand shading his eyes, in the same
attitude as we had found him.

I could see that Hartog was troubled by this man's appearance, as
indeed was I also. It seemed a reproach to us to have been the means of
bringing a fellow-creature into such a condition.  Yet we had acted as
necessity demanded and in no spirit of malice or revenge. Still, the
consequences which had sprung from my fight with Van Luck and his
subsequent part in the mutiny were not such as we cared to contemplate.
If judges could see those whom they sentence after they have endured
their punishment they would pause before passing fresh sentences upon
wrongdoers, however guilty.

I could see that Van Luck attributed to me all his misfortunes, for he
watched me closely, but when I spoke to him he shifted his gaze
uneasily, as though afraid to look me in the face. I can honestly say I
felt nothing but pity for him, and I made allowance for his animosity
toward me when I remembered his cruel punishment.

"Of a truth, Peter," said Hartog to me one evening when we sat together
in the cabin, "I had better have shot Van Luck than let him live to
become what he is. Never again will I send a man adrift upon such a
voyage, though by all the rules of the sea the mutinous dog deserved
what he got for his treachery. It was not his fault that you and I were
not marooned instead of him."

I did not answer, but had I then known the malice in Van, Luck toward
me, of which I shall hereafter tell, the compassion which I felt for
him would have been lessened.



CHAPTER XV

THE SEAWEED SEA


Of all the adventures through which we had passed, perhaps there was
none so dangerous as that which now befell us. We had shaped our course
to the east, on the look-out for a new group of islands, among which
Hartog expected to find the Island of Gems, when, one morning, we
observed the horizon to have assumed a black look as though a storm was
brewing, but on nearing this phenomenon, we found it to consist of an
immense growth of seaweed floating upon the ocean, and extending as far
as the eye could reach.

The course we were steering would have carried us into the midst of the
weed, so we hauled our wind, and coasted along it to the south, hoping
either to find an opening through which we might pass, or to come to
the end of the floating mass, but the farther we proceeded the thicker
the weed became, while other masses now appeared to larboard, so that
we feared we might be enmeshed in such a manner that we would find it
impossible to extricate ourselves. I had read of a sea covered by a
weed which held ships entangled as in a net, and I feared that this was
the danger into which fate had now led us. Portions of the kelp
detached from the main mass, which floated alongside the ship, proved
it to be a growth of extraordinary strength, the weed extending twenty
feet and more below the surface of the water, and being so tough that
two of our men between them were unable to break a specimen we drew on
board, so that if we should become entangled in the kelp, we knew that
death by slow starvation, when our provisions were exhausted, would
await us.

During the day upon which we first sighted this phenomenon we attempted
every manoeuvre of navigation to keep the ship clear of the weed, but
in spite of all we could do, and the ceaseless watch Hartog and I
between us kept on deck, the dawn of the next day found the ship as
stationary as though we had run ashore.

"Nothing but a gale from the right quarter can save us, Peter," said
Hartog when we held a consultation together in the cabin, "and even a
gale will not help us unless it comes soon and before the weed
gathers."

I knew what he said was plain truth, yet I advised we should keep a
brave face before the men, as nothing would be gained by provoking a
scare.

Notwithstanding our assumed cheerfulness, however, we could see the
crew were becoming alarmed, and as each day added to the accumulation
of the weed which collected between us and the open sea, anxious looks
were turned to the horizon in the hope of detecting the long-expected
breeze.

So as to give the men occupation, and prevent their brooding, Hartog
gave directions to man the boats in order that an attempt might be made
to tow the ship through the weed, but after two days' fruitless effort
the attempt was abandoned. It was dreadful to contemplate our impotence
in the face of this danger, which hourly grew upon us. The seaweed, in
itself so harmless that it becomes the sport of children when washed
ashore upon the beaches at home, here, in its original and monstrous
growth became more terrifying than all the Leviathans of the deep.
There was something irresistible in this brown mantle which drew its
folds so silently and yet so surely around us that even Dirk Hartog's
indomitable spirit quailed at the thought of what might be before us.
"What demon led us hither, Peter?" he said to me when a week had
passed, and we still rode motionless in the grip of the seaweed. "Of
all the perils which mariners must face, whoever heard of a ship's
company being brought to their doom by floating kelp?"

I told him of the sea of which I had read, and which I believed we had
come to. He listened to me with patience, and then relapsed into a
reverie, from which I found it impossible to arouse him.

On coming on deck I detected Van Luck at his old game of sowing discord
among the men. They did not, however, appear to pay much attention to
what he said. He had now no authority over them, and none but Janstins
and Bantum, who were with us on this second voyage, remembered him as
the first officer of the "Endraght". The ingratitude of the man,
however, after the consideration we had shown him, angered me, and I
spoke to him roughly, and ordered him to quit the deck.

"Take heed," I warned him, "that I do not have you put in irons, or
sent adrift upon a second voyage."

Van Luck obeyed me with a scowl, and slunk below, but I could see an
evil light in his eyes which I attributed to madness, though I was
subsequently to learn there was much method in it. I did not like to
add to Hartog's anxieties by telling him of Van Luck's conduct, and,
indeed, when I considered our present predicament, it seemed unlikely
that Van Luck, or anybody else, could do us much harm or good.

And now another event occurred to add to our perplexities. The kelp
around the vessel suddenly became alive with a small species of black
crab. These creatures must have scented the food from our vessel, and
they came in millions to besiege us in order to devour it. The deck was
soon black with them, and they swarmed below in ever-increasing
numbers. Nothing escaped them, and most of our provisions were quickly
demolished. We killed them in thousands, and the stench from their
crushed bodies almost drove us out of our minds, but other thousands
quickly filled their places, and the crustaceans continued to pour down
the hatches like black streams of evil-smelling water.

But this visitation, dreadful though it was, eventually proved our
salvation. The weed, now alive with marine life, lost its density, and
when, at length, the breeze came, we could feel we were making headway.
But had we not been able to force our passage into the open I verily
believe we would all have been devoured alive by black crabs, which
swarmed upon us. As it was, many of the men suffered severely from the
bites of these creatures, and weeks elapsed before the ship was clear
of them and the stench which they had brought aboard. But when the
breeze freshened from the right quarter, and we felt our vessel moving
toward the open sea, we were too thankful for our escape from a
horrible death to think of the lesser evils from which we suffered,
though the destruction of such a considerable quantity of our stores
was a serious loss, and set Hartog thinking as to whether our immediate
return to Amsterdam was not imperative.

"I had made up my mind for another year in these latitudes, Peter," he
said, "and I am loath to go back without setting foot upon the Island
of Gems, but man is but a straw in the hands of Destiny, and who am I
to set myself against the decrees of Fate?" So with mixed feelings of
disappointment and pleasure we once more found ourselves homeward
bound.

I had hoped that from this voyage I might return a rich man, able to
make honourable proposals to Count Holstein for his daughter's hand,
but it seemed now that fortune was not to be won so easily. My share of
the treasure found on Cortes' island might enrich me sufficiently to
buy a small interest in my master's business, but this was all I could
hope for, and the bright dreams which Hartog and I had formed of the
Island of Gems seemed about to dissolve, as is the way with phantoms,
into thin air.

But who can trace the course of Destiny, or fathom the mysteries of
Fate?



CHAPTER XVI

THE ISLAND OF GEMS


For some weeks after getting free from the kelp we experienced fine
weather, with favourable winds and a smooth sea, when, almost without
warning, a storm broke upon us with hurricane force. All hands were
ordered to shorten sail, no easy task in the fury of a gale. As chief
officer I took command in the fore part of the vessel, while Hartog
issued his orders aft. The sea ran so high, often breaking over the
bows and swamping the decks, that I ordered the men to attach
themselves by lifelines to the foremast, and I also secured myself in
the same way. As sometimes happens at sea in the heart of a storm, a
succession of rollers followed each other, making it impossible to do
more than hang on until they pass, and during one of these intervals I
observed Van Luck, whose presence I had forgotten in the hurry of the
moment, standing by the foremast with a knife in his hand. I was
powerless to reach him from where I stood, and a moment later the
lifeline which held me to the foremast was severed, when, despite a
desperate effort which I made to retain my hold, I was swept into the
sea.

For a time, which seemed to me an eternity, I was under water, but when
I rose to the surface I could see the ship at some distance from me,
fighting her way through the storm. I was almost suffocated by the
spray which continually blew over me, and the heavy sea boots which I
wore, filling with water, threatened to drag me down. I had given
myself up for lost, when I noticed a spar floating near, which must
have been washed overboard with me, and, making an effort, I succeeded
in laying hold of it, so that I managed to keep afloat. Thus holding to
the spar and swimming, sometimes with one hand and sometimes with the
other, I kept my head above water until my feet touched ground, when I
waded upon the shore of an island, where I fell down exhausted, and for
the time lost consciousness.

When I came to myself it was almost dark. I had fortunately been
carried by a current upon the leeside of the island, so that I was
protected from the wind and sea, but my limbs felt numb and cold, while
the blood coursed feebly in my veins. I felt too weary to move, and
presently I fell asleep, from which I awoke, as I judged, about
midnight, much refreshed.

I was now once more haunted by the thought of being marooned in a
strange country, so that I remained awake, bemoaning my fate and
blaming myself for not having taken better precautions against such a
mishap. These reflections led me so far that I began to form a project
against my life, but the dawn dissipated my gloomy ideas, when I made
up my mind to trust to Providence, which had protected me through so
many perils.

I then mounted the high land to scan the horizon, but no sign of the
ship could I see, so I knew myself to be again a castaway.  The island
appeared to be one of considerable size, very fertile and well watered.
The verdure inland was unusually luxuriant, even for the tropics. From
the centre of the island rose a mountain, with a smoke-cloud banging
upon it, which proved it to be an active volcano.

The storm had passed, and the weather was pleasant, the beat not
excessive, being tempered with a land breeze. I descended after a while
into a valley, where I noticed a number of fresh-water ponds, at one of
which I knelt down to drink, when I perceived a prodigious quantity of
bivalve shells of one single species, which formed a kind of beach, in
breadth about fifteen feet. The water in the pond was clear, and
although it was deep, the sand and shells at the bottom of it were
easily seen.

Whilst I was admiring their beauties I was startled by the approach of
a party of natives, the leader of whom, a tall, muscular savage,
marched in front of the others, who followed him with some degree of
order. From the crown of his head to his waist he was plastered with a
red pigment, his frizzled-out hair being ornamented with the plumes of
the bird of Paradise. His dress, composed of tapa cloth, shells, and
feathers, was more elaborate than any I had seen in the islands. In his
hand he carried a spear tipped with white quartz. His followers were
decked in similar fashion. Raising his right arm in token of
friendship, an overture to which I responded, the chief then addressed
me in the same dialect to that used at Cortes' island, which I had
little difficulty in understanding, although some of the words puzzled
me.

"Whence come you?" said he. "From the sun or the sea?"

"From the sea, O chief, whither I will return when my friends, the
white spirits, come for me," I answered.

This reply did not seem to surprise my interrogator, who now desired me
to follow him. After proceeding for some distance through a luxuriant
forest we came to what appeared to be the gates of a town. Two large
perpendicular stones rose to the height of fourteen feet above the
ground. These pillars must have been twelve feet through at the base,
and five feet on top, while a still larger stone, some sixteen feet
long and four feet thick, was mortised into the perpendicular columns.
It was difficult to understand how such huge stones could be quarried
and transported inland by a people possessing so few mechanical
appliances as these savages, but to my inquiry regarding this curious
gateway I was answered that the stones had been there as long as any
could remember, having been placed in position by supernatural agency.

At the gate of the city crouched some miserable specimens of humanity:
old men and women, haggard, shrivelled, and naked.  These unfortunates,
I afterwards learned, were the aged and infirm, too feeble to perform
their share of the work of the tribe and condemned to remain at the
gateway, dependent for food upon such charity as might be given them.
On entering the town we passed a number of warriors, all fine, athletic
men, dressed in the same style as those who accompanied us, and painted
with stripes of red, yellow, and white pigment.

I was now received by a commanding figure, whom I took to be the king.
He was even more gorgeously dressed than the others, with strings of
bright stones round his neck and Paradise plumes in his hair, while
upon his head was a circlet composed of human teeth, set in clay, in
the centre of which glowed an opal of extraordinary fire. His face was
sullen and cruel, and his hazel eyes, with their dark lashes and
yellow-tinged whites, gave to his countenance an expression scarcely
human. Near to him stood a group of young men, their bodies plastered
with a bright red pigment, who appeared to be his personal attendants,
or slaves.

This savage now addressed me, asking the same questions as the other
chief, to which I returned similar answers. I was then led to a house
with a beehive-shaped roof, where food was brought to me, consisting of
coconuts and bananas, with a luscious kind of fruit I had never before
tasted, but which I found very palatable. After my meal I was taken
before the queen.



CHAPTER XVII

QUEEN MELANNIE


The queen was white--indeed very pale--with large dark eyes, and brown
hair that hung down in its natural beauty, untouched by the pigments
with which the savages convert their own hair into mops. She was
dressed in a robe of white tapa cloth with strings of bright shells and
gold ornaments upon her neck and arms. Upon her head was a diadem of
white clay encrusted with uncut gems.  The throne upon which she sat
was of polished marble. Her left hand rested upon the woolly head of a
black boy, who showed his white teeth as we entered. In her right hand
she carried a human skull. The queen, though very beautiful, looked
sad. She could not have been more than eighteen years old, and it was
evident she came from European descent, and was in no way related to
the savages by whom she was surrounded.

And now I bethought me if I would gain favour I must make a present to
the queen, and remembering a small mirror I had with me, set in a
silver frame, which Anna had given me as a parting gift, I took it from
my pocket and presented it to Queen Melannie, the name by which her
people addressed her. It cost me a pang to part with it, but I
reflected that if these savages killed me, as seemed likely unless I
could ingratiate myself with them, the mirror would, with equal
certainty, pass into their hands as if I voluntarily surrendered it.

The queen uttered an exclamation of surprise when she caught sight of
her face in the looking glass, nor could some of her attendants who
stood near resist the temptation to look over her shoulder in order to
see the reflection of their own faces also.  Nothing that I could have
given the queen would have pleased her more. My present at once brought
me into favour, for all appeared to regard such a prodigy as the work
of immortals.

Queen Melannie, having appropriated Anna's mirror, and finding I
understood what she said to me, then dismissed her attendants and
invited me to a private audience. I asked her how she, a white lady,
came to be among savages, but she could tell me nothing except that she
remembered standing upon the beach as a child, alone, when it was very
cold, and that she cried very much, until the natives had brought her
into this house, where she had been reared and cared for ever since.

"They tell me I was born of the sea," she said, "but I do not believe
that, for I seem to remember other faces, like yours, before I came
here."

It was then plain to me that this poor girl had been shipwrecked as a
child, and cast upon this island. It was sad to think that one so
beautiful should be condemned to live among savages, but I reflected
that my own case was no better, for it seemed unlikely I would return
to civilization. Melannie appeared to place full confidence in me from
our first meeting.

"I am not really queen," she said. "Ackbau is king, and I must do as he
tells me. He makes me speak his words, but sometimes I would rather not
say what he bids me."

I sympathized with her, for I could readily understand why this Ackbau,
who was the chief before whom I had been taken, chose her to be his
mouthpiece. She had become a goddess to the tribe, and it was thought
she could speak nothing wrong. So that by using her as his medium
Ackbau gained his ends without accepting responsibility.

Whilst I was talking to the queen I could not help admiring the jewels
in her diadem, and seeing I was pleased with them she invited me to
accompany her to a rock cavern near to her dwelling, where I saw such
an accumulation of wealth that I began to picture myself among the
richest of men. The floor of this cave was carpeted with gold dust, and
nuggets of the same precious metal were piled high against its walls.
But what caused me to rub my eyes in wonder was a slab of opal, which
seemed ablaze with the fire it contained. Upon this priceless table
were strewn a collection of gems, which, from the knowledge I had
acquired in De Decker's office at Amsterdam, I knew to be of great
value, but which did not appear to be so regarded by the queen, for
when she had presented me with a double handful she still seemed to
consider herself in my debt for the mirror and some other trifles I had
given her. I now knew that I had come to the Island of Gems of which
Hartog had spoken. But, alas! of what use was all this wealth, since I
could not spend it in this place, and it seemed improbable I would ever
go back to my own country?

Melannie now returned to her dwelling, which I subsequently found she
seldom left, except at night, which accounted for the fairness of her
skin. All festivals were held at night, by moonlight, and what struck
me as peculiar was the absence of fire. Fish and shellfish were eaten
raw, but many subsisted entirely upon coconuts and fruit, which grew
upon the island in great profusion.

The native city in which I now found myself consisted of a number of
dwellings of beehive shape, thatched with grass, and usually about
twelve feet high. The queen's house was about three times as large as
the others, and was placed in the centre of the town, with an avenue of
trees, and a clear space before it for tribal dances or meetings.
Ackbau also lived in a large house. On the reserve around the queen's
palace, the older men spent most of the day in gossiping, or playing
upon reed pipes, which furnished their sole musical instrument. The
younger men made nets, mended weapons, or shaped stones for their
slings.  The natives in this island did not appear to understand the
use of the bow and arrow, their only weapons being clubs, slings, and
spears. The spears were made of hard wood, polished and inlaid with
pearl shell and beaten gold. The slings were of plaited fibre, the
stones being rounded like an egg. The clubs were of various shapes,
some with rounded heads, and others bent and pointed like a pick.



CHAPTER XVIII

A QUEEN'S FAVOURITE


Three days after my coming to the Island of Gems I discovered, to my
embarrassment, that Queen Melannie regarded me with more than royal
favour. It had been her custom to seclude herself from her people
except upon occasions, but now she preferred to walk with me daily upon
the cliffs, or among the rich foliage, which made a natural garden in
the valleys. None molested us, for those to whom the queen showed
favour were taboo to the rest of the tribe, so that as long as I
retained her goodwill I was safe. But who would be dependent upon a
woman's whim?

"You do not love me, Peter," she said, for I had told her my name, "not
as I love you. Your blood is cold. It does not run warm as mine does
when I hold you to me."

I tried to pacify her, but she would not be satisfied.

"You do not love me! You cannot love me!" she repeated. "They want me
to give you to the snake god. Why should I keep you if you do not love
me?"

This was the first time she had threatened me, and I began to realize
that the love she professed was tempered by a degree of venom which at
any moment might consign me to some cruel death.

Surely no man was placed in such a dilemma as that in which I now found
myself. In all my adventures I had never felt so helpless as I did when
dealing with this wilful queen. I dared not tell her of my love for
Anna Holstein, for I knew that such a confession would quickly seal my
doom. Yet I could not return her love, for Anna was never out of my
thoughts. Meanwhile Ackbau watched us closely, content to bide his
time.

The people upon this island were unlike any I had previously met with.
I conjectured that in ages past some tribe of Indians had migrated to
it, for that Indian blood flowed in the veins of its present
inhabitants seemed beyond doubt. Their intelligence exceeded that of
aborigines, and their language contained words of Hindu origin. As for
the queen, I set her down for a Portuguese maiden, whose mother must
have accompanied the captain of some trading vessel, probably in search
of the Island of Gems, when, by a stroke of fate, the ship, with all
hands, had foundered, leaving Melannie the sole survivor.

Ackbau seldom spoke to me, and when he did his tone was unfriendly.
"The white man will make good sport at the coming of the snake god," he
said to me once when I had angered him by walking out with the queen,
and those with him had laughed, and had looked at me in a manner that
made me speculate upon what cruel fate it was to which they, in their
own minds, had already consigned me.

Of the tortures practised by the islanders upon those who offended
them, I was not left long in doubt. There had lately been a war, so
Melannie told me, between this people and those of an adjacent island
in which some captives had been taken who, according to custom, would
be offered in sacrifice to propitiate one of the many evil spirits whom
these benighted people worship. On the day of the sacrifice I was
bidden to be present, and not daring to refuse, I accompanied the queen
to a barren spot at the foot of the mountain where some gaunt trees
rose out of a bed of lava. Here we found Ackbau haranguing the victims,
and describing to them the tortures they would shortly be called upon
to suffer. One of the captives had been prepared for the sacrifice,
and, but for the gravity of his position, his appearance might have
excited mirth. His body was encased in a kind of basket from which his
head, arms, and legs protruded, giving him the appearance of a gigantic
insect. To the top of the basket, or tamgky, to give it its native
name, was attached a rope of flax, the end of which had been thrown
over a branch of one of the trees to the height of about forty feet
from the ground. By command of Ackbau, a file of warriors now began to
pull upon this rope, when the victim was drawn up to the branch over
his head, where Melannie told me he would be allowed to remain until,
in the course of time, the rope rotted away, when the skeleton would
fall to the ground. The object of enclosing the vital parts of the
victim in a basket was that death might come as slowly as possible.
Some would live, so the queen assured me, for many days, during which
time of agony their faces and the exposed parts of their bodies would
be devoured by ants and other venomous insects. Yet Melannie sat
unmoved by the sight of these tortures, and even smiled when the poor
wretch had been drawn up to his awful doom, and cried out in his agony.
For that smile I felt that I could kill her.

Unable to control myself in the presence of such barbarities, I
abruptly left the place of execution and began to ascend the mountain,
at the foot of which the sacrifices were made, which I could see was
the cause of a commotion among the natives. As none offered to stay me,
however, I continued my way up the steep sides, which I found to be
composed of rocks and scoria, with occasional patches of coarse grass.
Among the slag of metals between the crevices of the rocks I unearthed
a number of gems, though none so large as those which Melannie had
given me, which I added to the collection I carried in a belt I had
made for the purpose. I knew it was unlikely these bits of coloured
crystal would ever be of value to me, but I carried them in the hope
that some day I might be rescued, when I would return home possessed of
the wealth I had coveted, and which I had risked my life to obtain.

As I explored the mountain I could hear the rumbling of the volcanic
fire within, while as I proceeded a rain of fine dust descended, making
further progress disagreeable. Earth tremors also warned me that the
crust here was thin, and therefore dangerous. The mountain seemed on
the verge of eruption, and I wondered that no alarm for the safety of
the town built at the foot of it had been shown by Melannie and her
people. But I remembered that volcanoes, like all great works of
Nature, measure time by the lapse of ages, and that a thousand years
will often pass between the convulsions of the internal fires which
find an outlet through the earth's craters. The smoke and heat of the
mountain, however, reminded me of my tinder-box, and I gathered some
flints, of which there were a number lying round, before returning to
my dwelling in the native town. I had kept my ability to make fire, so
far, secret, but if my life was threatened I resolved to kindle a
conflagration that would sweep the island.

When the queen and her followers returned from the place of execution
Melannie sent for me.

"Have a care, Peter," she said. "We are ruled here by customs which may
not be changed. Already Ackbau is jealous of the favour I have shown
you. To go upon the mountain, which is forbidden country, may be made
an argument in favour of thy death, from which even I cannot save you."

I pleaded an excuse for infringing the taboo, but Melannie shook her
head. Then she embraced me and begged me to forgive her ill-humour.

"You will not leave me, Peter," she pleaded. "You are strong--stronger
than Ackbau, and will protect me from him."

"But you are queen, are you not?" I answered.

"Yes, I am queen," replied Melannie, "but I do not love my people as I
should do. I wish they would make Ackbau king, so that I might be free
as others are."

She tried to embrace me, but I disengaged myself from her. I could not
take her to my heart, coming, as she did, a willing spectator from the
place of sacrifice.



CHAPTER XIX

I BECOME CHIEF COOK


I now resolved to introduce the cooking of food upon the island.  From
the fish and clams which the natives offered me in their raw state I
turned in disgust, but I reflected that, cooked, they would make
excellent eating. I was tired of fruit, and craved a more substantial
diet. How long I might be compelled to remain upon this island I knew
not. Perhaps I was destined to spend the rest of my life upon it. Why,
then, should I be deprived of the luxury of cooking my food, when, with
my flint and steel, I possessed the means of making a fire?

When I spoke of my intention to Melannie she failed to grasp my
meaning. She had no notion of fire except in connexion with the smoke
on the mountain, and when I told her I could make fire like that and
convert it to my use, she became incredulous.

"If you can make fire, Peter," she said, "you are greater than all the
gods upon the island. Whoever heard of making fire?"

In order to convince her, and to test the effect which my fire might
have upon these islanders, I invited her to accompany me to a remote
part of the island, seldom visited, where I had already constructed a
fire-place and collected a quantity of fuel, of which there was an
abundance lying round. She came with me fearlessly, for she trusted me
entirely, and her intelligence, which was superior to the islanders',
made her less superstitious than the savages over whom she nominally
reigned. When she saw the dried wood and leaves I had collected in my
fire-place she appeared to think I had become suddenly demented, as
sometimes happened to the people on the island, when they were thought
to be possessed by evil spirits.

When I took up my flint and steel, however, and began to strike sparks
on to the prepared tinder, she drew back alarmed, although her woman's
curiosity conquered her desire to run away.  But when the sparks
lighted the dried leaves, causing the wood to crackle and burn, she
would have fled if I had not detained her.

"There is no magic in fire-making, Melannie," I said, trying to allay
her fears; "all white men make fires. It is as necessary to them as air
and water."

But it was hard to convince the queen of this. She looked at my fire,
which now burned brightly, with wonder and alarm.  "Of a truth, Peter,"
she said, "thy magic is beyond me. I know now thou art indeed come from
the sun. No man born of men could work such marvel."

I had brought with me a fine fish, caught that morning from the rocks,
which I had sealed and cleaned with my dagger-knife, and I now toasted
it over the hot coals, after which I enjoyed the most satisfying meal I
had tasted since I had been cast upon the island. I induced Melannie to
eat some of the fish, which she found so much to her liking that her
fear of the fire changed to admiration for what it could do.

"When my people eat of this delicious food," she said, "they will
worship you."

I had no desire to be worshipped. All I asked was permission to eat my
grilled fish in peace. But Melannie was so delighted with her meal that
she made me promise to prepare a fish each day for our mutual
enjoyment. For some days we continued to dine by stealth. Fish were
plentiful, and we also found the bivalves I had noticed on my first
landing round the fresh water pools very palatable.

At length our daily absence from the village, always at the same hour,
excited suspicion, and spies were set upon us, who reported we were
making another smoke mountain, which led to a surprise visit from
Ackbau, who came upon us one day when our meal was preparing. I had
made some rude vessels of clay, hardened by fire, in which to boil the
shell-fish, and with these simmering in the pot, and a fine rock cod
grilling upon the hot coals, we were awaiting our dinner with
pleasurable anticipation, when Ackbau appeared.

He was too astonished at what he saw to find fault, and when, later, he
had eaten of grilled cod and boiled clams, seasoned with salt and
cut-up bananas, a recipe which Melannie, with her woman's instinct, had
invented for the preparation of this delicacy, he was so pleased with
his food that he forgot to be ill-tempered.

After this surprise visit from Ackbau our privacy was at an end.  Next
day the whole council came to dinner. They brought with them a quantity
of fish and clams, which they wanted cooked, and it became necessary to
make fresh fires, and to instruct them in the art of cooking. This was
soon done, for the natives, when shown our simple methods, very quickly
began to understand what was required of them, and they became so
interested in the cookery that for the time being all other business on
the island was suspended. Soon the whole tribe took part in the
cooking, and fires burned all along the shore at which fish and clams
prepared as Melannie directed were converted into luscious banquets for
the astonished islanders. Nothing else was thought of but cooking and
eating, and the natives often gorged themselves to such an extent that
they were unable for hours to stir from the spot.

This soon gave rise to disagreements and led to quarrels, until at
length Ackbau, who in his own way was a born organizer, called the
council together and enacted laws for the regulation of the cookery.

By these laws cooks were appointed, of whom I was made chief, and it
became an offence, punishable by death, for any except those duly
qualified to indulge in cooking. Regulations were also made for the
distribution of food, and each day, at stated hours, the tribe
assembled round the fires, when they were served with their portions,
which they greedily devoured. There were no birds upon the island, or I
might have added game to our bill of fare, but turtles were plentiful,
and, when captured, were cooked under my directions in a manner which
convinced the savages that I was of divine origin. The method of
fire-making I kept to myself, rightly conceiving that so long as I
preserved this secret my life would be spared.

But notwithstanding the improvement in their mode of living which I had
brought to these people by the introduction of the use of fire amongst
them, I could see that Ackbau still regarded me with disfavour. His
cruel nature, moreover, began to suggest to him another use to which
fire might be applied. One of his slaves inadvertently picked up a
burning brand, which burnt his fingers, and the pain which it caused
suggested to Ackbau that fire might be employed in torture. He ruled by
fear, and the fear of fire had now become universal among the
islanders.  Ackbau spoke to me privately with regard to the making of
this new element, and even offered to give me a seat on the council if
I would surrender to him my flint and steel, but I told him that to me
alone was committed the power of making fire, and that any other
attempting it would bring upon himself inevitable disaster. Ackbau's
ambition to become a fire-maker was checked for the moment, but I could
see it was not satisfied.



CHAPTER XX

THE SNAKE GOD


I was now to meet with a surprise. The chief deity worshipped by the
people of the Island of Gems was a snake god, a monster who at regular,
intervals visited a coral cave rising out of a pool of water said to be
fathomless, from which I conjectured it was connected with the sea. The
water in this pool was of a deep blue colour, salt to the taste, which
further convinced me of its link with the ocean. On the first night of
each full moon a human sacrifice was offered, with which the monster
retreated into the coral cave, where it remained feasting upon its
victim three days. During this period the natives continued without
sleep, and fasting. At the end of three days the snake god disappeared,
nor was it seen again until its next periodical visit.

There ran, a legend among the people of the Island of Gems that if a
human sacrifice was not made to the snake god at the time of its
coming, the island would be destroyed and its people exterminated, so
that great care was taken to provide the monster with its accustomed
tribute. Prisoners of war, and all strangers found upon the island,
were, in the first place, offered to the snake god, and, failing these,
a victim was chosen among the tribe.

It now appeared, so far as I could gather from Ackbau, who made no
secret of his intentions regarding me, that had it not been, for the
arrival of another stranger upon the island, I myself would have been
offered as a sacrifice to the snake god at his next coming, and it was
for this reason I had been received with apparent friendship. But a
fresh captive being taken soon after I had been washed ashore had
caused a change of plan very much to my advantage. Queen Melannie also
had interested herself in my favour, and had refused to speak words at
the secret council which would have decreed my death. But I might
assure myself, said Ackbau, that my fate was only delayed, and at the
coming of the snake god, next after the one immediately expected, my
death had been decided upon. I appealed to Melannie, but she could only
confirm what Ackbau had told me.

"I cannot save you, Peter," she said, "unless you will become my
husband, when, if you are strong, we may overcome Ackbau, and rule as
king and queen upon this island. But if that cannot be, let us escape
by a means that I know of."

I put aside the question of marriage, but I eagerly embraced the
proposal to escape.

Melannie then led me, secretly, by a path known only to Ackbau, the
council, and herself, to a rock cavern close to the water's edge, in
which was kept a ship's boat, which the queen told me had been washed
ashore at the same time when, she was found crying upon the beach. It
was a well-built, serviceable cutter, with spare oars, and a sail
stowed under the thwarts, just as they had been placed in her when she
had put to sea, but there was neither food nor water in the boat,
although I discovered a water-tank forward, which could readily be
filled from one of the many streams on the island. I became so excited
at the prospect of escape that Melannie looked grave.

"You are glad to go, Peter," she said. "Go, then; take the boat, and
leave me to my fate."

"Not so, Melannie," I answered. "I will take you with me, and restore
you to your own people. It is not meet that a white girl, such as thou,
should abide with savages."

At these words Melannie recovered her gaiety.

"Let me go with thee, Peter," she said, clapping her hands with
pleasure. "It is all I ask. But if we would not be followed by war
canoes, which could easily overtake us, we must use much cunning in the
manner of our going."

We then took counsel together, when Melannie advised that our best
chance to escape would be at the time of the coming of the snake god.
When the monster appeared, and for three days afterward, while it
remained in the coral cave, the savages would be held to the spot by
their traditions from which nothing would induce them to depart. We
might then slip away unobserved, and be out of sight of land before the
ceremonies in connexion with the sacrifice were over. This appearing to
be our opportunity, we at once set about making preparations. From a
stream near the cave I filled the boat's water-tank, and we collected a
quantity of coconuts, bananas, and other fruits, which we stowed on
board; nor did I forget to take some of the largest gems from the
treasure cave, which I stuffed into my belt with the others. The gold I
did not touch. It was heavy to carry, and its transport might have
caused suspicion. We also launched the boat, with some difficulty, into
a natural boat harbour formed by a coral reef, so that no time might be
lost in getting away. All being ready, we waited impatiently for the
day upon which we had planned to set out upon our voyage.

During this time I observed a change upon the mountain in the centre of
the island. The smoke cloud, which always hovered over it, had
increased until it hung like a funeral pall over the top of the
volcano. Loud rumblings also were heard like distant thunder, while
earth tremors were constantly felt. I mentioned these matters to
Melannie, but she did not appear to attach any importance to them.

"The mountain was always like that," she said. "Perhaps the evil
spirits who live there are angry." But I knew from my reading and
experience that these signs and portents were such as heralded an
eruption. In the excitement of leaving the island, however, I forgot my
anxieties with regard to the volcano.

I now questioned Melannie with regard to the white stranger whose
coming had saved me from being offered as a sacrifice to the snake god.
At first she refused to tell me anything concerning him, but when I
pressed her she conducted me to a cavern in which the captive was
confined. The door of this dungeon was a swinging rock, which Melannie
caused to open by some means of which she knew the secret, when the
wretched man who was reserved for the sacrifice was seen crouching in
darkness at the farther end of the cave. He came toward us bent double.
There was a scared look upon his face. The light dazzled him. I knew
him at once, and held my breath. It was Van Luck.  When he saw me he
threw himself upon his knees and implored me to save him, but I told
him I had no power to avert his death even if I would. In answer to my
question as to how he came upon the island, he answered, that almost at
the same time as I had been washed overboard he himself had been
precipitated by a wave into the sea.

"Well, Van Luck," I said to him. "It seemeth to me that the hand of
Providence is in this business. But for your conduct we had both now
been on board the 'Arms of Amsterdam,' yet no sooner was I cast into
the sea by your treachery than you were made to follow me, to be
brought to this island, where, but for your coming, I would have been
subject to the cruel fate which now awaits you."

"Mercy!" he cried. "I do not fear death. But the death that I am to
suffer is not for a human to contemplate. If you cannot save me, at
least kill me, so that I may escape the torture of being devoured
alive."

But I was powerless to aid him, and at a sign from Melannie, who was
fearful lest our visit might be discovered, I stepped back, as the rock
at the mouth of the cave returned to its place, and consigned the
miserable captive to a darkness from which he would not emerge until
the time for the sacrifice.



CHAPTER XXI

A PLAN OF ESCAPE


I was now of two minds, whether to make terms with Ackbau or to
endeavour to escape with Melannie from the Island of Gems in the boat
we had made ready for sea. On the one hand was immediate safety, and
the prospect of some ship calling at the island in which I might return
to civilization. On the other was a hazardous journey alone with a
young girl, who could not be expected to realize the dangers which lay
before her. Was I justified, I asked myself, in exposing the queen to
the tragedy which might await us upon the ocean? If captured I had no
doubt that both of us would be condemned by Ackbau to a cruel death,
and if we succeeded in getting away how should we exist until some
chance vessel came to our rescue? I mentioned my fears to Melannie, but
she would not hear of abandoning the project we had formed.

"Let us go, Peter," she urged. "Nothing but death, or worse, awaits us
here. As for you, at the next coming of the snake god after the one
that is about to take place you will assuredly be offered as a
sacrifice, for I may tell you that a solemn vow has been made by the
council to that effect. While I, at the same time, am to be given in
marriage to Ackbau, a fate from which I shrink more than from death.
Why, then, should we exchange the chance of reaching the country you
speak of for the tortures which must certainly await us here? Let us
trust ourselves to the sea rather than cling to this land of sorrow. If
we perish, we perish."

I could not but agree that her argument contained much good sense, and
I admired the courage with which she was ready to face the worst that
Fate might have in store for us.

"Let it be so then, Melannie," I answered. "May heaven deal with me as
I deal with thee in protecting us both from evil."

After arriving at this decision we agreed there must be no turning
back, and it only now remained to await the night upon which the
unfortunate Van Luck would be offered to the snake god in order to make
good our escape. Meanwhile we were allowed to wander about the island
together as before. Ackbau having obtained the decree of the council
for my death, and his own marriage with the queen, could afford to
wait, nor did he appear anxious to deprive Melannie of the pleasure
which she found in my company, until I was removed from his path.
Melannie, although arrived at woman's estate, was but a child at heart,
and, as a child, he knew she would be content to let things drift until
the moment for my execution was at hand, when it would be too late even
for the queen to prevent it.

I had now become much attached to Melannie, feeling for her as for a
dear sister. Her love for me I could not return, since all my love was
given to my betrothed, but next to Anna I loved Melannie more than
anyone in the world.

So far as the islanders were concerned, I was now left to my own
devices. My fire-making had lost its novelty, and since it was
discovered that one fire could be lighted from another my flint and
steel had depreciated in value. In order to conciliate Ackbau I offered
to explain to him the secret of my fire-making, but he answered coldly
that he himself knew how to make fire by taking a burning brand from
one fire and thrusting it among dried wood and leaves, of which there
were great quantities on the island, as fire had never been alight
there before.

"But if your fire should go out you would not know how to light it
again," I argued.

"I will take care that it does not go out," answered Ackbau.

The cooking also which I had taught them was easily performed by
certain members of the tribe told off for that purpose, and I noticed
that much secrecy was observed in the preparation of food. This secret
was revealed to me in a startling manner when I unexpectedly came upon
Ackbau and some members of the council seated together enjoying a stew
of what I could see was human flesh. For, indeed, what else could it
be, seeing there were no animals upon the island? I mastered my horror
as well as I could, for I was now in great dread of these savages, who,
since they had acquired the taste for meat, appeared to have become far
more ferocious and cruel than before resorting to the dreadful practice
of cannibalism. My discovery, however, made me more than ever
determined to rescue Melannie from the companionship of these wretches
who called her their queen. It was better, I argued, for her to die in
her youth and innocence upon the sea, if Providence so willed, than to
become the wife of such a man as Ackbau.

I did not confide to Melannie my dreadful discovery, but she was not
slow in noticing a change in the demeanour of the men with whom she
formerly had daily intercourse. Those who had become eaters of human
flesh avoided her, and even Ackbau seemed ashamed to intrude himself
upon her.

"What is it, Peter?" she asked me, and I read the questioning fear in
her eyes.

I did my best to pacify her, but I could see that the repugnance with
which she regarded Ackbau now almost amounted to a mania.

"I feel inclined to run from Ackbau when I see him," she said.
"If he touched me I am sure that I would scream."

"You will soon be beyond his power," I answered. "Do not think of him,
and you will not fear him."

"Oh, Peter, take me away, I am frightened!" she sobbed. "Do not let
Ackbau and the others come near me. They have done something.  I don't
know what it is. But they are not as they were before they made the
fire. Perhaps a curse is upon them for having stolen the secret from
the smoke mountain."

I tried to comfort her, but I could see that the poor child was greatly
alarmed, and I determined to speak to Ackbau regarding the abominable
practice in which he was engaged.

"Had I known that my fire-making would have made a cannibal of thee,
Ackbau," I said, "I would never have kindled the element upon this
island. Fire is a useful and necessary article in the life of a good
man, but it becomes a curse if put to evil purposes."

"It is a curse then that will fall most heavily upon thee," answered
Ackbau. "As for me, this is my country, and I am king of its customs."
But although he pretended to resent my interference, I could see that
Ackbau was ashamed of what he had done, and henceforth he avoided
Melannie, and seldom entered the queen's presence, so that I gained
what I had in view by remonstrating with him.

The thought of the fire, however, and the effect which the making of it
had upon these savages, set me pondering whether this element was
really the primary cause of cannibalism.

No savages whom I ever met devour raw flesh, whether human or animal,
so that the eating of meat by men would seem to be an acquired habit.
Fruit and water appear to be the natural food and drink of man, all
else being artificial and vicious.



CHAPTER XXII

THE NIGHT OF THE SACRIFICE


At last the night came when the snake god was to appear. The moon shone
with wonderful brilliancy, sending a path of dancing light from the
island across the sea to the horizon. The air was heavy as though
presaging a storm. On the mountain the black pall was conspicuous
against the star-spangled sky. A red glow from the crater illumined the
dark smoke-cloud hanging over it. The silence was broken by the
continued playing of reed pipes, making wonderful music. Melannie sat
upon a throne, close to the pool in front of the coral cave, in which
the stars were reflected as in a mirror. Ackbau and other chiefs stood
near her. The queen was pale, but her dark eyes were resolute. She
smiled when I looked at her, to give me encouragement. Her subjects
were assembled round the pool in a triple line. Presently the beating
of a war-drum announced the arrival of a procession, which advanced
slowly to the pool, bearing a litter upon which, bound hand and foot,
was stretched the unfortunate Van Luck. When they had come to the edge
of the pool they set the litter down and withdrew.

I had no cause to love Van Luck, yet there was something in his
helpless misery which appealed to me, and made it impossible for me to
abandon him to his fate without an effort to save him.  Besides, he was
of my race, a white man. I could not leave him to be butchered by
savages.

And now the waters of the pool began to be agitated by the rising of
the leviathan from its depths, and suddenly a monstrous head, mounted
upon a neck full twenty feet long, rose out of the water. The body of
the creature resembled that of a turtle, only ten times larger than.
the biggest turtle I had ever beheld. Thrice the monster circled the
pool. Then it began slowly to approach the litter upon which Van Luck
lay, more dead than alive with the terror that had come upon him. I
could bear no more, and, throwing prudence to the winds, I ran to help
him.  I was just in time to drag him beyond reach of the monster, who
made a rush to the edge of the pool when he saw his prey being taken
from him.

A great shout arose from the savages, who seemed amazed at the act of
sacrilege I had committed. The reed pipes stopped playing. Melannie
rose from her throne pale and trembling.  Ackbau advanced towards me
with a threatening gesture.

"This must not be, Ackbau," I said, pointing to where Van Luck lay at
my feet gazing at the monster in mute terror. "I will prevent it."
Ackbau gave some directions, when a number of savages advanced,
evidently with the intention of taking me alive, so that I might be
given to the monster, which continued to swim round the pool lashing
the water into foam, and stretching its neck from side to side in anger
at having been robbed of its prey.

But now a new diversion arose which caused a panic among the savages.
We had all been so engrossed by what was taking place at the pool that
no heed had been given to the mountain. With a mighty roar which shook
the island to its foundations the volcano broke into eruption. The
crust had given way, and the internal fires, held in check, belched
from the crater. Huge rocks and stones glowing red hot were thrown to
incredible heights. The earth rocked and opened, so that many were
engulfed.

Streams of lava began to descend. The pool sank, leaving a deep pit
into which the monster disappeared. The prophecy was about to be
fulfilled. The snake god had been robbed of its tribute, and the island
with all upon it was to be destroyed. In, their terror the savages
raced for the seashore. Nothing was remembered but self-preservation.

I now released Van Luck from his bonds, and bidding him and Melannie
follow me, I led the way along the secret path to where the boat lay,
ready to put to sea. I was rewarded for my rescue of Van Luck by his
ability to help me. Not a breath of wind stirred, so that we could not
use the sail, and it became necessary to sweep the boat with the oars
away from the burning island. Alone I could not have accomplished this,
and I doubt if Melannie could have helped me, ignorant as she was of
the use of the heavy oar. But Van Luck and I had no difficulty in
sweeping the boat out to sea. Thus does Providence recompense a
merciful action.

When we had gained a safe distance from the island we rested awhile in
order to look back on the strangest and most terrific sight I had ever
beheld. The island seemed to be blown to atoms.  Flames and masses of
rock shot up from the quickly-widening crater until the island, which
had lately risen like a beauty-spot in the ocean, became a mass of
fire. The lava, now pouring in red-hot streams into the sea, caused
steam-clouds to rise, so that the island disappeared behind a luminous
veil. None of the savages escaped, for we saw no canoes making from the
shore.  Thus vanished the Island of Gems, with its treasure of jewels
and gold, the dross of the world, in the pursuit of which so many risk
their lives.

A light breeze now coming from the south-east, we hoisted the sails,
and taking the helm, I placed Van Luck in charge of the foresail,
whilst Melannie and I sat together in the stern. The queen did not
appear to regret the loss of her country.

"I am queen no longer," she said, clapping her hands at the thought of
her freedom. "Ackbau cannot frighten me any more, nor shall I see again
those dreadful sights I was compelled to witness."

"You will be happy," I whispered, "among your own people.  You will be
rich also, for half my jewels will make you wealthy in the land to
which you are going."

"Nay, Peter," she answered. "I need not take your jewels. I have jewels
of my own. When I saw that you valued the bright stones, I knew they
would be of value to me also. I have a bagful of jewels, larger than
yours, and brighter." And, laughing to see the surprise she had given
me, Melannie drew out a handful of gems from a bag which she carried at
her girdle, which glowed with a wonderful lustre under the light of the
moon.

It was then that I saw Van Luck watching us from the bow of the boat.
His countenance wore a cunning, greedy look, and his eyes were fastened
upon the jewels in Melannie's hand.

"Put them away," I whispered. "Such toys are often the cause of much
trouble."

Melannie replaced the jewels, but seemed disappointed at my words.

"I thought you would be glad I had brought away the bright stones," she
said. "But if they are unlucky I will cast them into the sea."

"Nay, Melannie," I answered. "Keep them, for they will make you the
richest among the women of your own country. But do not show them to
anyone or let it be known that you have them with you, should we fall
in with a passing ship, or they may cause our ruin, perhaps our death."
Melannie seemed to understand me, but her pleasure in the bright stones
had received a check since her display of them had brought a rebuke
from my lips.



CHAPTER XXIII

AT THE MERCY OF THE SEA


When morning broke on the day after our escape from the burning island
we shaped a course with the wind, for I had no fixed purpose, and our
only hope of returning to civilization lay in a chance meeting with
some passing vessel. Yet I knew how remote that chance would be. The
sea in these latitudes was not in the course of trade between any of
the countries of the known world, and voyages of discovery such as
those undertaken by Dirk Hartog and other navigators of the time were
few and far between. Still I conceived it to be my duty to make the
best use of the means which Providence had placed in my hands of
returning to home and friends, and as the cutter danced over the waves,
and the salt spray moistened our faces, I felt my spirits rise.

Melannie, in her new-found freedom, was like a happy child.

"Let us sail on for ever, Peter," she said. "I never want to put my
foot on land again."

I tried to tell her that we could not live long upon the ocean; that
our food and water would fail us; and that unless we fell in with a
ship, or landed upon some friendly island, our doom was sealed. But
Melannie refused to look upon the graver side of our situation, and
seemed so happy and contented that I did not like to spoil her
enjoyment with my dismal forebodings. Time enough, I thought, to meet
trouble when it comes. Meanwhile we continued our voyage as a pleasure
trip, eating the fruit we had brought with us when we felt hungry, and
quenching our thirst from the boat's water-tank, with no care for the
future.

During this time Van Luck resumed his former air of abstraction, which
I had noticed in him on board the "Arms of Amsterdam". For hours at a
time he would remain silent, looking across the sea with his hand
shading his eyes in the watchful attitude which had become habitual to
him during his solitary vigils at the island upon which we had found
him. If spoken to when this fit was upon him, he would not answer, nor
did he, at such times, appear to realize where he was. I could see that
his mind was deranged, and I dreaded some violent outbreak, such as
that which had come over him when, by his treachery, I was cast into
the sea. But Melannie showed no fear of him; in, her delight at being
with me upon the ocean away from the savages, among whom she had been
reared, she seemed to have forgotten his presence.

For the next week after leaving what had been once the Island of Gems,
we experienced a spell of fine weather, with bright sun and cool
breeze. The elements seemed kind to the exiled queen without a throne,
who had trusted herself to the wind and the sea, and but for the
anxiety which I felt for the future, the voyage would have been a
pleasant one.

In order to protect Melannie from the heat of midday, and to ensure her
some measure of privacy, I constructed a temporary cabin for her, with
some spare canvas which I found on board the boat, but at night she
preferred to sleep in the open so that she might watch the stars, which
shone with extraordinary brilliancy. It was then that I lowered the
sails when our boat drifted upon the moonlit sea. Melannie would at
such times creep into my arms, and with her head pillowed upon, my
breast would listen to the wonders I had to tell of the world of white
people to which I hoped I was taking her.

"Something warns me I shall never see that country, Peter," she said to
me one night with a sigh, "but I like to hear you speak of it. It must
be a happy land where there are no black men to frighten a poor girl
and make her weep. But I shall not see it.  The white spirits would not
welcome me to their country if they knew of the sights I had seen and
the pain I had caused to be inflicted on those whom Ackbau hated."

"It was not your will, but Ackbau's, Melannie, which caused such
suffering," I answered. "None could blame you for being the mouthpiece
of his villainy."

But Melannie shook her head.

"The white man's country is not for me, Peter," she declared
sorrowfully. "I am too steeped in blood to take the white girls' hands
in friendship."

Then she clung to me weeping, with her head upon my breast, and so she
would sob herself to sleep like a child disappointed in play.

But, knowing her history, I could not find it in my heart to blame her
for what had been done at the dictation of others. I pictured her a
queen, among the whites, by reason of her wealth from the sale of her
jewels, who would doubtless have many noble suitors at her feet. Her
beauty was such as I had never seen equalled, and her imperious and
sometimes wilful ways only added to her indescribable charms.
It was now forced upon me that unless help came soon we must starve.
Our stock of fruit was almost exhausted, and scarce three quarts of
water remained in the tank. I had not been able to impress upon
Melannie the necessity for economy in our eating and drinking. She had
always been used to an abundance of simple fare, and, like a child,
lived for the hour, with no thought of the future. Van Luck had also
been in the habit of helping himself to what he wanted from our stock,
nor had I liked to interfere with him lest I might cause trouble. But
now I resolved to take a firmer stand with both my passengers.

To add to my anxieties I could see that Van Luck had been attracted by
the bag of jewels which Melannie had so imprudently displayed on the
night of our escape from the burning island. He was continually
watching it when his eyes were not employed in gazing across the sea,
and once I caught him creeping toward Melannie when she slept as if
with the intention of robbing her of the treasure. I spoke to him
roughly, and ordered him back to the fore part of the boat. He obeyed,
but his looks were so threatening that I momentarily expected him to
attack me.

I now determined to keep awake while Melannie slept in order that I
might watch Van Luck, and I impressed upon the queen that she must
never sleep when I slept. Thus we continued for some nights, keeping
watch and watch about. But I soon found I could not trust Melannie, for
when I awoke I discovered her to be asleep. But in this, as in all
else, Melannie was such a child that I could not find it in my heart to
scold her.



CHAPTER XXIV

HOW MY SECOND VOYAGE ENDED


I now resolved to place Van Luck under restraint, for it was plain to
me he was not responsible for his actions, and with this object in view
I went forward one morning with a rope in my hand, intending to secure
him in some way from harming himself and others. As I approached him
Van Luck, who seemed to divine my purpose, drew back with a savage,
animal-like growl. I tried to pacify him by speaking kindly, but he
suddenly sprang at me with a knife in his hand. I caught his arm before
he could strike, and we fell together upon the thwarts of the boat,
locked in a deadly embrace. Van Luck was a powerful man, and his
madness seemed to give him double strength. I called to Melannie to
keep away from us, but afraid for my safety, and fearless of her own,
she hurried to my assistance. "Get my knife," I whispered, for I was
unable to draw it myself from its sheath by my side. The brave girl
stooped to do my bidding, when the madman, at the same moment, wrenched
his arm free and struck her. Melannie fell with a low moan upon the
thwart beside me, and Van Luck, snatching the bag of gems from where it
hung at her girdle, retreated with his prize to the stern.

I was soon upon my feet, and lifting Melannie into a more easy
position, I turned my attention to Van Luck. He was sitting in the
stern, handling the gems and mumbling over them, and when he saw me he
clutched the bag, and, springing up, made as though to run from me,
unmindful of the fact that we were tossing in mid-ocean. Without
turning his head from looking back at me, he stumbled blindly into the
sea, where he soon became lost amid the grey waves that rose on every
side.

When I returned to Melannie I could see that she was sinking fast. I
did my best to staunch the blood which flowed from her breast. But her
whitened face, upon which the dews of death were gathering, warned me
she had not many moments to live.

"Kiss me, Peter," she whispered. "It is better that I should go. You do
not love me; you cannot love me as I love you. There is some one else
whom you love. I know it; I have felt it. Go to her, Peter, but do not
quite forget me."

These were her last words, and, when I kissed her, Melannie, Queen of
the Island of Gems, had crossed the waters of the Great Divide. Next
day I consigned her body to the deep wrapped in her robe of white tapa
cloth which formed her shroud.

I was now alone upon the waste of waters, with barely three days'
provisions between me and a slow and painful death. To add to my
anxieties I could see that the weather, which had been calm and fine
since my leaving the island, was about to change. Storm clouds gathered
on the horizon. The sun was obscured. Rain fell, and the wind rose
until it blew with the force of a tempest. I managed, with difficulty,
to unship the sail, and devoted myself to baling the boat, which
threatened at any moment to be swamped by the green water which came
aboard of her. All that day, and the next, I was driven by the storm
whither I knew not. The fruit which remained from our store was now
rendered uneatable by reason of the salt water, in which it washed from
side to side as the boat tossed and buffeted upon her way. A was
famished and numb with cold. Yet, even in my extremity, I clung to
life, and my last act of consciousness was to secure myself by a rope
to the thwart upon which I lay.

I was brought back to life by a flask of spirits held to my lips, and
upon opening my eyes I became conscious of a bronzed, kindly face
looking down at me in the water-logged boat.

"Hold up, lad," said my preserver in English, a language with which I
was well acquainted. "We'll have you aboard the 'Seagull' in a jiff,
and to-morrow you'll be as fit as a buck rat."

I then saw that a ship's boat was alongside the cutter, manned by four
men. The weather had by this time moderated, but the sea ran high. It
was therefore no easy matter to shift me from the cutter into the boat,
for I was helpless and weak as a child from exposure to wind and sea.
But willing hands at length effected the transfer, when we made for the
"Seagull", which lay hove to half a mile distant.

On coming aboard this vessel I was taken below and treated with great
kindness, when, after my wet clothes had been set to dry, I was put
into a warm bunk, a bowl of hot soup being brought to me, which, when I
had taken it, sent me into a sound sleep. I awoke much refreshed, and
on resuming my clothes I was glad to find that the belt in which I
carried my jewels had not been interfered with. I thought it more
prudent not to make mention of these gems, for I well knew that if they
were found upon me I should not be allowed to keep them. The captain,
having heard so much of my story as I chose to tell, promised me a
passage to England, whither his ship was bound.

I found the crew of the brig "Seagull" to be a rough lot, of mixed
nationalities, but Captain Bland, who was in command, was an Englishman
returning home after a voyage of two years in these latitudes. Upon
learning my rating on the "Arms of Amsterdam" he made me his second
mate, in place of one who had died shortly before my coming on board
the brig.

It may be imagined with what a thankful heart I welcomed a change from
the companionship of savages to that of civilized men, and when I
remembered the projects I had formed against my life I realized how
unwise it is to become the arbiter of one's own fate.

I voyaged in the English ship without mishap so long as we sailed upon
uncharted seas, but when we entered home waters we kept a sharp
look-out for pirates and free-booters, who at this time took toll from
all whom they encountered. Off the coast of Africa we exchanged signals
with passing vessels, from whom we learnt that pirates had been sighted
in close proximity, and one morning we noticed two schooners bearing
down upon us. As the wind was in favour of the pirates, for such we
judged them to be, we could not hope to outrun them, our ship being
foul after her long voyage, so the men were mustered and made ready for
action.

While these preparations were on foot I could not help admiring the
cool and fearless manner in which the English sailors set about their
work. There was no hurry or confusion in their methods. Each man knew
his duty, and was ready to do it.

With shouts and yells from the pirates on board of her, one of the
schooners now ranged alongside, and the grappling irons were hove
athwart our bulwarks. I sent a shower of grape from the gun, of which I
had charge, upon the deck of the schooner, killing four of the pirates
and wounding others, but this failed to stop the boarding party, who
now swarmed upon us. The fight became general, and, led by Captain
Bland, we engaged the robbers with such goodwill that we had almost
succeeded in driving them over the side when the second schooner came
up, and a fresh horde of ruffians joined in the attack. Retreating aft,
we again made a stand, though it was evident that, in the end, we must
be overpowered, outnumbered, as we were, three to one.

Still we continued to fight on with no thought of surrender, for we
knew that capture would mean death by walking the plank. Four of the
English on our side were killed, besides seven or eight of those of
other nationalities, whilst many were wounded. The decks were slippery
with blood, and a gathering mist made it impossible to ascertain the
extent of our losses. Captain Bland now placed himself beside me, and
together we held the pirates at bay.

"This can't last, Van Bu," he said, "and I am resolved that my ship
shall not fall into the hands of these scoundrels."

"What can you do?" I answered, without pausing in my defence.

"I'll fire the magazine sooner than let them take her," replied Bland.
"Keep them in check for a while and we'll sink together."

With these words he sprang to the hatchway while I continued to fight
on, expecting every moment to be blown with all hands into eternity.

I had given up hope, and the suspense of awaiting the expected
catastrophe was so acute that I had almost made up my mind to throw
myself overboard and take my chance with the sharks, when two square
sails emerged out of the smoke, and the hull of a man-o'-war, with a
wide spread of canvas, ranged alongside, while a number of English
man-o'-war's men, led by an officer, sprang upon our decks. At the sight
of the King's men the pirates flung themselves headlong aboard their
schooners, and endeavoured to make off, but they were soon captured and
brought back, to be afterwards tried and hanged at the yard-arm.

When the man-o'-war's men boarded us, I ran down the companion stairs
in search of the captain, whom I found lying senseless at the foot of
the ladder. Fortunately for him, and for all of us, he had been stunned
by a blow from one of the pirates as he descended, and was thus
prevented from carrying out his desperate resolve to fire the magazine.

This was my last adventure upon the voyage, and some weeks later,
without further mishap, we sighted a Dutch vessel bound for Amsterdam,
to which, at my request, I was transferred.



CHAPTER XXV

I ARRIVE AT AMSTERDAM


My first care after arriving at Amsterdam was to interview the
goldsmiths with a view to disposing of the jewels I had brought from
the Island of Gems, which proved to be of such value that I realized a
considerable sum by the sale of a small portion, for I wished to keep
some of the best as a wedding present for Anna.

I lost no time in sending my compliments to the Count of Holstein, with
a request that I might be allowed to call upon him. He consented to
receive me, and I hastened to the Count's palace, where I found the old
nobleman prostrated with grief at the continued and unexplained illness
of his only child; but when Anna had seen me, and satisfied herself of
my return, she recovered so rapidly that her father, on hearing from me
my improved condition, and the sentiments which I entertained for his
daughter, gladly gave his consent to our union.

From Anna I learnt of the persecution to which she had been subject
from Count Hendrick Luitken, which had mainly been the cause of her
illness. Convinced that she would never accept him willingly, Count
Hendrick, unknown to her father, had attempted to abduct her to his
country estate. With the aid of one of her attendants Anna had made her
escape, and believing me dead, while fearing further persecution, she
had determined, should she be restored to health, to seek the cloister
as her only safe refuge. As her tale proceeded I found it hard to
restrain myself from starting off at once in pursuit of the villain who
had treated my loved one so shamefully, and I promised myself to bring
him to account when the opportunity should arise.

I next sought Hartog at the tavern which I knew he frequented.  When he
saw me he cried out, "Is it you or your ghost, Peter? I had never
looked to see thee again, lad. I'd sooner have thee back than salvage
all the gold in the Orient."

I thanked him for his welcome, which I knew to be genuine, and taking a
seat at his right hand, I began to tell him of my adventures since we
last met. When he heard it was owing to the treachery of Van Luck I had
been cast into the sea to be washed ashore on the Island of Gems, and
of the subsequent fate of the island and of Van Luck, he became so
interested that he promised to meet me later, when I could give him a
more detailed account of all that had befallen me. I offered to share
with him my jewels, but to this he would not consent.

"Nay, Peter," he said, "I take no treasure that I had no hand in
getting. I am no pirate to rob a friend to whom chance and opportunity
have proved kind, but if it would pleasure thee to give me a keepsake,
I will wear one of thy jewels set as a brooch, as a reminder of thy
goodwill. I am, moreover, in no need of money, for the gold we took at
Cortes' island proved of greater value than I expected, and of this
your share, together with the wages due to you, I will see to it is
honestly paid by the merchants at Amsterdam. Besides, who knows we may
sail together again?" But at this I shook my head.

"No more voyages for me, Hartog," I said, "I have had my share of the
rough side of life, and will now be content with the smooth."

"And you not thirty!" laughed Hartog. "Nay, Peter, I'll never believe
it of you, that having tasted of adventure, you will be satisfied with
a humdrum life ashore."

I was now rich by the sale of my jewels, and able to choose for myself
my future mode of life. Count Holstein advised me in the disposal of my
wealth, and a fine estate being for sale not far from his own, I
purchased it.

I urged my parents, who still resided upon the Island of Urk, where my
father followed the occupation of a fisherman, to give up this mode of
earning a livelihood and retire into private life, when I promised to
make them a handsome allowance. But they would not consent to abandon
their independence.

"I am not an old man, Peter," said my father, when I spoke to him on
the subject, "and I have, I hope, still many useful years' work in me.
I have always been a fisherman. My father was a fisherman, and so was
his father before him. Fishing is the only work I understand. It is
honest work. Why then should I live in idleness upon thy bounty, when I
can still play my part in the world?"

I could not but see the force of his argument, so I contented myself
with making my parents comfortable in the old home by adding many
improvements which my mother desired but could not afford, while I
presented my father with a new fishing-boat fitted with all the latest
improvements.

It is wonderful, the power of money. It brought a new happiness into
the lives of my parents, and it made my mother look ten years younger.
My father also, and my two brothers, who were all fishermen, had now
come to regard me as the flower of the flock. Yet they had not scrupled
to knock me about, with little ceremony, in the days of my boyhood; nor
do I think they would have been behindhand in finding fault with me for
my folly, had I returned from my second voyage as poor and needy as
from the first. But such is life, and a man must take what comes, and
make the best of it and not the worst; so I accepted my new role as the
patron saint of my family with philosophy and content.

Anna approved my parents' decision not to give up their independence.
She came with me to see my mother, and I soon found that, as true
women, there was no inequality between them. Anna had lost her own
mother when she was too young to remember, and she clung to her new
mother that was to be with an affection born of her loving nature.

In a word, my jewels had brought me the only true happiness which
wealth can give--the power of making others happy.



CHAPTER XXVI

HAPPILY MARRIED


I now resolved to bring Count Hendrick Luitken to account for his
treatment of Anna, though I did not desire that Anna's name should
appear in the matter, so that gossip might be avoided. I therefore
bided my time, and waited an opportunity which soon came.

The Count of Holstein had resigned the governorship of Urk, and now
kept a fine establishment at Amsterdam, to which he frequently invited
company, and at one of his banquets I met, as I expected, Count
Hendrick Luitken.

As a merchant's clerk, and afterwards as a seaman, the Count had taken
no notice of me, but now that I was rich and betrothed to Anna, he
could do no less than treat me with consideration when he met me at her
father's house.

The banquet was sumptuous, and no effort was spared to make it worthy
of the late Governor's hospitality. Only men were invited, no women
being present, so that free scope was given for the gluttony and
drunkenness which usually prevailed at such entertainments. Great
joints of beef and venison vanished like melting snow before the
keen-set appetites of the diners, and goblets of wine disappeared down
thirsty throats until all present were more or less under the influence
of liquor. Toward the end of the entertainment, some horse-play was
indulged in by the younger guests, among whom Count Hendrick Luitken
was conspicuous. I could see he was the worse for liquor, and as often
happens to those under the influence of strong drink, his veneer gave
place to a quarrelsome arrogance in which his true disposition was
displayed. Accompanied by some of his friends as boisterous as himself,
he came over to where I was sitting, and, planting himself in a vacant
chair on the other side of the table in front of me, he asked rudely
how the fishing trade prospered at Urk.

I felt the blood mount to my face as I answered that for all I knew to
the contrary it prospered well enough, although I had for some years
past been away from Urk, and could therefore not answer the question as
fully as I might otherwise have done.

"You've been a pirate since you gave up the fishing," sneered the
Count, "and to some purpose if report speaks true."

For answer I threw the wine which stood in a half-emptied goblet at my
elbow in his face.

The Count sprang to his feet, the red wine dripping from his handsome
doublet, while his face worked with passion.

"Insolent!" he cried, when he had mastered himself sufficiently to
articulate. "My rank will not let me fight you, but I have influence
enough to punish you as you deserve."

"No difference in rank exists between us, my lord," I answered, "and I
claim the right to cross swords in an affair of honour with all save
those of royal blood. Grant me the satisfaction I demand, or I will
brand you as a braggart and a coward throughout every town of the
Netherlands."

I could see that the Count changed colour at my words. As the son of a
fisherman he could have pleaded his nobility as an excuse for not
meeting me, and had me punished by the law, but he had forgotten that
my betrothal to Anna carried with it a dignity equal to his own, or I
doubt he had been so ready with his tongue.

A hasty consultation was held among those who were with him, from which
it appeared I was judged to be in the right, for presently the count
turned and said to me, with a surly frown, "At dawn, then, in the
courtyard," and quitted the hall.

Such scenes were not uncommon at this time, and beyond a question or
two in our immediate vicinity, but little notice was taken of what had
occurred. But Hugh Bergin, a friend who offered to second me in my
affair with the count, advised some rest before the hour of meeting,
which was now almost at hand, for it was said the count was a skilful
swordsman, who had never yet failed to kill or maim his adversary in a
duel.

Hugh Bergin and I were first in the courtyard at break of day, and here
we were presently joined by the count and his seconds.

Count Hendrick Luitken and I now stepped forward, and, the rapiers
living been handed to us, we fell to the task of I trying to kill one
another according to the rules of the duello.

At first I parried the count's attack, in order that I might learn the
extent of his boasted skill, but I soon found myself to be his equal,
if not his superior, in sword play, for I had spent much of my spare
time in the gymnasium at Amsterdam, where I had become the favourite
pupil of the instructor.

The count, I thought, seemed surprised at my cunning in fence, and lost
the confident smile with which he had first, regarded me. Presently I
felt the point of my rapier touch his tunic upon the breast, and, in my
sensitive grasp, I knew that my blade had encountered steel. The look
which I gave him must have conveyed to him the knowledge that I had
discovered his treachery, for he set his lips and attacked me with even
greater fury than before, but my blood was up, and I beat his guard
down with such force that I was presently enabled, by a trick I had
learnt, known as binding the blade, to wrest the weapon from his hand.
The seconds would now have interfered, but my temper was not to be
restrained, and, to the astonishment of those present, I seized the
count by the throat, and, tearing open his tunic, laid bare a
breastplate which he wore next his skin. No blow that I could have
struck this cowardly noble would have hurt him so much as this
exposure. With shamefaced looks his seconds led him away.  This was the
last I saw of him, for he soon after left Holland, and took service
with the Spaniards, with whom he had long been in league. Some years
later he was condemned as a heretic, and suffered death by torture at
the hands of the Inquisition.

Nothing now stood between me and my marriage with Anna, which was duly
celebrated with much pomp at the Count of Holstein's town palace, after
which Anna and I retired to my country estate, there to live, as I
thought, the rest of our days in peace.

Dirk Hartog, to whom I bade good-bye after the wedding, for his
restless spirit was away again upon a fresh voyage, predicted I would
one day become weary of inaction.

"If ever the roving spirit comes over thee, Peter," he said as he wrung
my hand at parting, "there's always a place for thee aboard my ship.
Travel once tasted is a lodestone that draws the spirit from the
cosiest corner to fresh adventure."

But at this I shook my head. "Here is my lodestone," I said, and I
pressed Anna to my heart.

But who can foretell the future, or predict the decrees of Fate?



CHAPTER XXVII

ONCE MORE TO THE SOUTH


Five years of wedded happiness followed my return to Amsterdam from my
second voyage with Dirk Hartog into the Southern Seas.

I had now come to regard myself as being past the age of adventure. My
income was large, my estate substantial; and the wealth I had brought
back with me from the Island of Gems, shrewdly invested by my
father-in-law, the Count of Holstein, enabled me to maintain a position
compatible with the dignity of the noble family into which, through my
marriage with Anna Holstein, I was admitted a member. Nothing,
therefore, was farther from my thoughts and inclinations than a return
to the life of peril through which, in my younger days, I had passed,
when suddenly the blow fell which changed all my plans.

During the year 1630 an epidemic known as the "Black Death" raged
through the Netherlands, and, as one of the victims to the fell
disease, Anna, my wife, was taken from me. I followed her to the grave,
and returned to my desolate hearth determined to die also. To this end
I shut myself in the room which Anna had lately occupied, where I would
permit nothing to be disturbed, nor would allow any to enter. Such food
as I required was brought, by my orders, into an adjoining apartment,
where I ate, when my appetite craved, in moody silence. Dust gathered.
The air in the room became oppressive. I regarded this mournful chamber
as my tomb.

My servants, and those who had called themselves my friends, avoided
me. I heard whispers at my barred and bolted door, saying that I was
mad.

A madhouse I knew to be worse than a prison. I therefore resolved to
leave my home before I was prevented from doing so.

How long I had remained in the state of misery and dejection to which I
had abandoned myself I cannot say. It must have been some considerable
time, for when, at last, I came out into the light, the sun dazzled me.
None offered to stop me when I left the house. Many of my one-time
servants had been discharged by my father-in-law, who had taken upon
himself the management of my estates. The gatekeeper looked at me
curiously when I passed his lodge, and that was all the notice
vouchsafed me by my former dependents.

I knew that Dirk Hartog had returned from the voyage upon which he had
embarked soon after my marriage, and to him I determined to carry my
broken heart. Only upon that mirror of mystery known as the ocean could
I look for peace.

I found my old commander in the cabin of the "Santa Isabel", an ancient
Spanish vessel, reported to have voyaged to the south in 1595, when
Mendana, a Spaniard, was sent out with instructions to establish a
colony at the island of San Christobal, in the Solomon Group, and from
thence to make an attempt to discover the Great Southern Continent.
Mendana's fleet consisted of three large vessels and a frigate, and,
since it was intended to settle a colony, many took their wives with
them, among the emigrants being Mariana, the wife of Lope de Vega, who
commanded the "Santa Isabel". The total number of men in the fleet was
378, of whom 280 were soldiers. The "Santa Isabel" became detached from
the rest of the fleet, and reached the Great South Land, where she
spent five years in a harbour said to be of great beauty and
extent--the finest harbour in the world.

All this we learnt, from the log of the "Santa Isabel", though what
became of the expedition, or of those who composed it, the record did
not disclose. But the reading which interested Hartog most, keen
treasure-hunter that he continued to be, was a paper describing some
curious drawings he had found in one of the lockers of the vessel, of
hands, some with six fingers, some with four, and others with only two.
Under these drawings was the following inscription, translated into
Spanish from some ancient language: "These hands are not carved upon
the rocks, but are painted with a pigment that withstands the elements,
and yieldeth not to time. They mark the measures of gold obtained."
Then followed a rude chart giving the latitude and longitude of the
place which Hartog professed his ability to find.

"Join me, Peter," he said, "and let us ship together. There's treasure
to be won, dangers to be passed, and forgetfulness to be had in the
South. You are still a young man--in your prime.  Is it fair that you
should set yourself against that which plainly hath been decreed by
Fate?"

These words of Hartog moved me, as well they might, and I placed myself
unreservedly in his hands. My father-in-law, when he was made
acquainted with my desire to embark upon another voyage, offered no
opposition. He was, I imagine, glad to be rid of me, perceiving that my
moods ashore might interfere with the plans he had formed for the
management of my estates. So, all being settled to our mutual
satisfaction, Hartog and I went to work to equip our vessel, in which
occupation I found relief from my sorrow, and became more reconciled to
submit myself to the will of heaven.

In three weeks our preparations were completed. A new ship was
purchased, and commissioned without regard to cost. So much money was
spent upon her that Hartog called her the "Golden Seahorse". She
carried six guns, and a brass bow-chaser, with which Hartog declared we
might make war upon the whole South Pacific in the event of our being
forced to hostilities. A great quantity of arms and ammunition was put
aboard, together with a supply of beads, knives, and bright-coloured
cloths to barter with the natives. Berths were also found for Bantum
and Janstins in the officers' quarters, and although Hartog and I were
joint owners of the "Golden Seahorse", and shared equally in the profit
or loss of the expedition, Hartog was given the supreme command.

It was not until we had lost sight of land, and when I felt the call of
the sea, that I ceased to mourn my lost Anna, and realized my
obligation to live what remained to me of life in such manner as an
all-wise Providence might determine.



CHAPTER XXVIII

THE MOLUCCA ISLANDS


On this voyage to the place of the painted hands Dirk Hartog resolved
upon a different route from that taken by former navigators to the
Great South Land, and within three months of leaving Amsterdam the
"Golden Seahorse" came to anchor among a group of islands to the north
of New Holland known as the Molucca Islands, first visited by Sir
Francis Drake in the "Pelican" during the year 1579.

The competition between England and Holland for sea supremacy was at
this time very keen, and the ships of both nations sometimes carried a
broom at the masthead to signify the sweeping of the ocean. We found,
however, no English or other vessels to dispute with us our landing at
the Moluccas, where the King received us with some ceremony.

Providing ourselves with presents, Hartog and I, attended by the ship's
officers, went ashore to pay our respects to the King, who accepted our
tribute graciously, and, looking up to heaven, said:

"I know that nothing happens to men which has not, long since, been
decreed by Fate. So bring your ship into the harbour and let your
companions land in safety, in order that, after so much tossing about
on the sea, and so many dangers, you may securely enjoy the comforts of
life on shore and recruit your strength."

Having thus spoken, the King laid aside his diadem, and embraced each
of us in turn. He then directed such refreshments as the country
produced to be set before us.

The people of the Moluccas cannot be classed as savages. They possess
an intelligence and form of government which lifts them above
aboriginal natives. Each island has its king, who is, nevertheless,
subservient to the chief Thedori, by whom we were received. This
monarch is a man of small stature, but reputed wise beyond the wisdom
of most men.

Certain it is he made wise laws for the good government of his kingdom,
one of which might, with advantage, be followed by law-makers in more
civilized nations. This is the law which makes for peace. So long as
the king upon each island maintains peace, his people show him almost
divine honours; but, if he is anxious for war, they never rest till he
is slain by the enemy in battle, and to this end they set him in the
front rank, where he has to stand the whole brunt of the combat. His
armies, moreover, do not exert themselves vigorously until they know
that the king has fallen. Then they begin to fight for liberty and
their new king. Since this law was enacted no king has entered upon a
war without being slain in battle. Hence peace reigns, where formerly
continued hostilities prevailed.

The city of Porne, in which King Thedori reigns as paramount chief,
consists of twenty thousand houses, all of which are low-built cabins.
Some of the men who inhabit these dwellings have such long ears that
they reach down to their shoulders, and when we expressed surprise at
this, we were assured that on an island, not far off, there were men
who had such large ears, that with one ear they could, when they liked,
cover the whole of their heads. But Hartog disbelieved this story, nor
would he visit the island when this prodigy was offered to be shown to
him. We were not in, search of monsters, he said, but of treasure.

We had been informed by one of the merchants at Amsterdam that when we
should come to the island of Solo, one of the group of the Molucca
Islands, we would find pearls as large as clove's eggs, but Thedori did
not encourage us when we hinted to him our desire to possess some of
these marvels. They were only to be found, he said, in very deep water,
and this was not the season to obtain them. We decided not to press the
matter, since we desired to leave a favourable impression, but Hartog
promised himself a return visit, when, should friendly overtures prove
of no avail, an appeal, might be made to the King's better judgment
with the aid of our six guns and brass bowchaser. It is certain that
pearls of great size do exist on these islands. The King wore one in
his crown the size of a hen's egg.

On our first night in harbour at the Molucca Islands we witnessed the
most remarkable display I have ever beheld. The islands are well
wooded, and amongst the trees by night, through the whole island, did
show themselves an infinite swarm of fiery worms flying in the air,
whose bodies, being no larger than common house-flies, made such a show
and light as if every twig or tree had been a burning candle. In the
dark recesses of the woods, also, appeared wonderful black bats, with
red eyes, of which the inhabitants of this country stand in
considerable dread. The bats are thought to be the spirits of departed
kings, and none are allowed to molest them.

From the security of our vessel, which lay close to the shore, we were
able to view these marvels without danger, but the natives remained in
their huts, afraid to venture forth, so that nocturnal dances, or
meetings at camp fires, were here conspicuous by their absence.

We now met with an adventure that was destined to influence our future
in a manner we did not, at the time, foresee, or it is doubtful but we
would have hesitated before granting an asylum to the miserable
fugitive from King Thedori's tyranny, who now came aboard. Pedro de
Castro, the name of this refugee, a Spaniard, informed us that for some
time past he had been held as hostage by Thedori. Three years before
our visit to the Moluccas, so ran his tale, a Spanish vessel, of which
de Castro was first officer, had called at the islands. The captain and
crew had been well received by the King, who had pretended the same
friendliness towards them as he had shown to us. But so soon as a
favourable opportunity offered, Thedori had looted the ship, and taken
Pedro prisoner, declaring he would hold him to ransom, until his
friends returned to Spain, from where they must send cotton, and other
goods, not procurable at the Moluccas, in order to ensure his release.
It was by this means that Thedori obtained many useful commodities of
European workmanship, the presence of which we had noticed, with
surprise, among his people. De Castro had contrived to escape his
gaolers, and having swum aboard our vessel, he now besought us to save
him from the miserable condition to which he had been reduced since his
ship had sailed, leaving him dependent upon a vague promise of release
from captivity, which he knew might never be fulfilled.

"And mark you," he said, when we had assembled the officers in the
cabin to hear his story, "Thedori will serve you as he served us, when
the time is ripe for his treachery, for he possesses many guns, hidden
away, together with a great store of ammunition, so that he could send
an army against you that you would find it impossible to resist."

We thanked Pedro for his warning, and since we determined to profit by
it, we could do no less than offer him a berth among our officers. But
I had no love for Spaniards or their ways, and I lived to learn that my
distrust of them was not misplaced. That night we made preparations for
departure, and, with the first breath of dawn, we hove our anchor
aboard, and set a course for the open sea.

When it was seen that we were leaving the island the utmost excitement
prevailed on shore. The natives crowded upon the beach which bordered
the harbour, while some put off in their canoes, making an effort to
overtake us. But the "Golden Seahorse" was a ship very finely built,
which caused her to slip through the water, needing but little wind to
drive her at a rapid pace, so that we soon outdistanced our pursuers,
and an hour later the Molucca Islands had disappeared beyond the
horizon.



CHAPTER XXIX

THE VOYAGE CONTINUED


We had been compelled, by reason of the treachery of Thedori, to leave
the Moluccas without having obtained a supply of fresh water. This made
it necessary to keep a sharp look-out for some island from which to
replenish our tanks. On most of the islands in the Pacific water is
readily obtainable. It is only upon the Southern Continent that great
stretches of waterless country prevail.

At length we sighted an island, the coast of which was rocky and
barren. Through stress of weather we were compelled to keep off the
shore, steering northward until, on the third day, the weather having
moderated, we hove to as near to the coast as we dared approach, and
endeavoured to land a boat's crew. In spite of breakers and a heavy
sea, six of the sailors leaped overboard opposite a sandy beach, and
with great difficulty reached the shore. Whilst searching for water the
sailors saw four natives, who fled at their approach. They were wild,
black, and entirely naked. Not finding water, the seamen regained the
boat, bruised and half-drowned. Again we set sail, and next day we were
off an island of considerable size, with two dangerous reefs stretching
out into the sea. At length we managed to effect a landing, and fresh
water being found, the ship was brought to anchor between the reefs,
where some shelter was to be had, although the position of the vessel
was by no means secure.

Upon this island we fell in with a race of savages totally unlike any
we had previously met with. These people have no houses or garments of
any kind, and, setting aside their human shape, they differ but little
from brutes. They have large heads, round foreheads, and great brows.
Their eyelids are always half-closed to keep the flies out of their
eyes, these insects being so troublesome that no fanning will keep them
away; so from their infancy being so tormented, they do never open
their eyes as other people do, nor can they see far unless they hold up
their heads as if they were looking at something over them. They have
great bottle noses, full lips, and wide mouths.

They appeared to be quite indifferent to our landing upon their island,
nor did they exhibit any fear or surprise at seeing us.  We endeavoured
to make them help us carry some water barrels to the boats. But though
the barrels contained only six gallons each, and we put them on their
shoulders, all the signs we could make to get them to carry them were
useless. They stood like statues, without motion, grinning like so many
monkeys. Having watered our vessel we once more put to sea.

We were now, by our reckoning, somewhere in the vicinity of New
Holland, and at six o'clock in the evening we shortened sail. We were
then in twenty fathoms of water, when suddenly we again found ourselves
in deep water, and believed all danger at an end. But in less than an
hour, without warning, our ship struck on a rock, and remained
immovable. Not being near to any shore we were well aware of the
gravity of our position. We feared we had struck a submerged coral
reef, and all sails were immediately taken in, and the boats lowered.
We had struck just before dark, and at daylight I observed land some
eight miles distant. High tide was expected at about eleven o'clock,
when it was hoped the vessel would float off, though we feared she
would sink in deep water.

At twenty minutes past ten the ship floated, but the leak she had
sprung gained on the pumps, and there was now three feet nine inches of
water in the hold. The men were wearied to death.  Each could only pump
a few minutes at a time, and then sink exhausted upon the deck. At
first we despaired of saving the ship, but eventually we got a sail
drawn over the leak, and anchored seven leagues from the shore. Next
day we found a safe place where the vessel could be moored near the
beach, where, on examining the ship's bottom, we found that a large
piece of rock had broken away from the reef and remained stuck in the
hole it made. Had it not been for this singular fact the "Golden
Seahorse" must have foundered.

During the week which followed this adventure, which had almost proved
disastrous to our voyage, we lightened the ship as much as possible,
and made our camp ashore. We judged we had now come to the coast of New
Holland, and since I had been the first to observe it on the morning
after we had struck upon the reef, Hartog named that part of the coast
Peter's land.

The ship being safely careened, the carpenters set to work to repair
the damage done to the hull by the sharp rocks, and, as this would
occupy some time, we decided to overhaul our stores, of which we made
an inventory. At this work we found the services of Pedro de Castro of
great value. De Castro was a man well versed in figures, and able to
enumerate with surprising facility. Indeed, I think he spent most of
his spare time in mental arithmetic, calculating the riches and
treasure which he hoped some day to obtain.

One evening, when Hartog and I were seated together in front of our
tent, de Castro brought us a paper which he said had been given him by
a relative at Lisbon, who informed him that it was an extract from an
ancient Portuguese manuscript, supposed to have been written by
navigator Van Nuyts in 1467. The translation of this curious paper ran
as follows:

"Land of Gold. While some fishermen of Lamakera, in the island of Solo,
were engaged in their fishing, there arose so great a tempest that they
were unable to return to the shore. Thus they yielded to the force of
the storm, which was such that, in five days, it took them to the Land
of Gold, which is properly called the Southern Coast. When the
fishermen reached the Land of Gold, not having eaten during those days
of tempest, they set about seeking for provisions, and such happy and
successful fortune had they after searching the country for yams and
batatas, that they alighted on much gold in a cavern, enough to load
their boats until they could carry no more, but, when they were ready
to start loading, there came upon them so great a trepidation that they
did not dare take any of the gold away with them."

This further account of gold upon the Southern Continent strengthened
our belief that treasure would be found at the place of the painted
hands, to visit which our present voyage had been undertaken. But what
could have caused the fishermen of Lamakera so great a trepidation we
were at a loss to understand.  Well, perhaps we would soon learn, for
Hartog reckoned we were not many leagues north of the place marked upon
the chart, which had encouraged us to embark upon this voyage.



CHAPTER XXX

A SPANISH SETTLEMENT


The "Golden Seahorse" being now repaired and revictualled, we once more
put to sea, and stood to the south at a safe distance from the coast
for fear of again meeting shoal water. On the morning of the first day
out we passed the shoal upon which we had so nearly lost our ship, it
being but a spot of land appearing above the surface, with several
rocks about it ten feet high, to be seen at low tide. It is of
triangular form, each side one league and a half long.

We now approached some formidable cliffs, which rose, like a gateway,
shutting out the land beyond. It was here that Hartog reckoned we
should find the place of the painted hands, if, indeed, such a locality
had any real existence.

The weather was now calm and fine, the wind fair, with a cloudless sky
overhead, so that barely an hour passed from the time we observed the
cliffs before we rounded them, when a sight appeared so unlooked for as
made us wonder if our eyes had played us false.

The coast along which we had sailed since first sighting the Great
South Land had been so barren and desolate as to make the novel and
attractive scene which now greeted us the more remarkable. Clustered
together in a pleasant valley, surrounded by green hills, and facing a
white sandy beach, were some two hundred houses, built of stone, and
roofed with what appeared to be clay, of such extraordinary whiteness
that it glistened, like snow, in the sun's rays. The herbs and grass
around the town were green and inviting, while tall, straight trees,
not torn by the wind, bore evidence of shelter from tempest which the
hills provided. To add to the beauty of the scene, flocks of parakeets
and bright-coloured parrots flew among the branches of the trees, while
sweet scents, from many kinds of flowers, were wafted to us from the
shore. On the beach we perceived a number of white people, dressed in
the fashion of some thirty years before. Many of them wore ruffs and
cloaks, which were now no longer the mode, and, to set our doubts at
rest as to their nationality, the Spanish ensign floated from a
flagstaff in front of the town. It was plain we had chanced upon a
Spanish colony, probably of some of the people of Mendana's fleet, who
had succeeded in forming a settlement in New Holland.

Anxious to make a favourable impression upon our first landing, Hartog
and I now donned our best, and the cutter, being manned, we were pulled
toward the beach, where we could see that a number of Spaniards had
assembled to receive us.

On landing we stepped forward as the leaders of our expedition, when we
were greeted with the most extravagant demonstrations of delight at our
arrival, and were presently conducted by some of those whom we took to
be in authority to one of the flat-roofed stone houses, somewhat larger
than the others, where Donna Isabel Barreto, the ruler of the
settlement, graciously welcomed us. From her we learnt the following
strange story.

The voyage of Mendana, as previously stated, had been undertaken with a
view to colonization as well as discovery. After reaching the Solomon
group the fleet dispersed. The "Santa Isabel", as her log informed us,
spent five years in a fine harbour on the Southern Continent, from
whence she had returned without establishing a settlement. Another of
the ships and the frigate remained for a time at the islands, where the
crews left many evidences of their visit. But it was reserved for us to
ascertain what had befallen the "Concordia", the third of the vessels
of Mendana's fleet. This ship, under the command of Captain Barreto,
had reached New Holland, where the present settlement had been formed,
and the town built. There were turbulent elements, however, among the
crew, who had been allowed a license at the islands which their captain
was not disposed to continue. He ordered the execution of some, before
the rest were brought to submission. But there was sullen discontent
remaining. To make matters worse, sickness broke out.  It carried off a
large number of the Spaniards, and Barreto himself died, as did his
first officer. The pilot then claimed to take command, but to this
Donna Isabel objected. As the captain's wife, she declared it to be her
right to rule the settlement, and, marrying a young Spanish officer,
Fernando de Castro, she assumed the title of queen, with Fernando as
prince consort. To complicate matters still further, the pilot and
those who were attached to him sailed away in the "Concordia", taking
the infant son of Fernando and Isabel with them, and leaving the
adherents of the queen marooned in this pleasant and fertile valley.
Fernando, soon after the sailing of the "Concordia", died, since when
Donna Isabel, who had resumed the name of Barreto, had reigned alone.
This was, in brief, the story the Queen had to tell; and on hearing it
Pedro de Castro threw himself at her feet, and claimed to be her son.

Donna Isabel was now past middle age, being near forty years old, but
she bore herself with a degree of uprightness and vigour which defied
the advance of time. She was readily convinced of the truth of Pedro's
statement, and when she had bidden him to rise she embraced him, and
acknowledged him to be her son.

"You have been led back to me," she said, "by the will of heaven, and
by the courage of these brave men who shall henceforth be to me my
brothers."

Fair words, but lacking the ring of sincerity, as we were subsequently
to find.

Queen Barreto then begged us to consider her dominions at our disposal
to the extent of all they contained. Houses were allotted us, and
servants were instructed to place before us the best the country
produced. We fared sumptuously, for the natural growth in this
sheltered valley is surprising. The bread given us was made from three
kinds of roots, of which there is a great abundance, and they grow
without labour, receiving no more help than being dug up and cooked.
These roots are pleasant to the taste, very nourishing, and keep for a
long while. They are a yard long, and half a yard thick. The fruits,
too, were numerous and good, consisting of oranges and lemons, which
the Spaniards had planted, together with many earth-nuts, almonds, and
other fruit, as well as sweet canes. Of live stock the settlers
possessed goats, pigs, and a few cows. Round the houses were many fruit
trees, with entwined palisades, by reason of the great quantity of
pigs; the town was well arranged, the houses and yards being very
clean.

Queen Barreto kept Pedro with her in her own house, while Hartog and I,
together with the officers and crew of the "Golden Seahorse", were
suitably accommodated and made free of the settlement, where we enjoyed
a run ashore after so much storm and stress at sea.

We had not yet ascertained whether the settlers had been successful in
finding gold in this place. Pearls and silver they possessed as
evidence of their wealth, but we saw no gold among them. Pedro, who
came to consult with us regarding this, informed us that his mother,
the queen, had heard nothing of the place of the painted hands, or of
gold being found there, but had told him that some years previously an
expedition, sent to punish a tribe of natives who had proved hostile to
the settlers, had reported the discovery of caves, very deep and
mysterious, into which the natives could not be induced to enter,
where, it was reported, gold was to be found by washing the sand from
the bed of a subterranean stream which took its course through the
caves from none knew where, and emptied itself into the sea.

To these caves, therefore, now being rested and refreshed, we
determined to direct our steps.



CHAPTER XXXI

THE PLACE OF THE PAINTED HANDS


Upon leaving the Spanish settlement, Queen Barreto provided us with an
escort to guide us to the caves in which it was reported gold was to be
found. The country outside the settlement was of the same rocky, barren
nature as everywhere along the coast, while the natives we encountered
were hostile and warlike. Armed with spears and slings, they attacked
us, and were only driven off after many had been slain.

Pedro de Castro did not accompany us. He had pleaded a disinclination
to leave his mother so soon after their long separation. At the time we
thought his conduct strange, but in return for the assistance that
Queen Barreto had given us, we promised him a share of any gold
obtained.

At length, after a day's journey, we came to the entrance to the caves,
a gloomy portal to a tunnel which ran into a high rocky cliff from
which issued a sluggish stream over a bed of water-worn pebbles. At the
entrance to this dark recess, upon the face of a flat rock, appeared
painted hands, some with six fingers, some with four, and others with
only two. They were painted with a dark brown pigment, and were easily
discernible. It was the sight of these hands, and the assertion that
they had reference to the measures of gold obtained, as set forth on
the paper found by Hartog in the locker of the "Santa Isabel", that
decided us to explore farther into the heart of the caves, and, having
procured torches, Hartog and I, accompanied by Janstins and a lad named
Bruno, a Mulatto, entered the tunnel, and made our way along the left
bank of the stream.

As we advanced the caves increased in size, until at length we stood in
a great apartment, formed of colossal fluted pillars, and roofed high
above our heads with depending stalactites which glistened in the light
of our torches. Everywhere in this huge cavern the same mineral
formation was to be seen, so that we seemed to be standing in a palace
composed of glittering gems.

The stream here was wide, moving sluggishly over a bed of black sand.
Presently a cry from Janstins brought us to where he was standing
beside a heap of what, at first sight, looked like yellow clay, but
which, upon closer inspection, proved to be a quantity of gold dust,
interspersed with small nuggets. Here, then, was the treasure collected
by the fishermen from Lamakera, and abandoned by them in 1467, almost
two hundred years before the date of our coming. But the cause of the
great trepidation which had come upon them, so that they had been
unable to carry the gold away, we had yet to learn.

We had become so intent upon our gold discovery that we had failed to
notice a peculiar humming sound, which became louder as it drew nearer,
and suddenly we observed descending upon us, from the vaulted roof,
what appeared to be white feathery clouds, which, however, speedily
resolved themselves into a prodigious number of flying hornets. Bruno
was the first to be attacked by these venomous insects. In a moment he
was covered with them, and ran screaming into the water of the
slowly-moving stream. His cries were pitiful, but we could do nothing
to relieve him. In less than a minute he was stung to death.

It now became imperative, if we would save ourselves, to make the best
of our way out of the caves without attempting to carry off any of the
gold we had found. The fate of the boy Bruno had caused a diversion
among the hornets to which we probably owed our lives. In the hope of
distracting them still further, we fired off our muskets, which awoke
echoes in that silent place the like of which had never been heard
before. Had we exploded a barrel of gunpowder, the sound of it would
not have been louder nor the concussion greater, than was caused by the
discharge of our firearms. Huge masses of stalactites fell from the
roof, while the air space around us became filled with bats, and flying
creatures with heads like foxes, disturbed from their slumbers by the
discharge of our guns. The flapping of their wings drove off the
hornets, and greatly aided us in our escape from a horrible death.

On reaching the entrance to the caves, where we arrived more dead than
alive from our adventure, we were met by those of our crew whom we had
brought with us, but were informed that our guides had returned to the
settlement. For this conduct the guides had offered no explanation.
They had said they were acting in accordance with directions given them
by Queen Barreto, and that, having brought us to the mouth of the
caves, their mission ended. We did not at the time attach much
importance to this desertion of us, being now well acquainted with the
path over the cliffs into the valley, opposite to which our ship lay at
anchor, so we did not anticipate any difficulty in returning. As we
advanced, however, our journey was continually impeded by attacks made
upon us by hostile natives, so it was not until toward the evening of
the second day after leaving the caves that we succeeded in climbing
the cliffs above the settlement. Judge then of our dismay when, upon
looking seaward, we perceived our ship standing out from the bay under
full sail, while at her mizzen floated the flag of Spain.



CHAPTER XXXII

MAROONED


As we stood upon the cliffs overlooking the Spanish settlement,
watching, with blank faces, the "Golden Seahorse" sailing seaward under
a foreign flag, it was borne in upon us that we owed our loss to the
treachery of Queen Barreto, who, taking advantage of our absence, had
pirated our vessel. On descending to the town our suspicions were
confirmed. Here we found the settlement abandoned by the Spaniards,
who, before leaving, had imprisoned our crew, bound and gagged, in the
Queen's house.  Having released them, we heard from Bantum, our second
officer, the particulars of what had occurred.

"No sooner had you left the town," said he, "than Queen Barreto, with
Pedro de Castro and a swarm of Spaniards, came aboard of us. De Castro
knew where the arms were kept, and, before I could guess what they
intended, they had hoisted their flag at the mizzen, and held
possession of the ship. We put up a fight, but what could we do,
outnumbered as we were--ten to one? We were quickly overpowered and
brought ashore, where they trussed us up and left us as you found us.
Had you not come in time we would certainly have died of thirst and
starvation."

When we had listened to Bantum's account of what had taken place we
could not blame him for the loss of the ship, but Hartog swore a great
oath that, if ever he should meet de Castro again he would reckon with
him in such manner as his base betrayal of us gave warrant. The
ingratitude of this man will be apparent when it is remembered that we
had rescued him from slavery, had admitted him to an equality with our
officers, and had loaded him with favours, for which he repaid us by
stealing our vessel.

It now became necessary to review our situation. Of food and fresh
water we had an abundant supply, and there were dwellings at our
disposal more than enough, for the Spaniards had numbered over two
hundred, while we mustered but thirty. We possessed, however, no arms
or ammunition beyond what we had taken with us upon our expedition to
the caves. The thought of this caused us grave anxiety when we
reflected upon the small force at our disposal should hostile natives,
having discovered our weakness, be tempted to attack us. Repining,
however, would avail us nothing, so, at Hartog's request, I set about
organizing our camp. Hartog himself was so cast down by the loss of our
ship that he seemed incapable of diverting his thoughts from the
catastrophe which had overtaken us. I thus found our former positions
reversed, Hartog being on the brink of the same hopeless despair which
had obsessed me when Anna was taken from me, while upon me devolved the
task of heartening him.

And now a new danger threatened us. We had not been a month at the
settlement after the piracy of the "Golden Seahorse" before it became
evident to me that our crew had ceased to regard their officers with
the same respect as they had formerly shown them on board ship.
Sailors, ashore, are accustomed to a license they do not look for at
sea. Hence it was but natural that, since their ship no longer claimed
their duty, they should regard themselves as freed from discipline.
This revolt against authority, however, I knew to be a menace to our
common safety, and I determined to put an end to it. I spoke first to
Hartog, who spent most of his time in the Queen's house, brooding over
our misfortune, and thus setting a very bad example.

"It is not because you are no longer captain of the 'Golden Seahorse',"
I said to him, "that you should regard your responsibilities at an end.
If you can regain your authority over the men, we may yet win through.
If not, then let us at once abandon ourselves to the mercy of the
savages, whom, I may tell you, I have observed watching us from the
cliffs above, and who are only waiting to assure themselves of our
weakness before they attack us."

For a time Hartog remained silent. Then he rose, and stretched himself;
drawing himself up to his full height, he stood before me, the finest
specimen of a man I have ever met.

"You are right, Peter," he said. "I deserve the scolding you have given
me. Show me the man who will not obey me, and I will talk to him."

Now there was one, Hoft Hugens, a Swede, who had made himself a leader
among the mutinous and lazy crew. I had intended dealing with this man
myself, but it now occurred to me that his schooling would serve to
rouse Hartog from his apathy.

"If you must know, then," I answered, "it is Hoft Hugens to whom the
men look as leader."

The next minute Hartog was striding through the town, a native club in
his hand, which he had taken from the Queen's house.  Although past
noon, there were none to be seen outside the huts.  All were asleep
after their mid-day meal, upon which they had gorged themselves to
repletion. At the sight of this defiance of discipline a deep flush
overspread Hartog's face, as though he felt shame for having allowed
his authority to pass from him.  Then he began to beat with his club
upon the doors of the houses until the men came out, some in sleepy
remonstrance, and others with curses in their mouths at having been
disturbed from their siesta.

"Well, what have you to say?" demanded Hartog. "Is it not enough that
our condition is such that if only fifty determined savages came
against us they could kill us and destroy the settlement, but you must
waste your time in gluttony and sleep? Where is the watch, whose duty
it is to keep a look-out as though I stood upon my quarterdeck?"

"Nay, Hartog," answered Hugens, whom the others now pushed forward to
be their spokesman, "there must be an end to such talk. We shall never
get away from this valley. What need then for so much rule when death
is certain?"

"Certain it is for thee," cried Hartog, placing his hand on Hugen's
shoulder, and tightening his grip so that the man winced with pain.
"Ask pardon before I tear thine arm from its socket!"

At this, those who had begun to advance to their leader's assistance
drew back. It was known that the punishment which Hartog threatened had
actually been carried out by one of the buccaneer captains upon a
mutinous seaman, and none doubted but Hartog had the strength to fulfil
his threat. Hugen's face blanched as the grip tightened upon his arm.
He tried to free himself. Tears started to his eyes. A sob broke from
his heaving chest. Then he screamed with the intolerable agony he
suffered, but none dare interfere, and I verily believe that Hartog
would have performed his promise and torn the limb from its socket had
not one of the men, who had been looking seaward, cried, "A sail!
sail!"



CHAPTER XXXIII

CAPTAIN MONTBAR


The report of a sail having been sighted dispelled every other thought.
Hartog released Hugens, and, hurrying to the Queen's house, shortly
afterwards returned with his spyglass, with which he anxiously scanned
the horizon.

"God be thanked, Peter," he said presently, "our ship is coming back to
us, convoyed by a frigate."

So great was my joy at hearing these words that at first I could hardly
credit the truth of them, but as the ships drew nearer we could all see
that the smaller of the two was the "Golden Seahorse". The vessels
sailed into the bay which formed the port of the settlement, and
dropped anchor close to the shore, when a boat put off from the
frigate, and was rowed toward the beach. The crew were smart, and the
boat was fresh painted, while, seated at the stern, was a striking, yet
curious, figure. His dress was that of a French exquisite, very rich,
and trimmed with much gold braid. On his head was a curled wig of the
latest mode, and a flashing diamond brooch adorned his lace cravat. On
nearing the beach upon which we were assembled one of the sailors
stepped into the water and waded ashore, carrying this gallant upon his
back, who, being deposited upon a dry spot, so that his buckled shoe
might escape damage from the salt water, gravely saluted us. Hartog
then, stepped forward, when the Frenchman, for such we took him to be,
addressed him as follows:--

"I have come, sir," said he, "to restore to you your vessel, which I
understand was stolen by Spanish treachery."

"You are welcome," answered Hartog. "I thank Providence that my ship
has fallen into honest hands. I have yet to learn to whom I owe its
recovery. May I hope that you will favour me with your name?"

"Montbar," replied the stranger, and at the mention of his name both
Hartog and I started.

"You honour us by your visit, sir," said Hartog, with a bow as graceful
as that with which Captain Montbar acknowledged it. "Your reputation is
known to all seamen as that of a brave man and a princely gentleman."

Hartog then led the way to the Queen's house, where we proposed to
confer together as to the circumstances which had occasioned Captain
Montbar's arrival.

Captain Montbar was known to us, and to most navigators at this time,
as a French gentleman of fortune who, having heard of the cruelties
practised by the Spaniards, had conceived an aversion against them
which amounted almost to frenzy. He had heard of the buccaneers, who
were known to be the most inveterate enemies of Spain, and, in order to
join them, he fitted out a frigate which he placed at their disposal,
together with his own services. The achievements of this frigate were
so pronounced, and the Spaniards suffered so much from Montbar's
exploits, that he acquired the name of 'Exterminator.' His intrepidity
would never let him suffer the least signs of cowardice among those who
associated with him. In the heat of an engagement he went about his
ship, observing his men, and immediately killing those who shrank at
the report of pistol, gun, or cannon. This extraordinary discipline had
made him the terror of the coward and the idol of the brave. In other
respects he readily shared with such of his men as showed spirit the
great booty that was acquired by his fearless disposition. When he went
upon these buccaneering expeditions he sailed in his frigate, his own
property, nor would he take a lion's share of the treasure obtained
from captured Spanish merchantmen, but divided it equally with those
who formed his ship's company.

Such was the remarkable man to whom we owed the restoration of the
"Golden Seahorse".

From Captain Montbar we learned the particulars connected with the
recovery of our ship from the Spaniards.

"I had been driven out of my course," he said, "by contrary winds, when
we sighted a vessel flying the Spanish flag, which I am bound, by a
solemn oath, whenever an opportunity offers, to destroy. I was about to
sink her when I noticed an unusual number of people upon her decks,
among whom were several women and children, and, since I war only with
men, I sent a boat to demand the surrender of the vessel. This was at
once agreed to. Her colours were struck, and my own hoisted at the
mizzen. I then went on board to hold an enquiry, and decide what was to
be done, when I found that the ship had been stolen from a party of
Dutch navigators on a visit to this country. The object of stealing the
ship was for the purpose of conveying the settlers, who had been
marooned here for some years, to their homes. It was not difficult, in
the crowded state of the vessel, to find many who were prepared to
disclose the whole truth. Donna Isabel Barreto, who appeared to be a
queen among these people, then offered to make terms with me,
promising, if I would suffer her to continue the voyage, she would
send, as ransom, a large sum of money, of which she professed to have
command at Madrid; but, having some experience of Spanish promises, I
declined this offer, preferring to retain possession of the ship I had
captured, which appeared to be of good build and well found. I
undertook, however, to disembark Donna Isabel and her followers upon
the first land we sighted, which happened to be a desolate-looking
island by no means comparable with this fertile valley. Isabel
then threw herself on her knees, and implored me not to abandon her,
and her people, to death by slow starvation, which the landing of so
great a company on such an uninviting shore would mean. But I was
obdurate. 'Be thankful,' said I, 'that your lives are spared you. It is
not for me to interfere with the decrees of Fate.  This punishment for
having stolen their vessel from those who trusted you, and to whom you
were bound by the laws of hospitality, has clearly been ordained by
Providence. Land, then, and, by your submission in face of adversity,
seek to atone for your treacherous conduct.'

"The party being landed and left to shift for themselves, I resolved to
continue my voyage to this place, of which I had been given the
bearings, in order that I might restore to you your ship, for I take no
booty except from Spain."

We again thanked our generous visitor, nor could we do less than place
ourselves and our ship at his disposal.

"Come back with me, then," said Montbar, "and join our band. I have
voyaged far into these southern latitudes in search of treasure, and I
may tell you that the islands of the south are by no means comparable
with those in the west."

But at this we asked time to consider. Although we had no cause to love
the Spaniards, we had no reason to hate them with the same inveterate
hatred displayed by Montbar. Besides, in spite of the glamour that
surrounded them, we knew the buccaneers to be no better than pirates.
Still it seemed a poor return to make Captain Montbar for the service
he had rendered us to refuse his request. While we hesitated between
two minds what we should do, I bethought me of the gold dust at the
place of the painted hands. We had never intended to abandon this
treasure by reason of a swarm of insects, however numerous and venomous
they might be. The fishermen from Lamakera had excuse for doing so,
since they lacked the equipment to combat the pests which infested the
caves, but, with the resources of a ship at our disposal, it would be
strange if we could not devise some means to carry off the gold, share
it with Montbar, and thus repay the obligation we owed him.

I mentioned this project to Hartog, who at once fell in with my plan.

"You are a wizard, Peter," he said, "for finding a way out of a
dilemma. If we can get this treasure, and either share it with Montbar,
or give it all to him should it not prove considerable, our debt will
be paid, so that we may continue our voyage whithersoever our fancy
leads us, but, with the price of the ship on my conscience, I could
never regard myself as a free man. Montbar knows this.

"It is the rule of the sea that captured vessels are spoils to the
victor. For all his fine speeches, I feel convinced that Montbar looks
upon the ship as his own, and has only come to obtain her crew also to
be henceforth under his command. But, should ransom be paid, Montbar
would consider us freed from all obligation."

That evening, therefore, Hartog stated plainly our conditions to
Captain Montbar, which, shortly, were that if the treasure proved to be
of great value, we would divide it equally among the companies of the
frigate and our ship; if not of great value, then the whole of the
treasure was to go to the frigate as salvage for our vessel; and if we
did not succeed in bringing the treasure away, then our ship and her
company were to be at Montbar's disposal, to do with as he thought fit.

These proposals were received by Montbar with a gravity and shrewdness
which clearly proved his professed generosity in returning us our
vessel was only preliminary to demanding a ransom.

"Let it be as you say, then," he said. "Within a week we shall have
ascertained the value of this treasure, when the matter may be adjusted
in the manner you propose. Meanwhile, the resources of my vessel are at
your disposal."

We thanked him and withdrew, but we determined only to employ our own
men on our second visit to the eaves. A fair remuneration for the
salvage of our ship was all that Captain Montbar looked for or
expected, and we saw no reason why we should disclose our secret to any
beyond those chosen from our own company, nor did Montbar seek to pry
into our business, contenting himself with our promise, at the end of
the week either to pay him salvage or surrender our ship and ourselves,
to be disposed of in such manner as might please him best.



CHAPTER XXXIV

WE AGAIN EXPLORE THE CAVES


During the two days which followed the making of our compact with
Captain Montbar we were busy with our preparations for a second visit
to the place of the painted hands, where we knew that gold was to be
obtained for those who had the courage to carry it away. This time we
sailed round, so that we were saved the journey over the cliffs. We had
caused to be made for Hartog, Janstins, and me dresses of sail-cloth,
with masks like those worn by Inquisitors, the eye-holes being filled
with glass. The sleeves of the jacket were made long, so as to cover
our hands. Our sea boots and breeches we knew to be impervious to
hornet stings, and, thus equipped, we hoped to succeed in carrying away
the treasure which the Lamakera fishermen had abandoned.

We took the smallest of our ship's boats, in which we rowed ashore,
and, leaving the crew at the entrance to the caves, we three, as
silently as possible, propelled the boat along the stream into the
interior. As we progressed we met with evidences of our former visit.
Lumps of stalactites lay where they had fallen when shaken from the
vaulted roof by the discharge of our firearms. The body of the lad
Bruno was also to be seen, half submerged, in the water of the stream.
Close to the body was the heap of gold dust, and this we began to load
into our boat, making as little noise as possible lest we should
disturb the hornets from their nests.

We worked rapidly, and in less than an hour we had filled the boat with
as much as she could carry of the heavy sand, nearly all of which was
gold dust, when a humming warned us of the approach of the hornets. We
had brought with us but a single torch, so as to avoid the light which
we knew would attract the swarm of venomous insects, as also the bats
and flying creatures which had made their home in these wonderful
caverns; but the solitary gleam, in so much darkness, seemed to burn
with the brightness of a conflagration. The smoke, also, from our
torch, ascending into the vaulted roof of the cavern, was beginning to
disturb the weird dwellers from their gloomy abode, and already
ghostly, bat-like forms began to fill the air space above our heads. It
was time to leave, and, reluctantly, we began to push the boat toward
the mouth of the cave, promising ourselves to return next day for more
of the precious stuff; of which there appeared to be an inexhaustible
supply. As we neared the entrance to the cave, however, we were
startled to observe a peril which had hitherto escaped our notice.
Poised over the arch of the narrow passage was a mass of rock so finely
balanced that it seemed to be held in its place by the weight of a
number of bat-like creatures clustering at one of its angles. As we
approached, these bats, startled by the light of our torch, began, one
or two at a time, to rise from their resting place, causing the rock to
topple toward us. Thus we stood in danger of being crushed by the mass
should it fall as we passed the entrance, or, worse still, if it fell
before we escaped into the cave beyond, we might find ourselves
entombed alive in this dreadful place, to become a prey to the horrors
of which we had had previous experience.

"Forward!" roared Hartog, and, putting forth his great strength, he
began to propel the boat, heavily laden as she was, at a rapid pace
toward the entrance of the cavern. With our hearts in our throats,
Janstins and I came to his assistance, and, pushing frantically
together, we drove the boat through the entrance just as the bats, in a
body, rose from the balancing rock, which, relieved of their weight,
fell with a crash, effectually blocking the path into the cave.
Fortunately we were on the right side of the obstacle, and our way was
open to the sea, but a moment's hesitation would have consigned us to a
lingering death, which, I am not ashamed to say, I shuddered to
contemplate.

We now took off the canvas jackets and masks we had worn as a
protection against stings from the hornets, and, without further
mishap, conveyed the sand we had brought away with us on board our
ship, from which we washed six buckets full of gold dust.  Each
bucketful we reckoned, by weight, to be worth twenty thousand English
pounds, so that we had ransom to pay Montbar for salvaging our vessel,
besides retaining enough to make us all rich men.

Our crew, who had now become obedient to Hartog's authority, were
desirous to continue the search of the cavern, in the hope of obtaining
more of the precious metal, but on being taken to the entrance to the
caves, it was found that an impassable barrier of rock stood between
them and their desire for boundless wealth. They were, therefore,
compelled to be satisfied with a share in the gold we had already won.

And here it may be observed how wise are the ways of Providence and how
watchful appeared to be the good genius who followed our destiny. Had
limitless wealth been suddenly showered upon us, what evil consequences
might have followed? Man is, after all, but an avaricious creature, who
requires the discipline of necessity to restrain his covetous nature.
The prospect of gold-getting would probably have undermined Hartog's
authority, and would most likely have ended in disaster for us all. As
it was, we had enough, but not more than enough, and the discipline of
our ship, so necessary to our common safety, was maintained.

We paid Montbar, according to our agreement, gold to the value of sixty
thousand English pounds, that being half the value of the gold
obtained, with which he expressed himself well satisfied.

"Honesty is, after all, the best policy," he said. "Had I not restored
to you your ship I would have missed this treasure, that will well
repay me for my long voyage, which I had before thought profitless. I
regret your decision not to accompany me to the West Indies, but since
you have paid your ransom you are free to go whithersoever your fancy
may lead you, without let or hindrance."

We thanked Montbar, although I could not help smiling at the tribute
which he paid to honesty when I remembered that the lockers in his
cabins were crammed with the loot which he had taken as a freebooter
upon the seas.



CHAPTER XXXV

I AM KIDNAPPED


We were now of two minds, whether to continue the exploration of New
Holland, or to shape a course for the islands of the South Seas; but
Hartog finally decided for the islands, where there is always adventure
and profit to be had. Besides, we were anxious to prove the truth, or
otherwise, of the existence of the Islands of Engano, mentioned by
Marco Polo in the account of his voyage round the world in the year
1272, as the Male and Female Islands.

The first group of islands we touched at after leaving the abandoned
Spanish settlement at New Holland, appeared to be well wooded and
fertile, and approaching one of the largest we cast anchor near the
shore. On the following day we endeavoured to work to windward of this
dangerous coast, but in spite of skilful seamanship it soon, became
certain we were being drawn, probably by some strong current, closer to
the land. The ship was so near to the rocks that escape appeared
impossible. At three in the afternoon, however, the ship doubled the
reefs, it may be said, almost by a miracle.

This adventure set us thinking upon a record among the manuscripts we
had brought with us of a remarkable phenomenon existing somewhere in
these regions. In describing one of the larger islands the record says:
"By the coast of this country, toward the north, is the sea called the
Dead Sea, the water whereof runneth into the earth, and if anyone
falleth into that water he is never found more. And if shipmen go but a
little way into it they are carried rapidly downward, and never return
again. And none knoweth whither they are carried, and many have thus
passed away, and it hath never been known what became of them."

We had hitherto given little credence to this report, but our recent
experience proved the currents running between these islands to be
strong and treacherous, and warned us to be on guard against them. The
great distance we were from home, and the absence of any assistance to
be looked for from men of our own race made it doubly necessary to
consider every aspect of our voyage in order to escape the many perils
which everywhere beset us.

We now approached a coast running east and west to the horizon, so that
we could not say whether we had come to an island or to another
southern continent. The anxieties through which we had passed,
particularly our narrow escape from shipwreck upon the reefs, made it
desirable we should seek some haven in which to recruit our strength
and re-victual our ship before setting out upon our homeward voyage,
for Hartog was anxious to deposit the gold we had obtained from the
place of the painted hands in safe keeping at Amsterdam. The carrying
about of so much treasure on board the vessel was a risk he thought it
imprudent to run, as the presence of gold on the ship would prove a
constant temptation to the men to mutiny. Besides which, there was
always the chance of capture by pirates or freebooters who, at this
time, roamed the seas. General satisfaction was, therefore, expressed
when Hartog announced his intention of returning to Amsterdam.

On the morning of the next day after sighting the land along which we
now coasted the look-out reported a sheltered bay, which promised us
the haven we desired, and an hour later we cast anchor under the lee of
a bold headland, near to a beach, which bordered what appeared to be a
fertile and well-wooded country.

We had barely found our moorings when five natives came in a canoe, the
middle one vigorously baling the water out of the craft. As they drew
nearer we observed that they were all women, one standing up at the
prow, whose red hair came down to her waist. She was white as regards
colour, beautifully shaped, the face aquiline and handsome, rather
freckled and rosy, the eyes black and gracious, the forehead and
eyebrows good, the nose, mouth, and lips well-proportioned, with the
teeth well-ordered and white. Being rich in so many parts and graces
she would be judged to be a very beautiful woman, and at first sight
she stole away my heart. On arriving alongside she climbed aboard with
amazing agility, and without the least sign of fear, from which I
conjectured that Europeans were not unknown to her. As her eyes swept
us her glance halted when it rested upon me, and, without
embarrassment, she made signs for me to approach her.

"Whence come ye?" she said, speaking in Spanish, though with an accent
that sounded unfamiliar.

"From the white man's country," I answered, "to seek adventure in this
land."

"Ye come far to seek little," she replied. "This land is desolate. None
may live upon it. It is waterless."

"Then we must look farther," I answered. "We are in search of water."

"I can show you where water is," she continued, "if you will come with
me."

I hesitated, and Hartog, when he caught the drift of her invitation,
bade me on no account trust myself alone with these savages.

"Our boats will be lowered directly," I answered. "Then you may show us
where to find fresh water, and we shall be grateful."

"I cannot wait for your boats," she replied. "Come with me now if you
are not afraid. Your boats can follow."

It would have shamed me to confess fear to go with these women, and,
not dreaming of treachery, I descended to the canoe, while Hartog and
the others made ready to follow in the ship's boats.  But I had no
sooner set foot in the canoe than the four girls, who possessed the
strength of young men, began to paddle vigorously toward a point which
jutted out on the western side of the bay in which the "Golden
Seahorse" lay at anchor. We soon rounded the point, when we lost sight
of the ship. Thinking that all this was intended for a jest, I
remonstrated with my beautiful captor, and called upon her to bid the
girls cease rowing until my companions should come up with us; but at
this she only laughed, and at a word from her the girls redoubled their
exertions until the canoe seemed to fly over the surface of the water.
We now approached a precipice, which rose sheer out of the sea, and, as
we drew nearer, I observed a tunnel into which the water rushed with
the force of a mill-race. It then came to my mind that this was the
current I had read of which ran into the earth, and along which shipmen
had been carried, never to be heard of again.

I glanced at the woman who had kidnapped me in this strange fashion
seemingly with the object of enticing me to my doom. Her face was set
and stern; with both hands she grasped a steering paddle, with which
she guided the canoe into the rushing stream.  The girls had ceased
rowing, and were crouched together in the frail craft, which now,
caught by the hand of Nature, was carried with incredible speed into
the darkness of the unknown.

How long we were in the tunnel I cannot say. It seemed an eternity, but
it could not actually have been very long. The speed at which we
travelled was so great as to make the drawing of the breath difficult,
and a strange humming sound--very loud-made it impossible to speak or
even to cry out. I had abandoned hope and resigned myself to death when
suddenly we emerged from the tunnel into a blinding sunshine, which
dazzled the eyes after the darkness. Once more we had come to the open
sea.

The girls resumed their paddles, and now began to urge the canoe toward
one of two islands visible on the horizon about thirty miles apart.



CHAPTER XXXVI

THE MALE AND FEMALE ISLANDS


I was now able to demand an explanation for the cause of my abduction,
which I did with some warmth.

"In what way have I offended," I asked of the woman who had enticed me
on board the canoe, "that you should repay the trust I placed in you
with treachery? We came among you as friends, desiring nothing so much
as your goodwill. But you have treated me as an enemy, carried me away
from my ship, and separated me from my friends Take, heed, I am a man,
and have some strength.  You are but women. Why, then, should I not
overpower you and return the way I came?"

"That is impossible," answered my captor. "None could make their way
back through the tunnel against the stream."

"At least, tell me then," I continued, "your name, for what purpose I
am brought here, and whither you are taking me."

"My name is Sylvia Cervantes," replied my captor, proudly. "As to why
you are brought here, ask the wise-ones whom you shall presently see.
Yonder islands are the Islands of Engano."

In the surprise which her words occasioned I almost forgot the anger
which had begun to burn within me when I thought of how basely I had
been betrayed. Before me were the wonderful Male and Female Islands,
fabled by Marco Polo. I had come upon this voyage with Dirk Hartog in
quest of adventure. Well, here was an adventure awaiting me that was
likely to prove the most remarkable I had yet encountered.

As we drew near, to one of the islands, I was impressed by the extreme
beauty of the scene. The cliffs rose to great heights, forming a dark,
clear-cut line against the sky, while between the lofty walls, verdant
valleys stretched down to the white, sandy beaches, upon which the
waves broke in glistening spume. Toward a beach, somewhere about the
centre of the island, our course was laid, and upon coming to the
shallows, the girls shipped their paddles and sprang into the water,
when, with others helping them, they ran the canoe on to the beach,
making no more of my weight than if I had been a child.

I now observed among the woods of the, very ancient stone buildings,
which, at one time, must have been occupied by a people possessing a
high state of civilization. They were in ruins, and overgrown by
flowering shrubs and creepers, but were apparently still used as
habitations for it was to one of these houses I was presently
conducted. Here I was invited to rest and refresh myself with some
delicious fruit that was set before me, the like of which I do not
remember having tasted before.

Sylvia Cervantes now joined me, and in the witchery of her presence I
forgot my perilous plight, and gave myself up to the luxury and
enjoyment of the moment.

From Sylvia I learnt the history of my capture, and why she had come to
entice me away with her.

Having inquired my name, which I gave her, Sylvia continued as
follows:--

"You must know, then, Peter," she said, "that we are ruled here by
custom which may not be changed. The wise-ones who live on the mountain
tops tell us what to do, and we do it without question.  The wise-ones
are not as others are. They see what others cannot see, and they know
many things that others cannot even guess at, so when the wise-ones
told me your ship was on the other side of the Great Barren Island, and
that I was to take my canoe and bring you here, I could not help but
obey."

"How is it possible," I asked, "that mortal eyes can see so far?"

"The eyes of the wise-ones are not as mortal eyes," replied Sylvia,
gravely. "Rest now, and to-morrow you shall hear what is required of
you."

I was so affected by the calamity which had overtaken me that I lacked
the disposition to question Sylvia more closely on the matter. It was
plain I was a captive, and helpless to avert my fate, whatever it might
be. As well then accept the inevitable, and make the most of the
passing hour. I did not value life, since Anna's death, at a pin's
ransom. If, therefore, the end of all things for me in this world was
at hand, let it come. I would welcome it without regret.

Sylvia now told me as much as she knew about the island to which I had
been brought, and of its people.

In ages gone by, she said, when the stone houses were new, and a
flourishing city stood in the valley, a disagreement had arisen
between the king and queen, who held equal sway over the two islands,
of such a nature that the breach became impossible to be healed.
Instead of going to war with each other, and thus sacrificing the lives
of many of their respective followers in battle, who had no part in
their quarrel, an agreement was come to whereby the king withdrew
himself to the western island, leaving the queen in undisputed
possession in the east. The king took to him all the men in both
islands, giving up to the queen the women, to become her subjects. Since
then the Male and Female Islands had been managed as separate
communities. There was no king or queen now, the people of both islands
being ruled by the wise-ones, who lived on the mountain tops in the
Female Island. But the inhabitants of the two islands still continued to
live apart, the males on one island and the females on the other. On the
Male Island the males dwelt alone, without their wives, or any other
women. Every year, in the month of March, the men came to the Female
Island, and tarried there three months, to wit, March, April, and May,
dwelling with their wives for that space. At the end of those three
months they returned to their own island, and pursued their avocation
there, selling ambergris to the traders from Sumatra. As for the
children whom their wives bore them, if they were girls they stayed with
their mothers; but if they were boys their mothers brought them up until
they were fourteen years old, and then sent them to their fathers. Those
women who were married did nothing but nurse and rear their children.
Their husbands provided them with all necessaries. Those who were
unmarried, and until marriage, became Amazons, doing all the work on the
island that would, in the ordinary course, be done by men. They were
very strictly reared, and were as hardy as boys. If necessary they could
fight in defence of their country with a courage equal to that displayed
by the bravest warriors. Such were the strange customs of the people on
these two islands as related to me by Sylvia Cervantes.



CHAPTER XXXVII

A TASK IS SET ME


On the day after I was made captive to the people on the Female Island
in the Engano group, I was given an opportunity to observe the customs
which prevail among these Amazons. They appeared to be a happy, healthy
people, nor could I fail to notice the absence of ill-temper and
discord, which may be observed in all communities in which men and
women live together, and where jealousy between the sexes is too often
the cause of lifelong feuds. Here the matrons seemed content to devote
themselves to the rearing of their offspring, who, in return, rendered
heart-whole affection to their mothers. I never witnessed such docility
and loving obedience as was displayed by the children of this island to
those who had the care of them, and while I remained at Engano I never
heard a child cry or saw a woman in tears.

As the girls reach maturity, which they do in these latitudes at the
age of about twelve years, they are instructed by their mothers how to
perform the necessary work, and become very skilful at throwing the
lance, harpoon, or any manner of dart, being bred to it from their
infancy. These girls, from this training, possess wonderful eyesight,
and will descry a sail at sea farther than any sailor could see it.

The dress adopted by the dwellers on the Female Island, though scanty
to civilized eyes, is nevertheless suited to their manner of life. It
consists of tapa cloth cut in a deep fringe depending from waist to
knee. Their hair, which is long, hangs down their backs. Those who,
like Sylvia, have red hair, are mostly freckled and rosy, which, so far
from detracting from their beauty, rather adds to their charms. The
dark-haired ones are burnt brown by the sun.

I was now taken by Sylvia to be presented to the wise-ones, at whose
instigation I had been brought to the island. These I found to be men,
if indeed they could be called such, but they were so wizened in
appearance as more to resemble monkeys. Their manner of life is so
austere as to make it a matter for marvel that body and soul could
cling together. They will not kill an animal for food, or for any other
purpose, not even a fly or a flea, or anything in fact that has life;
for they say they have all souls, and it would be a sin to kill them.
They eat no vegetables in a green state, only such as are dry, for they
believe that even green leaves have life. And they sleep on the bare
ground, naked, without anything to cover them, or to soften the
mountain rocks which form their bed. They fast every day, and drink
nothing but water. Yet, in spite of the rigour of their discipline,
they attain to extreme old age; not one of the wise men, so Sylvia
informed me, being less than one hundred years old, while some were
accredited with upwards of two centuries of life. By reason of their
abstinence, they are supposed to be gifted with mysterious occult
powers, notably second sight, by which they are able to locate
strangers at a great distance from their own country, and to foretell
their advent. Not long since they had foretold the coming to the island
of a Spanish fleet, when the whole Amazon population had taken refuge
in subterranean caves until the Spaniards had left, which they did
under the belief that the island was deserted. It was by means of this
second sight that the "Golden Seahorse" had been located, and that I
had been selected from among the crew to carry out a project which the
wise men had in view, and the particulars of which I was about to
learn.

The chief of the wise-ones, who acted as spokesman, now informed me of
the reason I had been brought to the island.

"You must know, Signor," said he, addressing me as though I was a
Spaniard; an appellation which I felt inclined to resent, "that we are
troubled by a demon we have found it impossible to slay. Many of our
girls have fallen victims to the monster, while the men from the Male
Island have repeatedly attacked it during the months of their residence
here, without being able to overcome it. In length the creature is
thirty feet, and of great bulk. It has two forelegs near the head,
armed with claws. The head is very big, and the eyes stand out from it
on knob-like excrescences. The mouth is big enough to swallow a man
whole, and is armed with pointed teeth. In short, the monster is so
fierce that all stand in fear at the sight of it. Now it is known that
the men of your race are brave, and possess weapons of which we have no
knowledge, so, when it was revealed to us that your ship was close by
on the other side of the Great Barren Island, we resolved to bring you
here; who seemed, in our eyes, to be a brave man, so that you may rid
us of the demon which threatens our peace, if not our very existence."

"Alas! oh, wise-one," I answered. "How much better to have brought the
ship also! On board of her, it is true, we possess weapons against
which even such a monster as you tell me of could not prevail. But
these weapons I have not with me. How then can I, single-handed, hope
to overcome so terrible a creature as you describe? Rather send me back
to my ship, when I promise to bring her here, so that a party of us,
well armed, may attack the demon, when no doubt we shall be able to
destroy it." But at this the wise-one shook his head.

"To bring the ship here," said he, "would be easy. But how do we know
we could be rid of her without injury to our people?"

"I would pass you my word as to that," I answered.

"So you say now," replied the wise-one. "But how shall we know that you
would keep your word?"

An angry retort sprang to my lips, but I restrained myself on receiving
a warning glance from Sylvia, which reminded me that I stood at the
mercy of these monkey men.

"Give me three days, then," I answered, "to devise some means for
destroying the monster. If I succeed, I demand to be sent back to my
ship. Without this promise I will do nothing for you, let the
consequences to me be what they may."

The wise-one seemed to ponder my words carefully.

"Be it so, then," he answered. "If in three days you rid us of this
demon I will see that you are restored to your friends.  But if you
should fail, and survive, you must nevertheless be put to death. We
have no room on the Islands of Engano for strangers."



CHAPTER XXXVIII

THE SLAYING OF THE GREAT CROCODILE


I now bethought me of how I might best set about the task of
vanquishing the monster which held the Female Island in terror, and
which, from the description given me by the wise-ones, I judged to be a
crocodile. Nor in this was I mistaken, for, being taken by Sylvia to a
place of safety from which I could see the demon, I was confirmed in
the opinion I had formed by what I saw, although I had never seen a
crocodile of such amazing proportions before. It lived in a cave close
to a fertile plain, where goats belonging to the islanders were
pastured. Not far off was a stream at which it went to drink, and a
deep furrow in the sand marked the road it made to the water. During
the day it remained in its cave, but toward evening it would issue
forth and attack the goats, three or four of which it would kill, and
carry off to its lair. Those in charge of the goats dared not
interfere, lest the monster, deprived of its accustomed food, might
seek its dinner among the ruined stone houses in which the islanders
lived.

Now I noticed that the road along which the crocodile travelled to the
water was very deeply furrowed, thus proving how the great lizard had
repeatedly dragged its heavy bulk over the same spot on its way to
drink at the stream, and I bethought me of a plan to deal with the
reptile. The only weapon I had upon me when kidnapped from my ship was
a short sabre or manchette, which I wore as a sidearm. But this I hoped
would prove a formidable weapon when put to the use for which I now
intended it.

During the morning of the next day, when we knew that the crocodile
would be asleep in his cave, Sylvia and I went together to the road
which the reptile had made, by the weight of his body, to his usual
watering-place.

Here, with such rude implements as the islanders possessed, we dug a
trench the width of the road, and for some distance along it. At the
bottom of the trench we laid a stout log, in which was firmly fixed my
manchette, its sharp point upward. We then filled up the trench with
soft sand, and retired to the place of vantage which I had occupied the
previous day, and from which we could see the crocodile make his
evening raid. Towards sundown he came forth with a rush among the
terrified goats, four of which he slew with a stroke from his powerful
tail, after which he proceeded to drag their mangled carcases into his
lair. We waited an hour, when, just before sundown, the reptile came
forth again on his way to the water. We watched him with bated breath,
and Sylvia, who now, for the first time, began to understand the trap I
had set, could hardly contain her excitement. When the crocodile came
to the sand-pit we had dug on the road he sank down, when the sharp
blade of the manchette entered his breast, and as he dashed forward,
rove him to the navel, so that he died on the spot in the greatest
agony.

Sylvia now summoned the islanders to see my work. They came from all
parts, and raised so great a shout when they saw their enemy dead that
the sound of it reached the wise-ones on the mountain-tops, who peered
down at the beast where he lay in a morass of blood which deluged the
sand so that it ran into the stream, dyeing the water a deep red.

The death of the reptile, and the craft and cunning I had displayed in
the killing of it, so impressed the Amazons that they came to me in a
body, with Sylvia as their mouthpiece, asking me to stay and be their
king, nor did the wise-ones raise any objection to this proposal. But
although I admired Sylvia, I had no desire to spend the rest of my days
at Engano, not even as King of the Amazons. I therefore answered that
my comrades were no doubt looking for me, nor would they continue their
voyage home until all hope of my rescue had been abandoned, and I
reminded the wise-ones of the promise they had made me of safe conduct
back to my vessel, in case I should succeed in ridding the island of
their enemy. The justice of my claim was not to be denied, and with the
dawn of the morrow the wise-ones undertook to ascertain the direction
in which the ship lay and to send me aboard her.

That evening a feast was held in my honour; some of the men from the
Male Island came over, by special permission of the wise-ones, in order
to be present, and to see the man who had slain the monster against
which they had been unable to prevail.

The men from the Male Island I found to be as free from ill-will toward
one another as were the women on the Female Island. Since they had
neither wife nor child, they associated in pairs, and mutually rendered
each other all the services a master could reasonably expect from a
servant, being together in so perfect a community that the survivor
always succeeded his dead partner to any property he may have had.
They behave to each other with the greatest justness and openness of
heart. It is a crime to keep anything hidden. On the other hand, the
least pilfering is unpardonable, and punished by death.  And indeed
there can be no great temptation to steal when it is reckoned a point
of honour never to refuse a neighbour what he wants; and when there is
so little property of value it is impossible there should be many
disputes over it. If any happened, the wise-ones interposed, and soon
put an end to the difference.

In all my travels I never met with happier or more gently disposed
persons than the people of the Male and Female Islands of Engano.



CHAPTER XXXIX

I BECOME A VICTIM OF DOMESTIC INFELICITY


Next morning the wise-ones, according to promise, informed me, by means
of their power of second sight, that my ship was in the place where I
had left her, which seemed probable, as it would no doubt be on land
that Hartog and my friends would be looking for me.

I passed my word to the wise-ones that Hartog's vessel would not visit
the Engano Islands, since strangers were not welcome; and, having bid
good-bye to the Amazons, I once more embarked with Sylvia in her canoe,
and was paddled round the east end of the Great Barren Island, where,
in the distance, was the "Golden Seahorse" still at anchor in the bay
where I had last seen her.

When I came aboard Hartog was overjoyed at my return. "I shall have to
keep thee tied up, Peter," he said to me, in jest at my frequent
mishaps. "You are for ever either falling overboard or running away."
But when I told him of my adventure on Amazon Island he listened with
great interest, expressing regret that I should have pledged my word
against the ship's calling there. His disappointment, however, was
modified when I told him that nothing of any commercial value was to be
found upon either of the Engano Islands; nothing, in fact, being worthy
of notice but the wonderful contentment of the inhabitants, a commodity
which could not be carried away.

"Let us up stick and home, then," answered Hartog merrily. So, having
presented Sylvia and her accompanying Amazons with gifts, in return for
which they showed us where excellent water was to be obtained with
which we might replenish our tanks, we bade farewell to the Great
Barren Island, and shaped a course for Holland.

On our arrival at Amsterdam Hartog arranged for the disposal and
division of our treasure. He and I, as joint promoters of the
expedition, each took to the value of twenty thousand English pounds,
giving the remainder to be divided among our officers and crew, who had
never in their lives before looked to possess so much money. The ship
was put out of commission, though, for the present, we determined not
to sell her. Hartog promised himself a spell ashore, and I also looked
forward to a life of ease and recreation. I was now a rich man, with
more wealth to my credit than would satisfy my simple needs for the
remainder of my life. Why then, I asked myself, should I seek further
peril and adventure in unknown lands to gain money of which I already
possessed more than I knew what to do with?

I did not return to my estate, which had become distasteful to me,
recalling, as it did, the brief span of nuptial happiness which I had
enjoyed with Anna, and when, later, my father-in-law, the Count of
Holstein, offered to buy it from me, I was glad to sell it to him. With
a portion of my capital I now secured a full share in the business of
De Decker, my old master, and, having purchased a fine house at
Amsterdam, I resolved to settle down to the lucrative business of a
merchant.

Before taking possession of my new home I paid a visit to my family at
Urk, where I found that my father had retired from the active
management of his fishing business, which was now carried on by my
eldest brother, who was married, and blessed with three sturdy boys. My
two younger brothers were also married, and both had begun to rear
families.

"Only you, Peter," said my mother, "my favourite son, the flower of the
flock, are alone and childless."

I had not, since Anna's death, given a thought to marrying again, but
my mother's words appealed to me with some force when I reflected that
I owed it to my country not to lead a life of selfish celibacy. I would
never love with the strength of my first love which I had given to
Anna; but there seemed to be no reason why I should not become the head
of a house, and the father of a family, so that I might live again in
my children.

Now, it so fell out that Pauline Rutter, a niece of De Decker, came at
this time to stay with her uncle at Amsterdam, and as I was a frequent
visitor at De Decker's house, I often met her. Pauline was proud, dark,
and self-willed--the very opposite of what Anna Holstein had been when
I married her, and for this reason, perhaps, I liked her the more,
since it put an end to all comparison between her and Anna, to whom I
had given my first love.

Pauline was flattered by the attention I paid her, and when at length I
asked her to become my wife she made no secret of her satisfaction at
the prospect of becoming Madam Van Bu.

"I have always thought, sir," she said, "that you would marry again. It
is a duty which you owe to your wealth and position. That your choice
should have fallen upon me is an honour of which I am very sensible."

It will thus be seen that in the alliance which Pauline and I proposed
there was to be no love-making. The bargain was one that might have
been made in the course of De Decker's business. I was to give Pauline
my wealth and name, in return for which she promised to become my wife,
and to undertake the management of my household. It was a shameful
bargain, and I was well served for my part in it.

We had not been married a month before each of us began to observe in
the other an incompatibility of temper which made any kind of agreement
between us, even on the most trivial matters, impossible. Pauline
declared that I brought the manners of the forecastle into her
drawing-room, while the social inanities to which she devoted most of
her time angered me into upbraiding her with her frivolity and lack of
common sense. These mutual recriminations soon led us into a condition
of life which destroyed all prospect of peace and contentment in our
home. Neither would give way one jot. The more Pauline stormed at me
for my boorishness and want of consideration for her the more obstinate
did I become in ascribing to her frivolous nature the true cause of our
unhappiness. I admired Pauline, and I looked to her to become the
mother of my children; but we could neither of us endure the other's
presence for any length of time without a squabble, so that our
domestic infelicity became a jest and a byword even among our servants.
In these circumstances I felt it would be better that we should part.
It is said that absence makes the heart grow fonder, and I was
convinced that I would regard Pauline with more kindly feelings if seas
between us rolled than were possible if we remained together in the
same house, and I have no doubt that Pauline thoroughly reciprocated my
sentiments.

In this mood I sought my old comrade Dirk Hartog. I found him, as I
expected, at a tavern which he frequented. He was seated at a table
with Bantum and Janstins, poring over a chart in which all three
appeared to be deeply interested.



CHAPTER XL

THE YELLOW PARCHMENT


"Welcome, Peter!" cried Hartog, when he saw me. "I'd have wagered you'd
be with us, and here you are in the nick of time."

"What's in the wind now?" I asked, as I drew a chair to the table at
which the three were seated.

"The greatest and best chance that was ever offered to seafarers,"
answered Hartog. "Read that, and say whether any man with the blood of
a rover in him could sit tamely at home when such a country as this is
waiting to be explored."

With these words he pushed toward me a parchment yellow with age, but
very clearly written, so it was easy to decipher. The paper, a
translation in Spanish from some ancient tongue, read as follows:

"The Ruby Mountains. Among these mountains there are certain great and
deep valleys to the bottom of which there is no access. These valleys
are full of rubies. Wherefore the men who go in search of them take
with them a piece of flesh as lean as they can get, and this they east
into the bottom of the valley. Now there are a number of white eagles
that haunt these mountains and feed upon the serpents in which the
valley abounds. When the eagles see the meat thrown down, they pounce
upon it, and carry it up to some rocky hill-top, where they begin to
rend it. But there are men on the watch, and as soon as they see that
the eagles have, settled they raise a loud shouting to drive them off.
And when the eagles are thus scared away, the men recover the pieces of
meat, and find them full of rubies, which have stuck to the meat down
in the bottom of the valley. The abundance of rubies in these depths is
astonishing, but none can get down, and if any could they would be
devoured by the serpents which abound there. This country is inhabited
by pygmies and giants. The giants, who are by far the largest men to be
seen in this strait, are ruled by the pygmies."

"And who is the author of this fairy tale?" I asked.

"One to whom I take my hat off," answered Hartog. "Marco Polo, the
first and greatest navigator in the world's history. Where he could go
we can follow."

"And where does he place the Ruby Mountains?" I inquired.

"That is what troubles me," replied Hartog. "Marco Polo knew the Great
South Land, but not so thoroughly as we are beginning to know it now.
From this chart I place the Ruby Mountains on the north-west coast of
the continent of New Holland."

"Whose chart is it?" I inquired.

"Marco Polo's own," said Hartog. "It was given to me by a man I once
befriended, together with the parchment you have just read. How he came
by it I need not say. The man is dead, and I trust his sins are
forgiven him. But I know he would not lie to me, not willingly."

"It seems a wild goose chase," I said, although my doubts were rapidly
dissolving under the witchery of Hartog's sanguine temperament.

"So did our last voyage," answered Hartog. "Yet every word that was
written upon the paper that guided us was true. And why should we
presume that men would give so much labour to preparing these charts
and manuscripts in order to perpetuate lies?"

I could not but admit this. The ability to make these drawings, and to
inscribe these manuscripts, I knew was confined to a very few, who were
mostly men of truth and honour. Such accounts as were available of the
wonderful voyages of Marco Polo I had read with avidity, and I saw no
reason to doubt the assertions of this brave and learned man.

"What do you propose, then?" I asked Hartog, although in my own mind, I
knew the old sea-dog was impatient to be off on a new treasure-hunt.

"What else can I do, Peter?" replied Hartog, "than take ship for this
place? I could never rest content, nor would you either, with the
thought of these Ruby Mountains still unexplored."

"You have settled the matter, then, so far as I am concerned," I said,
with a laugh.

"And why not, partner?" answered Hartog. "We own a fine ship that was
surely never intended only to make a maiden voyage. We could visit this
place, and be back in twelve months--two years at most. What is to keep
us, then, from our pleasure trip?"

Before Hartog had done speaking, I knew my mind was made up to go with
him. My life at home with Pauline had become intolerable, nor did I
take any active part in De Decker's business, finding the drudgery of
the counting-house irksome after my more exciting experiences on sea
and land, so, without further ado, I expressed to Hartog my willingness
to join him in a fresh adventure to the South.

Hartog was overjoyed at my decision.

"I made no doubt you would come with me, Peter," he said. "We have been
shipmates too long to sail our separate ways alone. With Bantum and
Janstins, who are willing to sign on, and a picked crew; we can explore
the Ruby Mountains and be back within the year."



CHAPTER XLI

THE RUBY MOUNTAINS


On our second voyage to the South in the "Golden Seahorse" we followed
the route we had originally taken with the "Endraght", avoiding as far
as possible the calms and currents which had then impeded our progress,
as also those islands where we had met with a hostile reception. It
became necessary, however, to call at some of the groups we passed, and
it surprised us to find how diversified are the manners and customs of
the natives who inhabit the numerous islands of the South Seas. Not
only are the people of each group governed by different laws, but
frequently each island is distinct from the others in the language
spoken and the manner of life followed upon it. Hence it would require
a bulky volume to describe in detail the many and varied tribes we met
with on our journey.

We made the coast of New Holland within five months after leaving
Amsterdam (a record voyage), somewhere about the same place where I had
affixed the metal plate at the time of our first visit. But we did not
land here, as the weather was unfavourable, a strong breeze blowing and
a high sea running at the time, making it necessary to keep a good
offing from the shore. As we coasted toward the south, however, the
weather moderated, so that we were able to bring our ship with safety
nearer land.

From an observation we took when the weather was favourable, we
ascertained that we were three hundred miles to the north, with an
unbroken coastline extending before us; so we concluded we had rounded
a promontory, and were now upon the west coast of New Holland. This
encouraged us in the belief that we were following the right course to
the Ruby Mountains, for Marco Polo's parchment informed us that the
giants whom he saw were by far the largest men to be seen "in this
strait," from which it seemed the intrepid Venetian navigator had
sailed through this strait as early as the year 1272, when he made his
famous voyage round the world.

As we proceeded along the coast, the weather being now clear and fine,
we observed great stretches of country, flat and uninviting, upon which
there appeared to be no sign of life.  Indeed, the whole of this
southern continent seems to be sparsely populated when compared with
the islands, upon most of which the native inhabitants are very
numerous. In this may be seen the hand of an all-wise Providence. In
the ages to come a white population will, no doubt, emigrate to New
Holland, and if this great continent was found to be densely populated
by a black people, it would be a work of great difficulty to overcome
them. Whereas, the aboriginal population being scant by reason of the
barren nature of the country, the task of colonization by the whites
would be easy. We often sailed for more than a week at a time along
this coast without seeing any sign of human habitation, and those
natives whom we did see were of so poor a description and appeared to
be so frightened of us and of our vessel as hardly to deserve the name
of humans.

And now we approached some cliffs, beyond which appeared a lofty range,
which, from our present position, and the bearings given on Marco
Polo's chart, Hartog declared to be the Ruby Mountains.

As we approached the cliffs, a bold headland, which stood between us
and a view of the coast beyond, assumed the appearance of a lion's
head. The resemblance was so striking that it appeared as if the mighty
hand of Nature had hewn a colossus from the living rock in the shape of
a lion to guard the entrance into this land.

Upon rounding this remarkable promontory, we found ourselves opposite a
beach bordered by a broad line of surf, which indicated that the water
here was very shallow for some distance from the shore. Both the surf
and the beach seemed to be alive with black children, so diminutive
were the forms who disported themselves in the breakers, or ran up and
down upon the sand with the eagerness and agility generally displayed
by boys at the seaside. As to the real ages of these people, however,
we were not left long in doubt. Four canoes put off from the shore and
came alongside. They were manned by twenty-five blacks, who,
notwithstanding their small stature, we could see at a glance were
full-grown men. We made signs to them to come aboard, but they were
evidently in doubt whether or not to accept our invitation. We then
threw out to them some small pieces of iron and strings of beads, at
which they showed great satisfaction. These little men appeared to be
an intelligent race. Their bodies were small, but their heads, in
proportion, were large. They wore no beards, but their hair was curly
like the Kafirs, some of them wearing it tied to the neck in a knot,
and others letting it fall loose down to the waist. All of them had
holes through their noses to carry fish bones, polished white. Some
wore strings of human teeth round their necks.

At length, five, bolder than the rest, ventured aboard. They did not
appear to be afraid, and what astonished us most was that they seemed
ready to take charge of us. They made signs that we should go ashore,
and one of them, who appeared to be a chief, attempted to drive
Janstins into the sea by hitting him with a kind of hammer with a
wooden handle, and at one end a black conch shell. Janstins laughingly
disarmed his small antagonist, which seemed to surprise him as well as
the others, and brought them together in consultation.

Ten of the pygmies now came aboard, to whom we gave nutmegs and cloves,
thinking to please them. They took what we gave them, although they
appeared surprised that we should offer them anything. The little
chief, not more than three feet high, who had so amusingly attempted to
drive Janstins into the sea, again made signs to us to go ashore. So
Hartog ordered the pinnace to be manned, and armed against treachery.
But we had not come within musket shot of the beach when the water
became so shallow that we could not take the boat any farther,
whereupon a number of us stepped out into the shallows, up to our
waists in mud and kelp, and with some difficulty made our way to the
beach, where the pygmies mustered in great force.

On the beach we noticed fresh human footprints that must have been made
by men of great stature. They were twice as long as the footprints we
made, and none of us were noted for small feet. On going a short
distance into the woods we saw a vast number of huts made of dried
grass, so cramped that a man of ordinary size could not creep into them
on all fours, yet many of them contained families of pygmies. We
afterwards tried to penetrate somewhat farther into the wood, in order
to ascertain the nature and situation of the country, when, on coming
to an open place, a number of tall savages, none of them less than
eight feet high; came out from the brushwood as though to attack us. On
the neck of each giant sat one of the pygmies, who directed him in the
same way that a man would guide a charger. The pygmies then began to
let fly their arrows at us with great fury, by which Janstins was
wounded, and one of the men hit in the leg. We were all hard pressed,
so I ordered a volley to be fired, which killed one of the giants, so
that the others dragged the dead man into the wood, from which all
quickly disappeared. Being so far from the beach, and having a very
difficult path to travel, we determined to return to the ship and
report to Hartog what had occurred.

Hartog, upon learning what had befallen us, resolved to make no further
overtures of peace to these treacherous natives, who appeared to be
more like wild beasts than men, and who, by their conduct, had placed
themselves beyond all claim to consideration. It seemed that the
pygmies possessed a greater intelligence than the giants, whom they
used as ordinary men would use horses or beasts of burden. It was for
this reason that the little chief had attempted to drive Janstins into
the sea with his conch-shell hammer, regarding him as some smaller
species of giant whom he could easily frighten into obeying him.

During the afternoon some canoes came off in which were a number of
pygmies, but they made no attempt to come aboard of us, remaining, as
they thought, at a safe distance from the ship. In order to convince
them of the error of this, however, and to punish them for their
treachery of the morning, Hartog ordered our brass bow-chaser to be
loaded with grape, and fired amongst them, which caused great
consternation, and sent them back to their woods howling in terror,
taking their dead and wounded with them.

Hartog was determined to explore the range of mountains which we could
see not far distant from the coast, in order to ascertain the truth, or
otherwise, of the existence of rubies in the valleys as set forth in
Marco Polo's account of this country. Although we had carefully looked
for these gems among the ornaments worn by the pygmies, we had not seen
any, from which we concluded that the men spoken of by Polo as having
procured the rubies must have been of a different race, or possibly his
own sailors. Toward evening we observed a large bird in the sky, which
Hartog, with the aid of his spy-glass, pronounced to be a white eagle.



CHAPTER XLII

THE VALLEY OF SERPENTS


We now equipped an expedition to explore the Ruby Mountains, of which I
was appointed leader. Hartog wished to come with us, but I persuaded
him that his place was on board our ship, which, remembering how the
Spaniards had, on a former occasion, pirated the vessel, he could not
deny.

"You are right, Peter," he said, when we had argued the matter. "We
cannot both go, and, since I am captain of the 'Golden Seahorse', I
clearly perceive my duty is to stand by her through fair and foul."

The matter being thus concluded, I took command of the party for the
shore. In the forenoon we rowed for the beach in two pinnaces, well
manned and armed. In all the places where we had landed we had treated
the blacks with kindness, offering them pieces of iron, strings of
beads, and pieces of cloth, hoping by these means to win their
friendship, and to be allowed to explore the country; but, in spite of
our friendly overtures, the blacks received us everywhere as enemies,
and nowhere more so than in this land of pygmies and giants. We
therefore determined to waste no more time in making useless efforts
for peace, but to meet force with force. Twelve men, well armed, we
considered to be a match for all the savages we were likely to
encounter during a day's march inland.

We had brought with us some coils of stout rope in order to assist us
in descending from the mountain heights into the valleys below, for I
did not place much reliance upon the fable of the eagles and the pieces
of fresh meat as a means to procure the rubies which it was said were
washed down by torrential rains at certain seasons. If rubies were to
be obtained, I argued, it must be by a more practical method than that
employed by Marco Polo's men. Besides, we had no fresh meat with which
to give Polo's experiment a trial.

After our recent brush with the natives these wild men gave us a wide
berth, and we saw no sign of them on our way to the mountains, to which
we came after two hours of walking. The sides of these mountains are
rocky, with no verdure of any kind upon them except a species of
stubble which grows in patches. When we came to the top of one of these
hills, we looked down a sheer cliff into the valley. I never before saw
any place so inaccessible to man. Nothing without wings, it appeared,
could descend into those depths. After exploring the mountains for the
best part of an hour, however, we came to a position where it was
possible, with caution, to descend for some distance, and by aid of our
rope, one end of which we fastened to rocks or stubble as opportunity
offered, we succeeded in reaching a cliff from which there was a drop
of not more than two hundred feet. This I calculated to be the entire
length of the rope we had brought with us, by which I resolved to be
lowered. Bantum tried to dissuade me from my project, urging that the
risk was too great; but I was determined that, having come so far, I
would not go back without being able to make some report of the valley
we had undertaken to explore, and a descent by means of the rope seemed
to be the only method, nor could Bantum suggest any other.

I now knotted at one end of the rope a cradle in which I could sit.
while being lowered, and so long as the rope held, of which there
appeared to be no reason to doubt, for my weight was well within its
compass, I did not anticipate danger.

All being made ready, and every possible precaution taken against
accident, I was let down from the top of the cliff to what looked like
the dried-up course of a stream composed of pebbles and wash-dirt. The
whole valley presented the most dreary and desolate appearance. The
high cliffs by which it was surrounded rose like perpendicular walls,
casting deep shadows, so that the sun's rays never penetrated to the
floor, for which reason it was destitute of verdure, barren to the eye,
and depressing to the senses. As I descended it seemed to me as though
I was being lowered into some forgotten tomb.

At length my feet touched ground, and, extricating myself from my
cradle, I began to explore the course of the stream. The light in these
depths, although it was noonday, was not greater than twilight, and I
found some difficulty in ascertaining of what the bed of the stream was
composed, but by crawling on all fours I was able to form some idea of
its composition, and among the wash-dirt I found a number of dark
stones, which, from the experience I had gained at Amsterdam, I knew to
be rubies of a size and weight that promised great value.

I now became so absorbed in my hunt for rubies that the dismal nature
of my surroundings was forgotten. The greed of gain obsessed me, and as
I gathered the precious stones into my pocket I would not have
exchanged this desolate valley for the most beautiful spot on earth.

But I was soon to learn how the wealth of the world is for ever
encompassed by dangers that we wot not of. A shout drew my attention,
and on looking up a sight met my gaze which drove all thoughts of
ruby-hunting from my mind, and made self-preservation my only concern.
The rope by which I had descended, relieved of my weight, swayed like
a serpent endowed with life, and for this reason, perhaps, it was being
fiercely attacked, about midway from the top, by a flock of white
eagles which tore at the hemp with beak and claws. I ran to the cradle;
but I had barely come to it when the rope parted, a hundred feet or
more of it falling down to where I stood scarcely able, as yet, to
realize the extent of the disaster which had overtaken me. A return to
the ship for a fresh rope would occupy, I knew, six hours at the least,
provided my companions were not molested on their way by hostile
savages, and I shuddered to think what my sufferings must be during
such a period of enforced solitude in this dreadful place. I shouted to
my comrades on top of the cliff, who answered me, but it was impossible
to understand what was said. I noticed, however, that some had already
set off on a return to the ship, as I conjectured, for a fresh rope;
while others continued to watch me. Thus I did not feel so deserted as
I would otherwise have done, though I dreaded the weary hours before
me, particularly when it should become dark, as would happen sooner
here than above.

And now, to add to my terrors, I became aware of a low, hissing sound
which seemed to come from all around me, first from one quarter and
then from another. The air seemed to menace me with the hisses that
were borne upon it. Then, in spite of the gloom, by straining my eyes I
could see the cause of this hissing. A number of serpents were crawling
out of the crevices of the rocks around, and making toward me. I
shouted in the hope of frightening them away, but, although they
paused, irresolute, at the sound of my voice, they came on again,
drawing closer every minute. They were of all sizes, some of great
length, black and venomous-looking. One monstrous reptile of the
constrictor species continued to watch me from an adjacent rock upon
which it lay, its forked tongue darting in and out of its mouth. I felt
that my reason was leaving me. Endurance has its limits--I could bear
no more. Death or madness awaited me.

Then a miracle happened. The white eagles, the cause of my mishap, now
proved my salvation. They descended upon the serpents like bolts from
above, carrying them off in their talons to the mountain tops, there to
be devoured at their leisure. The dark valley became alive with
flapping white wings and squirming serpents, in the midst of which
pandemonium I mercifully lost consciousness.

When I came to myself Hartog was beside me. It was pitch dark, but he
carried a ship's lantern in his hand.



CHAPTER XLIII

WE AGAIN LEAVE NEW HOLLAND


"Courage, comrade," said Hartog, who held a flask of spirits to my
lips, and at the sound of his familiar voice life returned to me. I was
so weak, however, and the shock to my nervous system had been so great,
that I could not speak. I pressed his hand to let him know how thankful
I was that he had come himself to my assistance. None, I firmly
believe, but Hartog could have saved me at that moment from madness or
death. With the tenderness of his great heart, which could be gentle as
a woman's upon occasions, he lifted me in his arms, and bore me to the
cradle at the end of the rope by which he had descended. I was soon
drawn to the top of the cliff, where my companions awaited me, and
presently Hartog himself joined us. We did not fear the pygmies and
giants at night-time, for the dread of evil spirits in the dark is
universal among the aborigines of New Holland, making it unlikely they
would attack us, but it was a melancholy procession which made its way
through the woods to the beach where our boats lay, with me carried on
a stretcher by willing hands, since I was incapable of making any
exertion.

Next day, after a night of delirium, during which I raved, so Hartog
told me, of eagles and serpents, I awoke refreshed, though still very
weak. I could not bear to be left alone, not even for a moment, and
Hartog nursed me with a tenderness that my mother would have given me
had she been at my bedside. At length I pulled through, and was able to
come on deck; but it was a shadow of my former self who crept up the
companion ladder to where a couch had been prepared for me. As I lay
thus, recovering my strength in the sun, I was able to give Hartog some
account of my adventure. At first, when I spoke of rubies, he evidently
regarded what I said as a flight of fancy inseparable from the dreadful
ordeal through which I had passed. But when I insisted that I had told
him nothing but truth, he brought me the clothes I had worn on my
descent into the valley, the pockets of which we found to be full of
the rubies I had collected. But, after consultation, we determined to
say nothing about these rubies to any member of the crew. The wealth of
the Indies would not have tempted me to descend into the valley again,
and Hartog considered the risk too great for him to run, upon whom the
safety of us all depended. To have asked others to undertake a danger
from which we shrank would have been to undermine our authority and sow
the seeds of mutiny. Thus we kept our secret, and after a further
week's rest, during which I fully regained my strength, we made sail
for the open sea.

The land which we had up to now skirted and touched at was not only
barren and inhabited by savages, but also the sea in these parts seemed
to yield nothing but sharks, swordfish, and the like unnatural
monsters, while the birds also were as wild and shy as the men. What
pleasure the wretched inhabitants of this country can find in their
lives it is hard to understand.

We were now once more in need of water, and having sighted an island,
we made for it, but could find no means to get near the land, owing to
the heavy surf. We found the coast very precipitous, without any
foreland or inlets. In short, it seemed to us a barren, accursed place,
without leaf or grass. The coast here was steep, consisting of red
rocks of the same height almost everywhere, and impossible to touch at
owing to the breakers.

During the whole of the next day the current carried us northward
against our will, since we were running with small sail, and had but
little control over the rudder. In the afternoon we saw smoke rising up
from the shore, when I took charge of a boat's crew, in order to effect
a landing, with our spirits somewhat revived, for I concluded if there
were men on the island there must be water also.

Coming near to the shore, we found it to be a steeply-rising coast,
full of rocks and stones, with a violent surf running. Nevertheless,
two of our men swam ashore, and succeeded in drawing the pinnace close
to the reef, upon which we landed.

We now began our search for water, without, however, finding any, when
we observed coming toward us, from the direction in which we had seen
the smoke, three men creeping on all fours. Their appearance was so
wretched that we began to doubt if they were humans. They made no
sound, apparently being incapable of speech, but they signed to us with
beckoning fingers to approach them. Then they raised themselves upon
their knees, and stretched out their hands to us in mute appeal. They
were white men--some of the Spaniards marooned by Captain Montbar as a
punishment for having stolen our vessel. And, with a shock, I
recognized among them Pedro de Castro, the traitor to whom we owed the
piracy of our ship.

When we came close to the unfortunate Spaniards whom Montbar had left
to shift for themselves on this desolate shore I bent over to examine
them. But that they moved I would not have thought them to be alive.
The pupils of their eyes were strangely dilated, and there were black
circles under their eyes. Their hollow cheeks were deeply wrinkled.
Their lips glued to their yellow teeth. They exhaled an infectious
odour, and might well have been taken for dead men come forth from the
tombs.

We had some salt junk and biscuits on the boat, kept in one of the
lockers against, as sometimes happened, the boat being unable to return
to the ship in time for meals, and I sent one of the crew to fetch a
portion, which he set before the famished men.

When the Spaniards saw the food their limbs were affected with a
shivering, and tears came into their eyes. Then they fell upon it, and
devoured it with sobs of joy. In astonishment and pity we watched them
at their wolfish meal. When they had finished I asked de Castro for
some account of what had befallen them.

The devil Montbar, he said, had abandoned them upon this desolate
island, telling them to make shift for themselves, and to learn from
the hardship of their lot repentance for the act of piracy they had
committed in stealing our ship. On searching the island they found it
to contain no water except a brackish liquid, to be had by digging, The
only food obtainable was shell-fish, and occasionally the rank flesh of
sea birds. They had neither the tools nor materials to build
habitations, and were forced to shelter themselves from the scorching
sun in summer and from the bitter cold in winter with a few bushes.
When de Castro spoke of Montbar he became livid, and a very evil light
shone in his eyes. For two years they had endured upon this island
untold suffering. All the women and children were long since dead,
except Donna Isabel Barreto, who clung to life with the tenacity born
of a desire for revenge. Of the two hundred and forty Spaniards
marooned by Captain Montbar but thirty now survived, the rest having
perished miserably from starvation and exposure, when their bodies had
been cast from the cliffs into the sea.

When Pedro and his companions had somewhat recovered they led us to
where their wretched settlement had been made among a clump of gaunt,
wind-swept trees, and, in pity for their forlorn condition, I ordered
all the provisions we had in the boat to be brought for their
refreshment. Donna Isabel threw herself at my feet, clasping my knees,
and covering my hands with kisses. She had lost all trace of the proud
beauty she had formerly possessed. Her skin had been burnt almost black
by the sun, and a mane of tangled white hair surrounded what had once
been a noble countenance. Only her eyes retained their brightness, and
at thought of rescue, and possible revenge upon her enemy Montbar, they
seemed to glow with unnatural fire.

I knew that Hartog would not have wished me to leave these wretched
outcasts to their fate, however little deserving they may have been of
our sympathy, so I invited them to accompany us back to the ship. They
came protesting they would henceforth be our slaves, ready, in all
things, to obey our slightest behest. But I had little faith in their
promises when their necessities should be relieved.

Hartog, as may well be imagined, was considerably surprised when we
returned on board with the remnant of the Spanish settlement in such
sorry plight, but he approved of what I had done in bringing them off
the island. They were sent forward, where they received every
attention. Donna Isabel was the only one allowed to berth in the cabin.
We had no women's dress on board, but we found her warm clothing, in
which she appeared as a man. After a while she recovered her good
looks, and we found her companionship agreeable.

A week later we came to an island which promised more favourable
conditions than the one we had just left, and where we obtained a
supply of good water for our tanks.



CHAPTER XLIV

THE ISLANDS OF ARMENIO


It was now brought home to me that Donna Isabel Barreto was henceforth
to play no unimportant part in the prosecution of our voyage. She had
recovered her good looks, and although she was older than any of us on
board the "Golden Seahorse", and probably ten years older than Hartog,
she nevertheless exerted an influence over the captain which I could
see he found it impossible to resist. Donna Isabel had once more
resumed her feminine attire, having stitched together for herself a
wardrobe from the ship's stores of cloth and calico, and Hartog begged
from me three of the rubies which I had found in the Valley of
Serpents, which he presented to her, and which she wore sewn on to a
black velvet cap.

Donna Isabel openly expressed her desire to amass treasure in order to
follow up Montbar and take her revenge upon him for having marooned her
and her people upon a desert island. This desire for revenge obsessed
her. Her Spanish blood burned to repay the insults and indignities
which Montbar had heaped upon her, and she looked forward with pleasure
to the tortures which she promised herself she would inflict upon
Montbar when once she held him in her power.

In order to obtain means to make war upon her enemy, Donna Isabel
persuaded Hartog to embark upon a fresh adventure, which promised to
provide the necessary funds to equip a frigate equal to that owned by
Montbar, so that she might engage him upon equal terms.

The story that Donna Isabel had to tell was one confided to her by her
late husband, Captain Barreto, which she had kept locked in her memory
ever since, waiting for some such opportunity as the present, when the
information she possessed might be turned to account. The story was,
briefly, as follows:

A long time ago a Spanish vessel sailed from Manila for Mexico, and
east of Japan had by a violent storm been driven toward a small but
high-rising island.

When the crew went ashore, the island proved to be a country, strange
and unknown to anyone; the people being of handsome stature, white
skinned, and of good proportions, very affable, and amiably disposed.
On their arrival in Mexico, the sailors related many marvels about the
wealth of this island, giving their hearers to understand that, so to
say, gold and silver were almost to be picked up at discretion on the
shore, while the kettles and other cooking utensils of the natives were
made of these metals. These islands were named the Islands of Armenio,
after an Armenian merchant who was on board the ship.  Donna Isabel
professed to have received from her late husband the true bearings of
these islands, which she confided to Hartog, and a course was set
accordingly.

Pedro de Castro, Donna Isabel's son, had now been forgiven his
treachery toward us in stealing our vessel, since Hartog considered his
punishment in having been marooned upon a desert island commensurate
with his offence. He was, therefore, permitted to join us in the cabin,
and was given employment as ship's purser, for which he was well
suited. He expressed great contrition for what he had done, and I
honestly believe at the time he intended to serve us faithfully. But
treachery once practised is oft-times repeated, so I made up my mind to
keep a watchful eye on Pedro de Castro lest we again be caught
tripping.

We now proceeded northward, coasting with great care a succession of
small rocky islands that appeared to be uninhabited. As we proceeded,
the weather became rough and tempestuous, the sea running so high that
it sometimes threatened to engulf us. During the whole of our voyage we
had not met with such a mountainous sea.

At last we perceived a land to the north, trending to the north-east,
of which the coast seemed to be one continuous rock, remarkably level
at the top, and of a reddish colour, against which the sea broke with
such fury as to make a landing impossible, but Donna Isabel declared
this rock to be one of the islands of Armenio we had come in search of.
As there were no other islands to be seen, we concluded that during the
ages which had passed since the white-skinned people inhabited them,
the continuous beating of the waves had gradually demolished the
islands until nothing remained but the plateau of red rock to which we
had come, and over which the sea sometimes swept in a mass of foam.
But, having come to the island of her dreams, Donna Isabel would not
leave it until we had ascertained, beyond doubt, that a landing was
impracticable. It was not handsome, white-skinned natives whom we had
come in search of, she said, but solid gold, which neither tempests nor
seas can destroy. In order to satisfy her, we remained several days in
the vicinity of this mass of rocks, hoping that the weather would
moderate, so as to make possible a landing upon it, and at last we were
rewarded for our patience by a lull in the heavy breakers, so that the
pinnace, of which I took charge, was able to approach close to the
steep and jagged shore. Thereupon six of the Spaniards leaped
overboard, trusting to their skill as swimmers to make the land, which
they did, remaining on shore for upward of an hour. When they returned
they reported the rock to be a mass of auriferous quartz, in which was
embedded more gold than they had ever thought to see in one place, but
so tightly wedged was it between the crevices that they had been unable
to bring any of it away except a few small specimens which they showed
us. With picks and crowbars, however, they declared it would be easy to
obtain an unlimited supply of gold.

When we reported the finding of the gold to Donna Isabel, she vowed she
would never consent to abandon the treasure. "The sea cannot always be
rough," she said. "A calm must follow. Let us, therefore, wait in
patience until it comes, so that we may land and enrich ourselves."

Hartog, also, was in no mood to leave the gold until every effort had
been made to obtain it, so we continued to beat about in the vicinity
of the island awaiting a calm.

After three weeks tossing on the ocean, during which time of stress we
suffered much hardship by reason of our decks being continually
drenched by the seas which swept us fore and aft, a calm suddenly fell,
as it does in the tropics, without the least warning. Fortunately we
were not far from the island when the calm fell, so that we lay within
easy reach of it.

Without loss of time we manned the two pinnaces, I taking command of
one and Janstins of the other, and made for the shore. Donna Isabel
insisted upon coming in my boat. She had discarded her feminine
apparel, and now appeared in the sailor's clothes we had given her when
she first came aboard. Hartog, as captain, remained in charge of the
ship.

When we came to the island we found no difficulty in landing, and were
soon engaged with the picks and crow-bars we had brought with us, in
the work of gold-getting. We found the report given by the Spanish
sailors, who had been the first to land, to be somewhat exaggerated.
Still, there was an abundance of gold between the crevices of the rock,
and, what was more remarkable, we came upon what had evidently been
vessels of beaten gold, thus proving beyond doubt that the island had
formerly been inhabited.

During the course of the morning we obtained as much gold mixed with
quartz as the boats could conveniently carry, when we returned to the
ship, intending, after our midday meal, to come back for a fresh supply
of the precious metal, but on getting aboard we found Hartog much
perturbed by the extraordinary behaviour of the compass, and the
strange appearance of the sky.

"I don't like the look of it, Peter," said Hartog, when we descended
together to the cabin to discuss the situation. "I never knew this to
happen before but once, and I am not anxious to repeat the experience.
Unless I am greatly mistaken, there's something big coming."

When we returned to the deck, a low moaning sound came to us across the
sea, but, otherwise, there seemed to be nothing to cause anxiety. Donna
Isabel wished to return to the island for more gold, but Hartog would
not permit of any further expedition being made that day. He ordered
the boats to be hoisted, and the treasure carried below. Every stitch
of canvas had already been taken off the ship by the captain's orders,
and we now rode upon a glassy sea under bare poles. Then the moaning
increased, and presently there appeared upon the horizon a black line
over which lightning played, although no clouds were visible. The
atmosphere was at this time so oppressive that it was difficult to
breathe.

Hartog then ordered the helm to be lashed, the hatches to be put on,
and all hands below, he and I being the last to quit the deck just as
the storm broke upon us with hurricane force.

For three days and nights we remained between, decks, with the hatches
battened down, not knowing but that each moment might be our last. The
noise was deafening, while the violent motion of the vessel made the
getting about from one part of the ship to another difficult and
dangerous. Food and water we obtained with difficulty, not at regular
intervals, but when opportunity offered, crawling from one to another,
and helping those who, from exhaustion, were least able to help
themselves. The air became so foul in the cabin as to cause the ship's
lanterns to burn dimly, so that we feared they would soon be
extinguished. Thus we lived amid the raging elements, shut up in a
storm-tossed coffin which we knew might go to pieces at any moment.

At length, on the third day, Hartog ventured to open one of the
hatches, when a rush of cool air came to us as we lay gasping below,
bringing with it new life and vigour. The hurricane had passed, and
although the wind and sea still ran high, we were told we might come on
deck. But the happiness we felt at being released from our dreadful
imprisonment was checked when we saw the havoc which had been wrought
by the wind and the waves upon our ship. The decks were swept clean,
the masts gone by the board, the larboard bulwarks stove in, while the
cook's galley had disappeared.



CHAPTER XLV

SUMATRA


All hands now set to work to cut away the wreckage of our masts and
rigging, which, as the ship rolled in the trough of the sea, threatened
to stave in the hull as the spars dashed against it with each recoil.
Had it not been that the "Golden Seahorse" was a new ship, upon which
no expense had been spared in the building, we must have foundered. But
it was amid such scenes of storm and stress that the indomitable spirit
of Dirk Hartog asserted itself, and seemed to animate both officers and
crew with something of his own courage and determination. Forgetting
the hardships and privations through which we had passed, we set to
work, under the magic of his influence, with such goodwill that, in the
space of some six hours, order had been evolved out of chaos, and our
vessel once more rode the sea in safety. The pumps were then manned,
when it was found that although much water was in the hold, it was
easily gained upon, from which we concluded that no leak had sprung in
our timbers, notwithstanding the battering they had received. Jury-masts
were then rigged, upon which sufficient sail was set to give the ship
steering way, when we hoped to make a harbour where we might refit, and
effect necessary repairs.

We were now anxious to reach some port where new masts and rigging
might be obtained, as our progress under jury-masts, which carried only
a limited spread of canvas, was necessarily slow. Donna Isabel was in
favour of abandoning the "Golden Seahorse" at the first port we came to
where another ship could be purchased to convey our treasure to Spain,
but neither Hartog nor I would consent to this proposal, having no
desire to see the interior of a Spanish prison, or to taste of the
horrors of the Inquisition. It was astonishing how quickly Donna Isabel
and her son, Pedro de Castro, appeared to have forgotten the obligation
they were under to us for having rescued them from the desert island
upon which they had been marooned. Both now spoke as if we were
indebted to them for having put us in the way of enriching ourselves
with the gold obtained from the Islands of Armenio, and Donna Isabel
declared that the treasure really belonged to her, since she had
possessed the secret which led to its discovery. I was so disgusted by
the ingratitude of these Spaniards that I could hardly bring myself to
speak of the matter with patience.

Hartog now proposed that we should make for Sumatra, and as this
proposal appeared to promise a way out of, our difficulties, I had
nothing to say against it.

Sumatra is one of the Sunda Islands, having Malacca on the north,
Borneo on the east, Java on the south-east, and the Indian Ocean on the
west. It is eight hundred miles long and about one hundred and fifty
broad, and it possesses a fine harbour capable of containing any number
of the largest ships. Here we arrived without mishap, within three
weeks after setting our course for this port, and cast anchor in a
sheltered spot close to the shore. The harbour is commanded by a strong
fortress, well fortified, and mounted with cannon. Three ships were at
anchor, a Spanish frigate and two smaller vessels, one flying the flag
of England, and the other displaying the colours of the Netherlands.
We had barely found our moorings when a boat from the man-o'-war came
alongside, steered by a young Spanish officer, who bore as much
arrogance in his demeanour as there was to be seen gold lace and brass
buttons upon his uniform. He haughtily demanded an interview with the
captain, but upon Hartog stepping forward his manner became less
offensive, and finally they descended together to the cabin, being
shortly afterward joined by Donna Isabel.

Since I was not invited to this conference, I was forced to remain on
deck, feeling very jealous of the influence which Donna Isabel exerted
over Hartog, to the destruction of the mutual trust and confidence
which had formerly existed between us. I felt, also, there was trouble
in store for us. Hartog, although brave and resourceful upon the sea,
was but a child when it came to dealing with business matters ashore,
and I well knew that he would prove no match for the wily Spaniards
with whom he was now in consultation.

Presently the party from the cabin came on deck, when I perceived that
Pedro de Castro was one of those who had been present at the
conference. The young Spanish officer was now all smiles and
affability, and Donna Isabel and her son, accompanying him to his boat,
were rowed aboard the frigate.

Hartog then came to me, and I could see he was worried, and ashamed at
having shut me out from what had taken place in the cabin.

"Forgive me, comrade," he said, "but Donna Isabel would have none
present at the interview with the Spaniard save only myself and her son
Pedro."

"Since when has Donna Isabel Barreto become captain of this ship?" I
asked.

"Nay, Peter, I forgive thee that sneer," answered Hartog, "though I
would not take it from another. It has been decided to transfer the
treasure to the Spanish frigate, the captain of the warship undertaking
to protect us while we remain in this port and to pay for all necessary
repairs to our ship. These were the best terms I could make, and they
seem to me fair enough."

I had no desire to haggle over terms, for I was already rich enough to
make me careless of what became of the gold we had taken from the
Island of Armenio, but I realized how great was the influence Donna
Isabel had acquired over Hartog in order to induce him to lay aside his
claim to a part of the treasure.

During the day a boat came from the frigate into which the gold was
loaded and transferred to the warship, together with the Spaniards we
had aboard of us, whom I was glad to be rid of on any terms, and that
evening was the first upon which I had felt at home in our cabin since
Donna Isabel and her people had joined us.

It was a beautiful evening, with a gentle breeze off the shore--the
very night, as I remarked to Hartog, to put to sea.

"I wish we could up anchor and be off," answered Hartog. "But we have
work to do ashore in attending to the ship's repairs before we may hope
to leave this place where, I make no doubt, we shall be imposed upon
and robbed by the sweepings of Europe who inhabit this island. It is
fortunate we have the word of the Spanish captain that he himself will
be responsible for all we need."

I did not answer, for I did not share in Hartog's sanguine expectations
regarding the Spaniards. I had experienced too many acts of treachery
to trust them, and there existed, as I knew, at this time, a natural
antipathy between the Netherlands and Spain, which made any binding
compact between the people of these rival nations impossible. I did
not, however, voice my suspicions lest my opposition might be
attributed to jealousy.

As sometimes happens, I was unable to sleep that night, my thoughts
taking wing among the many scenes of adventure through which I had
passed, and refusing to compose themselves to rest. With the dawn I was
up and on deck. As I stepped upon the poop and looked around upon the
quiet harbour where the ships rode at anchor, I became aware of a
certain emptiness in the bay. I rubbed my eyes and looked again. The
Spanish frigate was gone.



CHAPTER XLVI

MAHOMET ACHMET


When Hartog was told of the treachery of Donna Isabel Barreto, in
stealing our portion of the gold obtained from the island of Armenio,
and leaving us, for all she knew or cared, without the means to repair
our vessel, he did not show so much anger as I expected. He seemed more
to regret the loss of Donna Isabel than the treasure with which she had
so heartlessly decamped.

"She was a clever woman, Peter," was all he said to me in reference to
the matter, "and I shall miss her." Then he clapped me on the shoulder,
and bade me not despond. "We still have the rubies," he reminded me,
"which, properly invested, will more than pay for all we need."

I had forgotten the rubies, but I stipulated that the disposal of them
should be left in my hands.

"Willingly, Peter," replied Hartog, "for, between ourselves, I doubt
not I am more at home on the sea than in making a bargain with
land-rogues ashore. Take you command of the ship until she is once
more taut and trim."

To this I agreed, although I had no intention of depriving Hartog of
his authority, and, after breakfast, I landed with a boat's crew, in
order to interview the islanders, and, if possible, to make
arrangements with some of them for the equipment of our vessel.

Achin, the metropolis of Sumatra, is situated at the north-west end of
the island. It stands on a plain, surrounded by woods and marshes,
about five miles distant from the sea, near to a pleasant rivulet. The
city consists of some eight thousand houses which take up more ground
than a city of this size would demand by reason of every person
surrounding his dwelling with a palisade that stands some yards distant
from it. The inhabitants are, in general, small, and of very swarthy
complexion. They have black eyes, flat faces, and high check-bones.
Their hair is long and black, and they take great pains to dye their
teeth black. They also besmear their bodies with oil, as do the natives
of other hot countries, to protect themselves from being stung by
insects, while they let their nails grow exceedingly long, scraping
them until they are transparent, and dyeing them vermilion. The poorer
class go almost naked, having only a small piece of cloth round the
waist, and a piece of linen about the head, or a cap made of leaves
resembling the crown of a hat. The richer sort wear white breeches to
above the knee, and a piece of calico, or silk, wrapped round their
loins and thrown over the left shoulder. Some wear sandals, but all are
bare-legged and bare-bodied from the waist upward. The common language
among them is the Malayan language, and, by speaking to some whom I met
on landing, I found I was able to make myself understood, and to
understand, though imperfectly, what was said to me. The Sumatrans are
a very indolent race of people, which accounted for the small interest
they took in the arrival of our ship, none thinking it worth while to
come aboard, or to make any inquiry concerning us.

When I explained that my business was to obtain new masts and rigging I
was directed to the house of an Arab named Mahomet Achmet, a carpenter
and ship chandler, if such he could be called, who traded with vessels
visiting the island, and dealt with them in the matter of repairs or
refitting. Mahomet, like all the inhabitants of Sumatra, spoke the
Malayan language, but we occasionally helped each other with Spanish or
Dutch words, of which he had acquired the meaning by his intercourse
with crews of these nationalities. When I told him we required masts as
well as rigging, he seemed to consider my request unreasonable. There
were masts on the island, he said, good ones too, made of beech, but
they belonged to the king, who set great store by them, since they had
come to him as the result of a victory by the fort over a foreign
vessel which had attempted to raid the island and take by force what
could only honestly be obtained by trade. On my asking to see the king
Mahomet turned up his eyes with an exclamation of astonishment at my
audacity. No foreigners were permitted to see the king, he said. It was
death to enter without permission the inner apartments of the palace
where the king lived. But when I produced one of my rubies he became
less demonstrative in his protestations against my proposed visit.

"It is for these toys that I would trade with the king," I said to him,
as I held up the red crystal to the light in order that he might see it
better.

"Such toys the king likes well," answered Achmet. "Give it me, and I
will send it to the king, and ask if he will receive you."

"Nay, Achmet," I answered, "I will not part with my jewels save only to
the king himself. Send, therefore, and tell him that a rich merchant
from the East is here to trade for gems such as are only fit for kings
to handle."

I could now see that Mahomet Achmet was on the horns of a dilemma. His
natural cupidity urged him to rob me of my jewels, but should this come
to the king's knowledge he would doubtless suffer for having taken the
law into his own hands. Finally he consented to send a message to the
king on my promising that not only would I pay him liberally for such
ship-chandlery as he might supply us with, but that if all went well I
would present him with a ruby of equal value to that which I had shown
him before I left the island.

While the messenger was absent on his mission, Mahomet gave me some
interesting information regarding his Malayan Majesty. The king, he
said, owned a large number of horses, as well as elephants, all having
magnificent trappings. He was at no expense in time of war, for all his
subjects were obliged to march at their own expense, and to carry with
them provisions for three months. In peace time his Majesty's living
and that of his household cost him nothing, for his subjects supplied
him with all kinds of provisions. He was, besides, heir to all those of
his people who died without male issue, and to all foreigners who died
within his territories, while he succeeded to the property of all those
who were put to death for offences against the law.

From this it will be seen that the revenue of this prince is very
considerable, and that he is personally interested in the death of
foreigners within his kingdom, whether from natural causes or in the
execution of the law, of which he is the sole arbiter.



CHAPTER XLVII

KING TRINKITAT


The space of an hour had barely elapsed since the sending of the
messenger to King Trinkitat of Sumatra, announcing my arrival in his
dominions, before an answer was brought me that his Majesty desired my
attendance at the palace forthwith, so I made ready to accompany those
he had sent for me, and who acted as my bodyguard.

The king's palace stands in the middle of the town, its grounds being
oval in shape, and about a half-mile in circumference, surrounded by a
moat twenty-five feet broad, and as many deep. All round the palace
there are cast up great heaps of earth instead of a wall, planted with
reeds and canes that grow to a prodigious height and thickness. These
reeds are continually green, so that there is no danger of fire. There
is no ditch or drawbridge before the gates leading to the palace, but,
on each side, a wall of stone, about ten feet high, that supports a
terrace on which some guns are planted. A small stream runs through the
middle of the palace, which is lined with stone, and has steps down to
the bottom of it for the convenience of bathers. There were four gates
and as many courts to be passed before we came to the royal apartments,
and in some of these outer courts are kept the king's magazines of
rifles and cannon. Here also are stalls for the king's elephants. In
the king's magazines are to be found numerous cannon, and a quantity of
small arms, while his guards consist of a thousand men. But his
greatest strength is in his elephants, which are trained to trample
upon fire, and to stand unmoved at the report of artillery.

When we came to the inner courts, beyond which were the apartments of
the king, our bodyguard halted, and Mahomet Achmet and I entered the
king's presence unattended.

We found his Majesty seated on a divan surrounded by his numerous wives
and slaves, to the number of several hundred, for the apartment in
which the king received us was a very large one, more resembling a
courtyard than a room, since the roof was open to the sky. The king
seemed to be a man of middle age, whom I judged to be about forty years
old, but his attendants were all young, some of them scarcely more than
children.

All were attired in the same manner, so that it was difficult to tell
their sex, with short white breeches to above the knee, silken scarves
of various colours wrapped round their waists, the end being thrown
over the left shoulder, and white turbans upon their heads, into which
their long hair was gathered. Some were yellow-skinned, others brown,
others again jet-black. All had been rubbed with oil so that their
skins glistened like polished marble, and they stood about the
courtyard or around the king in silent groups, like so many statues.

Mahomet Achmet prostrated himself when he came into the king's
presence, as is the manner of the East; but I contented myself with
bowing low as I approached the divan upon which his Majesty sat, very
gorgeously dressed in red and blue silk robes embroidered with golden
dragons, which I concluded he had obtained from China. Upon his head he
wore a white turban with a jewelled aigrette of great value. His
countenance was intellectual, and his expression shrewd.

King Trinkitat received me graciously, and ordered a stool to be placed
near to the divan so that I might sit and converse with him upon the
matter in hand. When I showed him some of my rubies he at once said,
"These come from the South Land," and upon my asking him how he had
arrived at this conclusion, he answered that some of his people visited
annually the South Land to trade with the natives, and had reported a
white ruler there among a tribe of savages who had in his possession a
great quantity of valuable jewels, which he would not part with for
money, but only in exchange for certain commodities, by the aid of
which he was making the tribe he governed the most powerful upon the
Southern Continent.

"What is the name of this white chief, your Majesty?" I asked, deeply
interested.

"King Luck," answered Trinkitat; "but I thought you came from him."

"That is not so, O king," I replied. "These rubies are magic rubies
that are found only in a valley guarded by serpents. If they are
honestly acquired they bring great happiness to those who possess them,
but if they are stolen, or dishonestly come by, they bring a curse upon
the robbers, and upon the land in which they dwell and all the people
who inhabit it."

At this I thought the king appeared disappointed. I had reckoned on his
being superstitious, and indeed it is well known that certain jewels do
possess mysterious qualities that influence the lives of those who own
them, although I had no authority, beyond my own perspicacity, for
endowing my rubies with supernatural charm.

"How many of these jewels have you?" asked the king, holding one of the
rubies up to the light.

I mentioned the number as being thirty, that being half of all I
possessed.

"There is not enough money upon the island to pay a fair price for
these stones," declared Trinkitat, "and how should it benefit me if I
acquire them for less than their fair value if, in that case, they are
to bring upon me and my people a curse rather than a blessing?"

"Nay, O king," I answered, "I ask no money for these gems, but rather
your good offices in helping us repair our vessel, which, after much
storm and stress, has found in your harbour a haven of rest."

"That you shall have, and welcome," replied the king, and after some
further explanation as to what was required, and more bargaining, it
was finally agreed that I would allow the king to retain the six rubies
I had brought with me, and that the balance of the thirty, which I
offered, was to be paid over when our vessel had been new masted and
fresh rigged at the king's expense. Mahomet Achmet was given directions
to see that this work was promptly carried out, after which we bowed
ourselves from the king's presence, I being well satisfied with the
bargain I had made.

Next day the work of repairing the ship began. She was careened in the
shallows of a safe and convenient harbour, and such an army of workers
set to work upon her that in the course of a week the "Golden Seahorse"
was once more ready for sea.

While the repairs to our vessel were in progress we received welcome
assistance from the crews of the English and Dutch ships in the
harbour, with whom we soon became acquainted. The Dutch vessel
"Speedwell" belonged to the Dutch East India Company, a company which,
at this time, was growing in wealth and importance. She was bound on a
voyage to the North for a cargo of furs, and Captain Smuts, in command
of her, was anxious that we should join him in this expedition, for,
said he, two ships will more readily succeed than one, since each may
help the other. But we not being equipped for northern travel decided
to continue our voyage south, though we arranged with Captain Smuts to
meet him later at the Molucca Islands, where we had resolved to call
King Thedori to account for his treacherous conduct toward us on our
former visit.

Before leaving the island of Sumatra I paid a second visit to Achin,
where I was given a final audience with King Trinkitat, when I paid him
over the balance of the rubies. I found the king well disposed toward
me, and apparently satisfied with the payment made him in return for
the refitting of our vessel, which indeed was at a princely rate, when
the value of the rubies was considered. He did not attempt to extort
more than was justly due to him according to promise, as is the habit
with these half-savage potentates, when dealing with foreigners, but
this I attributed to the superstition I had so happily aroused in him
that the rubies would bring misfortune if not honestly come by. I
questioned his Majesty more closely with regard to King Luck, and, from
what he told me, I felt convinced that this man, now a chief among the
savages of New Holland, was none other than my old antagonist Van Luck,
though how he came to be rescued from the sea I had no means, at that
time, of knowing. King Trinkitat possessed no chart of the place to
which his ships traded, as the captains of his vessels mostly steered
by the stars. But he promised me that, if ever I should again visit his
island, he would send a pilot with me to conduct me to King Luck.

Mahomet Achmet, with whom I parted the best of friends, expressed the
hope that we would one day meet again.

"I will not sell this jewel, Signor Peter," he said to me when I paid
him for his work with some money we had aboard the ship, and presented
him with a fine ruby, according to promise. "I will keep it in memory
of a shrewd man whose wit did more to save him than his money, for I
may tell you that neither you nor your ship's company would have been
allowed to leave this place had you not spoken to the king of the
ill-luck which these rubies bring to those who come not honestly by
them."

I thanked Mahomet for his frankness, which I promised to remember
should I ever have occasion to revisit Sumatra.

And now, all being ready, we put to sea, and by evening the island of
Sumatra had disappeared beyond the horizon.



CHAPTER XLVIII

STATEN LAND


Hartog believed, from an ancient Portuguese chart which we had with us,
that an island continent lay to the south-east, and after a lengthened
period, during which we encountered bad weather and rough sea, we
sighted a formidable coastline, which appeared to be a mainland
extending on either side as far as the eye could reach. We coasted
along this new-found country for several days in search of a landing
place, without being able to find one, the coast being a continuous
line of precipitous rocks. Toward the end of the third day we
encountered a canoe, the largest we had seen, containing upward of one
hundred natives. We offered food and other articles, but, although the
canoe came quite close to us, none of her people could be induced to
come on board.

These natives appeared to be strong and fierce, nor did they show the
least fear of us, but rather an intention to begin hostilities when an
opportunity should offer. In view of this we loaded our brass cannon,
and made ready a supply of ammunition in case they should attack us.
But after keeping company with us for some time the canoe made off, and
Hartog had no mind to follow it.

Next morning we hove to off a pebbly beach, upon which I undertook to
land a boat's crew and examine the country. Hartog sent two boats, one
in my charge and the other in charge of Janstins. The sea was smooth,
so that we had no difficulty in running the boats ashore, where,
leaving a man aboard each, the rest of us followed the course of a
stream inland. Here we soon came to a valley so beautiful as almost to
defy description. Colossal trees rose to a great height above our
heads, festooned with a flowering creeper which resembled a bridal
veil, whilst emerald green ferns stretched their fronds into a stream
which descended from the higher land beyond by a series of cascades. A
kind of flax plant grew here, with leaves over nine feet long, and
bearing a flower which looked like a bunch of feather plumes, whilst
palms and cabbage trees abounded everywhere in great profusion.

My attention was diverted from the beauties which surrounded us by some
strange footprints which I noticed on the soft ground near the stream,
and which appeared to have been made by a bird or two-legged animal of
prodigious size. The footprints measured fully three feet in length,
and I fell to wondering what kind of a creature it could be who had
made them, when I was startled by a cry from one of our men, which
caused me to look in the direction whence it came. At a distance of
some fifty yards from where I stood I then perceived a huge, wingless
bird. Its head, armed with a formidable beak, reared full twenty feet
from the ground; its body, big as an ox, and covered with black
bristles, supported upon legs thicker than the girth of a man. As yet
this prodigy had not observed us, for it was stalking quietly among the
trees, followed by a brood of chickens, each larger than the biggest
ostrich I had ever seen.

I now noticed that one of these chickens had strayed from the others,
and I saw Janstins, who had evidently not observed the mother-bird,
aiming his matchlock at it as though about to fire. I shouted to him to
desist, but too late to save the mad fellow from his folly. There was a
flash, and a loud report, and the giant chicken lay on its back, its
legs kicking in the air.

"To the boats!" I cried, and the scared sailors, when they saw the
mother-bird, needed no second warning. There was a rush for the boats
by all but Janstins, who seemed as one amazed, and incapable of action
at the sight of the monster. I could not leave him to the fate which
threatened him, so, running to his assistance, I dragged him down
behind some fern trees, where we hid out of sight of the mother-bird,
who seemed bewildered by the unaccustomed sound of firearms, and
perplexed at the death of her chick, for which she could not account.
But we both knew that her inaction was momentary, and that when she
discovered us we must expect the full force of her rage, which could
only result in the loss of our lives. Whispering to Janstins, I bade
him remember that in courage and caution alone lay our hope of escape,
and he presently recovered his presence of mind sufficiently to follow
me when we ran, bent double, under cover of the luxuriant foliage, to
the beach, where we arrived only just in time to scramble into the
second boat that was being shoved off by the terrified sailors, before
the mother-bird, now joined by her mate of even larger proportion, came
in pursuit of us, and so carried away were these monsters by rage at
our escape that they advanced into the sea, stretching their necks at
us while uttering a loud, drumming noise which we could hear repeated
when we were on board the ship, and even after we were out at sea.

Next morning, at daybreak, we again made the coast, and toward evening
we found ourselves opposite a sandy beach upon which a number of
natives appeared to be engaged in some tribal ceremony. Fires were
lighted along the sea shore, and, upon drawing nearer, we were able to
distinguish groups of men, apparently captives, with their hands bound
behind them, standing together while their captors performed an
extravagant dance round them. Armed warriors then rushed upon each
other in mimic warfare, and the sound of their bare feet, as they
stamped in unison upon the hard sand, came to us with measured cadence
across the sea. When the dance was ended, the captives were made to lie
flat, one behind the other, till they formed a black patch upon the
beach. Then appeared a number of men pushing from above high-water mark
a war canoe, the prow of which, elaborately carved, and upstanding to
the height of thirty feet, was decorated with shells and bunches of
feathers. On came the canoe, slowly at first, and then with increasing
speed, until it reached the row of victims, over whom it crunched,
taking the water reddened with their blood amid an uproar of shrieks
and groans most dreadful to listen to.

Not wishing to engage these savages, Hartog stood out to sea, but so
fearless were they that when they saw us they came in pursuit of us.
Over twenty canoes crowded with natives put off from the shore, but we
greeted them with shots from our brass cannon, which sent them back
quicker than they came, many being observed to fall after each
discharge of grapeshot and canister amongst them.

We left this country, which Hartog named Staten Land, in honour of the
States of Holland, with an unfavourable impression of its inhabitants,
who appeared to be bloodthirsty savages, prone to hostility without
provocation.



CHAPTER XLIX

THE CANNIBAL ISLANDS


After leaving Staten Land we sailed west to between the fifteenth and
twenty-first parallels of south latitude, when we fell in with a number
of islands, some of considerable extent, while others were mere islets
of sand and rock, uninhabited except by sea-fowl and turtle. A great
barrier reef surrounds the group to the eastward, leaving the southern
quarter open. This barrier is broken by numerous passages, between
which navigation is possible, but dangerous, except in fine weather. In
addition to the great barrier, every island has an encircling reef of
its own. The general appearance of these islands is bold and striking.
They are perhaps the mountain tops of some sunken continent. The island
upon which we landed was one of the largest of the group, with a
background of wooded hills, and a fringe of palm trees to the beach,
beyond which a native village stood among green foliage.

We found the inhabitants of this island not nearly so friendly as other
savages we had met with. The men were larger, and bore a ferocious
aspect. The chief wore a necklace of whales' teeth, his hair frizzled
into a mop, which stood out from his head, coloured to a reddish-brown.
His skin was a light brown, with no tattoo marks upon it, but shiny, as
if rubbed with oil. He carried a club and spear of elaborate
workmanship, and wore a cloth petticoat made from the bark of a tree,
and painted with some skill in its design. His followers were
similarly, but not so strikingly, clad, the women wearing feathers in
their hair, and a peculiar leaf from a tree, which looked like white
satin. Altogether this race appeared to be possessed of a far higher
state of civilization than the people in Terra Australis. They were,
however, openly addicted to cannibalism, and made no secret of this
abominable practice.

These natives did not display any hostility at our landing, nor did
they express any surprise at the presents we made them of beads and
bright cloth, although they accepted what we gave them with avidity.
We stayed at this island for nearly two months, during which time we
learnt something of the customs of the people, and I was able, after a
while, to understand some of their language. It seemed that these
savages were continually at war with one another, and the boom of the
great wooden war drums was always sounding somewhere in the group. It
was from prisoners taken in battle that men were provided for cannibal
feasts, hence there was never lacking a cause for quarrel. The
prisoners were kept in a compound, where they were fattened for the pot
and killed when wanted.

These islanders were industrious in their own way. They built
comfortable houses, and made excellent pottery capable of withstanding
the heat of fire when used for cooking. Their boat-builders constructed
sea-going canoes capable of travelling long distances. They also made a
delicate cloth from the bark of the mulberry tree, upon which they
printed from wooden blocks patterns of great elegance. Their spears and
clubs also showed much taste in their construction and ornamentation.
The women made fishing nets of coconut fibre, with which they captured
an abundance of fish. The tribes on the different islands kept up a
system of barter with one another, exchanging commodities, the making
of which was their hereditary occupation. A son followed the occupation
of his father, and for him to have followed any other occupation would
have been regarded as an offence against ancestors. A son was expected
to do exactly as his father did before him, and to do it in the same
way.

One day when I was fishing outside the reef, I was startled by a cry,
and looking toward whence it came I perceived a young girl in evident
terror, swimming for the reef with the black fin of a shark close upon
her. Going to her assistance I managed, at some risk, to drive off the
shark, and, pulling the girl into my boat I took her on board our ship,
where I delighted her with a present of printed calico with which to
reign as a queen of fashion among her tribe. When I took her ashore she
showed her gratitude by taking my hand in hers, and placing it upon her
forehead, which meant the making of a compact between us that she would
lay down her life for me if occasion should require. It was to this
that we subsequently owed our escape from death.

We had not found anything profitable to trade from these islands with
the exception of sandal wood and tortoiseshell, of which we obtained a
supply, but I noticed that the chief did not appear to grudge anything
we took from him. It became a joke among our crew that they could have
anything for the asking, and the ship was soon a museum of island
curiosities. This aroused my suspicion, for I knew the cupidity of
savages, and how they always try to take all and give nothing in
return.

Toward the end of our visit, I also observed that numbers of savages
from the adjacent islands began to arrive in canoes, and that
preparations were being made for a feast. It was then that I noticed
the girl I had saved from the shark was often to be seen standing on
the beach opposite to the ship, gazing at the vessel long and
earnestly. Thinking she wished to come on board again, I went in my
boat to fetch her, but when I met her she showed great alarm lest we
should be seen speaking together, and, urging me to follow her, she led
me to a secluded spot of the island, in order that we might be free
from observation. Here she confided to me the treachery of Vale Vulu,
the chief whose guests we were.

It appeared from this girl's account of the matter that Vale Vulu's
professed friendship for us was only a blind in order that he might
attack us unawares. To this end he had invited certain tribes from some
of the adjacent islands, with whom he happened to be on friendly terms,
to a feast, the principal food of which was to consist of the dead
bodies of our crew. His own tribe, unaided, he did not consider strong
enough for this enterprise, but with the assistance of the friendly
cannibals, whom he invited to the banquet, he made no doubt that he
would easily be able to overcome us, particularly as we were to be
taken unawares. The plan was to invite us to the feast, which we would
be told was to consist only of fish, coconuts, and bananas, but, when
we were seated, at a given signal we would be massacred and eaten,
after which Vale Vulu would take possession of our ship and all that
belonged to us.

The poor girl, when she had finished her story, confessed she would no
doubt suffer death by torture for having betrayed the plot. I tried to
induce her to come on board with me, but she refused, saying that if
she did so an attack would be made upon us at once, where our ship lay,
helpless, in the lagoon. I could not but see the force of her argument,
and, as the matter was too urgent to admit of delay, I hurried on board
and informed Hartog of what I had heard.

Our plans were soon made. All hands were told to be in readiness to man
the boats in order to tow the ship out of the lagoon during the night,
when we would depend upon a breeze to escape from these bloodthirsty
savages. Arms and ammunition were served to the crew, and our brass
cannon was loaded to the muzzle with grape and canister.

During the early part of the night we could see lights on the shore,
whilst the beating of war drums and the sound of wooden horns continued
to a late hour. At last all was still, when we slipped our anchor, and
began the arduous task of towing the ship out of the lagoon through the
opening in the reef which marked a break in the line of white surf.
During the night we laboured at the oars, and when morning broke we had
succeeded in towing the ship into the open sea for some distance from
the land. But our peril was by no means at an end. An absolute calm
prevailed, and unless a breeze came in time we feared the savages would
put off in their war canoes to attack us. Nor in this were we mistaken,
for we presently heard a great beating of drums and blowing of horns,
while we could see the savages crowding on to the reef, from which they
watched us lying becalmed. Ten canoes then came through the opening in
the reef, each containing some one hundred savages, and were paddled
rapidly toward us.

When the canoes came within range our brass cannon accounted for one of
them, on board of which I hoped was the traitor Vale Vulu, but the
others came on, and there is little doubt that by force of numbers we
must have been overpowered had not the breeze, which we could now see
approaching, come in time to save us. The canoes were all round us, and
the savages had already begun to swarm on to our decks, when the sails
filled and the "Golden Seahorse" began to gather way. We were now
incensed against the cannibals for their treacherous conduct, and many
fell to the discharge of our muskets. With our cutlasses we soon drove
those who had ventured upon the ship into the sea, and a second
discharge from our brass cannon disabled one of the largest remaining
canoes, when the others made off. As our ship bowed to the waves of the
ocean we were able once more to breathe freely, and, taking a last look
at the island, I fancied I saw a dark form hurl itself from one of the
highest cliffs upon the rocks below. Was it the brave girl, I wondered,
who had saved us, and who had thus escaped torture by destroying
herself?



CHAPTER L

AGAIN AT THE MOLUCCAS


Hartog was anxious, before returning home, that we should call again at
the Molucca Islands, and demand an explanation, together with a ransom
of pearls, from King Thedori, for having treated us so scurvily on our
former visit. We knew that this treacherous chief depended for the
success of his piratical schemes on taking by surprise those for whom
he pretended friendship, and for that reason we had arranged to meet
the "Speedwell" so that we might, by strategy, pay Thedori back in his
own coin, capture him, and hold him to ransom.

Now we knew that if Thedori, or any of the people, caught but a glimpse
of the "Golden Seahorse", they would make ready to attack her with all
the force at their command, but the "Speedwell" was unknown to them,
and there were many harbours among the Moluccas where our ship might
remain unnoticed while our plans were matured. The plan we had formed
was a simple one, and was therefore the more likely to succeed. It was,
shortly, as follows. On reaching the Moluccas we would choose a
convenient harbour as the base of our enterprise, when the "Speedwell"
would set out alone for the island ruled over by Thedori, where we had
no doubt the captain and crew would be well received, as is the habit
of this crafty king when dealing with strangers, in order that he may
eventually pillage them. Thedori was to be invited by Captain Smuts to
go aboard his vessel to inspect the cargo of furs and other goods in
which he proposed to trade. Once on board the "Speedwell", the King of
the Moluccas would be kidnapped, and brought away to where the "Golden
Seahorse" was at anchor, when Hartog undertook to deal with him.

Captain Smuts, whom we found waiting us at the Moluccas, was very ready
to fall in with this plan when we told him of the large pearls that
were to be found at the island, some of which we intended to demand as
the King's ransom for being allowed to return to his people.

The island we had chosen as the base for our operations happened to be
the one of which we had been told on our former visit that the men
possessed such large ears that with one ear they could, when they
liked, cover the whole of their heads; for when we landed, and met the
natives, we observed in them this remarkable peculiarity. Their heads
were the smallest and their ears the largest that I have ever seen in
human beings. The intelligence of these savages was as small as their
heads. They showed no interest in us, and seemed to be indifferent to
our appearance among them. This stupidity on their part, however, so
far from giving us any anxiety, rather commended itself to us, since it
appeared unlikely they would attempt to interfere with our plans.

When we had rested and refreshed ourselves for three days at this
island, the "Speedwell" set out upon her voyage to the main island,
leaving the "Golden Seahorse" to await her return. In order that I
might advise and consult with Captain Smuts with regard to our project,
I became his passenger on the "Speedwell", it being understood that I
was to keep out of sight until Thedori was safely aboard. So, every
precaution being taken in order to ensure success, we arrived at the
main island during the afternoon of the day we had set out, and cast
anchor in the bay from which, nearly six years before, in the "Golden
Seahorse", I had escaped with Hartog and our crew from the captivity
which Thedori had intended for us after capturing our vessel.

I had no pity for the man whom we had come to call to account, for, to
my mind, treachery is the worst of crimes. An open enemy may be fairly
encountered, but a snake in the grass can only be met by the same
serpent tricks as he plays upon others, and when I thought of the
welcome Thedori had given us at our first interview with him, when he
had exhorted us to land in safety so that we might enjoy the comforts
of life and recruit our strength, in order, as it subsequently
transpired, that he might betray us, I felt that no reprisals could be
too severe against one guilty of such roguish deception.

The city of Porne appeared unchanged from when I had last seen it.
There were a few new houses close to the beach, but otherwise the city
itself, with its low-built cabins and regular streets, was the same.

I was greatly surprised, however, upon entering the harbour to see the
Spanish frigate, upon which Donna Isabel Barreto had decamped with the
gold taken front the island of Armenio, at anchor close to the shore.
What could have brought the frigate here, and kept her here for so long
a time since I had last seen her at Sumatra, I was at a loss to
understand. The unexpected appearance of this vessel seemed likely to
complicate our plans, and I determined to elucidate the mystery before
proceeding with the matter in hand.

It was late in the afternoon when we cast anchor in Porne Harbour, and
that night the same wonderful display of glow-worms showed itself among
the woods on shore. It was then also that I knew that the black bats
would be abroad, so as to make it unlikely our movements would be
observed, since the inhabitants of Porne would be shut up in their
houses.

So, when all was still, I took the smallest of the ship's boats, and
was rowed in the direction of the frigate.



CHAPTER LI

GETTING BACK OUR OWN


We took no lantern with us in the boat upon our expedition to board the
Spanish frigate, trusting to the light of the stars, and that given by
the glow-worms on shore, to guide us, and as we approached the frigate
we observed her also to be in darkness, with no sign of life on board.

When we came alongside I climbed to the deck by the anchor-chain, when
I found the ship to be deserted, with hatches on, and the doors to the
cabins securely locked. So, judging we had nothing to fear from the
Spaniards, we returned to the "Speedwell" as silently as we had come. I
did not tell Captain Smuts of the treasure which I believed to be still
upon the frigate, as I desired, in the first place, to consult with
Hartog as to the course to be adopted regarding it. Captain Smuts, on
receiving my report that the Spanish ship was apparently out of
commission, concluded that no change need be made in our original plan,
the preparations for the carrying out of which were accordingly
proceeded with.

Next morning, after breakfast, the captain of the "Speedwell" and his
officers, in their best uniforms, and with a picked boat's crew, set
out for the shore, taking with them presents for King Thedori and his
chiefs, with a view to establishing friendly relations with them. In
the course of an hour they returned, when, the captain repeated to me
the greeting given him by the King of the Moluccas, which was almost
word for word that extended to Hartog at the time of his visit in the
"Golden Seahorse". Evidently King Thedori had a set speech wherewith to
welcome his guests whom he afterwards intended to plunder. Captain
Smuts was so impressed by the amiable bearing and fair words of the
King that he found it hard to believe so much treachery could lurk
behind such a frank and open exterior. Thedori, he said, had promised
to come on board the "Speedwell" next day to inspect the furs, and
arrange about the price to be paid for them. On my asking if any
Spaniards had been met with ashore, Captain Smuts replied that he had
not seen any, so we had no means of ascertaining what had become of
Donna Isabel and her people, as well as the captain and crew of the
frigate.

Next morning King Thedori came on board the "Speedwell" in the
captain's boat, which had been sent for him. He did not bring with him
any of his guards or attendants, not having the least suspicion of the
trap we had laid. It was only when he came into the cabin that his
suspicions were aroused, and it was then too late for him to retreat. I
was sitting at the table when Smuts brought him in, and was presented
to him as part owner of the furs. I saw him start when our eyes met,
but otherwise he gave no sign that he knew me. There was wine and other
refreshment upon the table, of which he was invited to partake, but
declined, and then, after some further conversation between us, Captain
Smuts, according to arrangement, made excuse to go on deck, leaving
Thedori and I alone together.

Thedori was the first to speak, and I could see that his small black
eyes glittered dangerously when he looked at me.

"We have met before, senor," he said, addressing me, as he had done at
our first meeting, as though I was a Spaniard.

"Yes," I answered; "I was once the King's guest, welcomed with fair
words, and offered the hospitality of his kingdom. Yet, had not chance
intervened, I doubt I had been here to-day to welcome the King as a
guest, in my turn, aboard this vessel."

Thedori rose, and went to the cabin door. It was locked, but he showed
no surprise at finding himself a prisoner. He had probably heard the
captain turn the key on the other side of the door when he went out.

"What is it you want of me?" he asked, coming back to the table and
resuming his seat. He spoke with assumed carelessness, but I could see
that his face was livid. I pushed the wine-jar toward him.

"Drink," I said. "You will need it. The wine is not poisoned."

With the ghost of a smile he filled a goblet which stood at his elbow,
but his hand shook when he raised it to his lips.

And now the noise of the anchor being hove aboard, and the usual
commotion on deck preparatory to setting sail, arrested his attention.

"Come," said he, "I would make terms with you. What is it you want."

But at this I shook my head.

"Promises and fair words once broken cannot be repeated," I answered.
"Besides, I am not alone in this business. There are others who must be
consulted. But you will soon learn the terms of your ransom."

At this I thought he appeared relieved. He probably expected that we
intended to murder him.

I had given instructions for a prize crew to be put on board the
frigate, so that both vessels might leave the harbour together and
presently I felt, by the motion of the ship, that the "Speedwell" was
at sea.

During our passage to the place where Hartog awaited us, King Thedori
and I continued to sit, one on each side of the cabin table, without
speaking, and when we had cast anchor, and Hartog joined us, Thedori,
who had made up his mind to the inevitable, calmly awaited our terms,
which, stated briefly, were that he should pay for his ransom, to each
ship, one hundred pearls of the size of dove's eggs, and that the cargo
of the frigate was to be transferred to the "Golden Seahorse". To the
first part of our demand the King made some demur, but when we
threatened to take him away with us on our voyage home, he promised to
send some of the big-eared men for his ransom if we would give him
speech with their chief. To the latter part of our demand Thedori
readily agreed.

"You will find nothing on board the frigate," he said, "but some bags
of stone ballast in the hold. Everything else of value has long since
been taken on shore, and is being made use of by my people."

While the messengers were away procuring the King's ransom, we
questioned Thedori as to how the Spanish frigate came to fall into his
hands, when we learnt that some time since, during a calm, the frigate,
caught by one of the strong currents which prevail among these islands,
had drifted into the harbour of Porne, where an attack had been made
upon her, and she, being short of ammunition, has been taken as a
lawful prize. The Spaniards had been allowed to depart in their boats.
So, for the second time, Donna Isabel and her people were probably
castaways upon some unknown shore.

Thus does Providence reward treachery.

When, in the course of three days, the messengers returned with the
King's ransom, we sent his Majesty ashore, to find his way back to his
own kingdom as best he could. A more splendid lot of pearls than those
paid to us I had never seen, and these we divided equally between the
"Golden Seahorse" and the "Speedwell", to be allotted among the
officers and crews of both vessels in such proportions as might be
decided upon on our return to Amsterdam. The stone ballast, which, as
we expected, turned out to be the gold-bearing quartz we had obtained
from the island of Armenio, we transferred to our own ship.

And now, with a cargo which for richness had surely never been
surpassed, we once more set sail for home.



CHAPTER LII

CONCLUSION


As we neared Amsterdam I began to think, with some trepidation, of my
inevitable meeting with Pauline. It was now three years since I had set
out upon my second voyage in the "Golden Seahorse", compelled to this
course by reason of the incompatibility of temper which existed between
my wife and me, making a happy union between us impossible. Yet when I
took myself to task I could not but blame myself for much that had
occurred. Pauline was vain, but so are most women, and most men too for
that matter, for while a woman seeks admiration for her personal charms
a man is equally proud of his achievements, and he is never so happy as
when he is being praised for what he has done. So, on reviewing the
matter of our matrimonial squabbles calmly and dispassionately, I came
to the conclusion that there had been faults on both sides, and I made
up my mind to be more conciliatory and less exacting in my conduct
toward Pauline in the future, hoping by these means to effect a
reconciliation so that I might live with some degree of comfort in my
own house. To this end also I resolved to give Pauline my share of the
pearls aid as ransom by King Thedori, in order that she might possess a
necklace unequalled at Amsterdam. Besides which I had my rubies.

Hartog also had become graver and more reserved than was his habit
before we had set out upon this voyage. He seemed to regret the
well-deserved fate which had overtaken Donna Isabel Barreto, and he
would have asked nothing better than to set off on a voyage of
discovery in search of her.

So it was with subdued and chastened spirits that Hartog and I arrived
at Amsterdam, where it was arranged that Hartog should dispose of our
rich cargo and apportion the profits of the venture. As a peace
offering to Pauline I took with me twenty splendid pearls and six
silver fox-skins, and, thus provided, I presented myself at my house
at Amsterdam, to which I was at first denied admittance by the
man-servant, who opened the door to me, and who had no knowledge of
my identity.

While we were arguing the matter; however, Pauline appeared in the
hall, into which I advanced to meet her. She was changed, I thought,
and her face had wonderfully softened. I held out my arms to her, and
she came to me, nestling into my embrace as though she indeed belonged
to me. Then she rested her head upon my shoulder, and gave way to
tears. I was touched by this kindly greeting, and had begun to mentally
upbraid myself for my former conduct, and to promise amendment in the
future, when the cause of my wife's changed disposition was suddenly,
in a flash, revealed to me by a series of yells from a room upstairs,
accompanied by a low voice of pleading in remonstrance, and what
sounded like the, throwing about of some hard substance on the floor.

I looked into my wife's eyes, and read in them the secret of the great
happiness which had come to me.

"He is quarrelling with his nurse," she said, smiling up at me through
her tears. "He is such a masterful baby."

Next moment I was bounding up the stairs, and on entering the nursery I
saw my boy seated on the floor, his face red with passion, while with
his chubby little hands he was tearing the sails off a toy ship that
had been given him to play with. The clever lad, even in his infancy,
must have noticed that the wretched apology for a ship which they
offered him was not rigged in seaman-like fashion. Well, I promised
myself that I would make him a model of the "Golden Seahorse", perfect
in every detail, and big enough for him to sail in. When I came into
the nursery he stopped crying and looked at me, but the nurse kept on
saying, "Oh, Master Peter, Master Peter, you must not be naughty like
that," as though she were repeating a formula.

I ran to Master Peter and picked him up, when he tried to bite my hard
hand with his little pearly teeth. Ah, what a lad of spirit he was! He
was not a bit afraid of me or of anyone. A boy after my own heart. Then
he looked at me, and the passion in his rosy face melted into a dimpled
smile. He knew me, I am certain of it, and putting his little arms
round my neck, he seemed to ask pardon for his wilfulness. We were
comrades from that moment, he and I, and although not a word was spoken
we understood each other thoroughly.

Pauline and the nurse watched us. Both women were weeping, as is the
way with women when they seek to relieve their feelings. But the tears
they shed were tears of joy.

When we were more composed, Pauline and I and young Peter went together
to look at the presents I had brought back with me. Pauline was
delighted with the pearls and the fox-skins, but she at once decided
that the skins would make a warm winter coat for baby, and a splendid
rug for his little carriage. I believe she would have given Master
Peter the pearls to play with had he shown a fancy for them, but
fortunately he did not notice them, so taken up was he in burying his
face in the thick fur of the silver fox-skins.

What a home-coming this was for me after so much tossing upon the
ocean, and so many wanderings into unknown lands, and how I trembled
when I thought on the dangers I had passed, and how easily I might have
lost my life, and thus forfeited the happiness that I knew was in store
for me!

Well, my voyages were over now. Never again would I leave my wife and
child for the hazards of the sea.

When I told Hartog of my great good fortune he was warm in his
congratulations. I took my boy on board the "Golden Seahorse", and
presented him to Hartog.

"We must make a sailor of him," said Hartog, when he had sat Master
Peter upon the table between us in the cabin. "He is a sturdy lad, and
has the look in his eyes that seeks for space--the look of the sailor,
whose natural home is the sea."

Could it be? Who can tell? Little Peter had a steadfast, far-off look
in his eyes. I had not noticed it until Hartog directed my attention to
it. Was it the call of the ocean? The call to the Dutch, and the
English--seeking for space?



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES IN SOUTHERN SEAS***


******* This file should be named 16704.txt or 16704.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/7/0/16704



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

