Project Gutenberg's The Bradys and the Girl Smuggler, by Francis W. Doughty

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Bradys and the Girl Smuggler
       or, Working for the Custom House

Author: Francis W. Doughty

Release Date: October 23, 2005 [EBook #16919]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BRADYS AND THE GIRL SMUGGLER ***




Produced by David Starner, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: "Madam," said Old King Brady, "here is a warrant for the
arrest of your daughter. The charge is smuggling!" Calmly taking the
document, the lady read it. Harry opened the door and let the hall-boy go.]




SECRET SERVICE.

OLD AND YOUNG KING BRADY DETECTIVES.


_Issued Weekly--By Subscription $2.50 per year. Entered as Second Class
Matter at the New York, N.Y., Post Office, March 1, 1899. Entered according
to Act of Congress, in the year 1900, in the office of the Librarian of
Congress, Washington, D.C., by Frank Tousey, 24 Union Square, New York._

No. 79. NEW YORK, July 27, 1900. Price 5 Cents.


The Bradys and the Girl Smuggler

            OR,

Working for the Custom House.

BY A NEW YORK DETECTIVE.




CHAPTER I.

THE BRADYS AS CUSTOM HOUSE DETECTIVES.


The Collector of the Port of New York sat in his office in the Custom House
with a look of annoyance upon his face.

Several of his chief inspectors were standing about the room with the most
uneasy expressions, for they were being censured unmercifully.

"I tell you, gentlemen," the Collector was saying, angrily, "I am very much
disgusted with the poor service your department is giving. I am determined
to stop this wholesale smuggling. If none of you are capable of doing the
work for which you are liberally paid, I'll have to get somebody to do the
work for you. Do you understand?"

"But, sir," began one of the inspectors, humbly, "we've done our best--"

"And accomplished nothing!" snapped the Collector.

"How could we, sir? The smuggler you want us to catch does not resort to
the usual tricks such people adopt to avoid paying duty on the diamonds and
other precious stones, which you say are smuggled into this country. It's
because he's such a sly and clever rogue, that we can't locate him. We've
resorted to every known method to discover the villain, but can't make any
headway."

"Then you admit you are beaten?"

"Yes," was the hesitating reply.

"Hum!" grunted the Collector, in tones of contempt. "A nice lot of
government detectives you fellows are to admit such a defeat. However, I've
taken the matter into my own hands now."

"Yours?"

"Yes! I've engaged two of the most skillful men in the Secret Service to
run down this smuggler. I refer to Old and Young King Brady."

"Indeed!" sneered the inspector, whose pride was wounded. "I'm sure if we
can't find that smuggler, they can't."

"They can't, eh?" grimly demanded the Collector. "Well, you'll find out
whether they can or not, Andrew Gibson, for they'll be here presently to
take your work right out of your hands. Do you hear me?"

With glum looks the inspectors glanced at each other.

It was a bitter pill for them to swallow, to have an outsider come in to do
the work they found themselves unable to cope with.

Finally Gibson affected a mocking laugh, and said, derisively:

"What can a Secret Service man do in a Custom House case, if we men,
educated for it, can't finish a job we find too hard for us?"

"They'll find the smuggler I'm after," replied the Collector, banging his
fist on the desk to emphasize his remark. "I've got every faith in that
remarkable man and boy. They are the most skillful detectives in the
profession. There's nothing they can't do in their own line, and you'll
find it out soon."

"On police and criminal cases--"

"On _any_ work!" roared the Collector, excitedly.

"They must be marvels, indeed!" sneered Gibson.

"So they are, sir--so they are."

"I'd like to see these wonders!"

Just then two men in uniform standing apart from the rest, advanced.

They wore the costume of boarding officers, the dark-blue uniforms being
garnished with brass buttons and on their heads were caps with bands across
the front bearing the word in gilt letters, "Inspector."

One of these men was tall and muscular, with a bushy black beard, deep gray
eyes and a heavy mass of dark-brown hair.

His companion looked like a mere boy, with a handsome face, a pair of keen
eyes and a dashing, aggressive air that showed he was of a bold, intrepid
character. He walked right up to the inspector.

"So you want to see the Bradys, do you?" he asked Gibson, quietly.

"Yes, I would," asserted the inspector, glaring at him in surprise.

"Then look, for we are the Bradys!" exclaimed the boy.

He took off his cap and his companion stripped off a wig and false beard.

Every one in the room glanced at them in amazement.

No one suspected their identity before.

Old King Brady was now seen to have white hair and a clean-shaven face, in
which a daring, determined character was shown.

Even the Collector was astonished.

When he recovered his composure, a smile crossed his face, and he rose and
warmly shook hands with the pair, saying:

"Well, this is an agreeable surprise."

Old King Brady smiled, took a chew of tobacco and replied:

"You got our chief to assign us on this case and requested us to be here at
two o'clock, and here we are."

"Ready for work?"

"Yes, sir. Instruct us."

"Well, all I can tell you is that this country is being flooded with
precious stones upon which no duty is being paid, and I want you to find
the party who is doing the crooked work."

"Have you any clews upon which we can work?"

"None, whatever. You'll have to get them yourselves from the importers in
John street, Broadway and Maiden Lane. They may give you some points."

"We shall follow your suggestion."

The two detectives started for the door, then paused.

Harry Brady, the boy, then said:

"Mr. Gibson has some doubts about our ability to work for the Custom House.
Since he has flung defiance at us, we'll accept his challenge."

"How? growled the inspector, in ugly tones.

"Well, we'll meet you officers and the Collector on board the steamer
Campania, of the Cunard line, in one hour, when she reaches her pier from
Quarantine. If we don't show up more smugglers than you do, we'll give up
this assignment."

"I'll go you!" eagerly exclaimed the jealous inspector.

"And I'll be there to see that you get fair play," grimly said the
Collector.

The Bradys silently bowed and withdrew.

When they reached the street, Old King Brady laughed and said:

"They're all jealous of us. But we'll show them a trick or two, Harry."

"They'll be a surprised lot," laughed the boy. "We have them beaten
already."

They headed for the jewelry district and called upon several of the most
prominent importers and lapidaries, from whom they gained some very
valuable information. The last importer they spoke to said:

"Paul La Croix, a French-Canadian, was just in here with his daughter,
trying to sell us some smuggled diamonds. See--there he goes now."

He pointed out the window at a tall, thin, stylishly-clad man of forty in
light trousers, a black frock coat and high hat.

The detectives observed that he now did not have his daughter with him.

From where they were, they could see that La Croix had a thin, sallow face,
a long, sharp nose and a closely-trimmed dark moustache.

He turned into Broadway and disappeared in the crowd.

"Who is he?" asked Old King Brady, of the dealer in precious stones.

"A mystery. No one knows. He makes many trips between New York and Havre to
smuggle diamonds which he sells here. Every jeweler in the Lane knows him.
Some deal with him."

"Where does he live?"

"At the Fifth Avenue Hotel."

"Thank you."

And a moment later the detectives were gone.

Reaching Broadway they hurried ahead intending to find La Croix and arrest
him with contraband diamonds in his possession.

But the man disappeared and they found no trace of him.

The Bradys gave up the hunt, temporarily, for they were determined to find
the man again.

They crossed the city, going to the west side.

People who saw the pair paid no heed to them now, for they had made some
changes in their apparel, in a sheltering doorway, and by turning their
coats inside out, pocketing their uniform hats and putting on soft felt
hats, they transformed their appearance.

They now looked like ordinary citizens.

Each one adjusted a false moustache and a wig to hide his identity.

They had their clothing so made that they could change to several
characters with but little trouble.

This fact was well known to most of the crooks at large, and they feared
the Bradys more than any other detectives on the force.

Although they bore the same name, there was no relationship between them,
for Harry was merely an apt pupil the old detective had chanced to meet,
and was educating in his profession.

As a team, they made themselves famous.

When they drew near the Cunard steamship dock, Old King Brady carried his
handkerchief in his hand as a signal.

A man was on the lookout and ran up to him.

Handing the detective a letter he exclaimed:

"I followed your order, Mr. Brady and went down to Quarantine to-day with
the port doctor. He took me aboard the Campania, and I found out a great
deal. It's all written in that letter. I wrote it coming up on the Custom
House tug."

"Has the steamer reached her dock yet?"

"She's swinging in now. I beat her up on the tug."

"Very well. You may go."

The spotter hastened away and the detectives eagerly read his letter.

It was full of valuable information for which they sent the man and having
read the letter they hastened to the pier.

The big trans-Atlantic steamer was just tying up to her dock and the
detectives saw the Collector and his inspectors standing on the pier
waiting for the passengers to land.




CHAPTER II.

NINE SMUGGLERS.


A scene of great animation and excitement was soon transpiring on the pier.

Passengers were swarming down the gangplank of the big steamer, crowds of
friends were waiting to greet them, porters and waiters were landing the
baggage on the dock and stevedores were preparing to discharge the cargo.

The two Bradys took up a favorable position and calling the purser of the
steamer, they induced him to point out several people whose names they
mentioned.

These people were the ones whom they had spotted as smugglers.

Presently the owners of the baggage began opening their trunks and valises
so the inspectors could examine their effects.

While this was going on the Bradys joined the Collector and spoke to him.
He was startled to discover their identity and remarked:

"Well, you certainly have the faculty of hiding your identity in the most
complete manner. Have you found any smugglers yet?"

"Several," replied Harry, quickly.

"Indeed! Who are they?"

"We'll show you when your men get through."

They chatted together until the inspection was finished and all the luggage
had been marked and received the pasters to show they were passed.

"Now call your men and get their report, sir," said Harry.

The Collector did as he was requested.

Out of several hundred passengers only a lace shawl had been captured.

"Is that all you managed to find that was dutiable?" asked Harry, in
surprise, as the searchers gathered round them.

They recognized him by his voice and Gibson growled sarcastically:

"Do you think you can do any better?"

"Oh, my--yes."

"Well, I'd like to see you do it."

"So we shall. Let us begin with Mrs. Harvey. Open her trunk again."

Despite the lady's protests this was done.

Pointing at the tray, Harry said, coolly:

"Pick up that cake of toilet soap, cut it in two and you'll find a very
valuable gentleman's ruby ring and scarf pin buried inside of it."

Gibson complied with a poor grace.

As Harry said, he disclosed the articles mentioned.

"My!" said the lady, innocently, "I wonder how they got there?"

"Madam," replied Harry, politely, "you put them there yourself. As a lady
don't wear such things and you've been traveling alone, it's clear you were
trying to smuggle those things. Seize them, Gibson, and they'll be
appraised in the Custom House. If the lady then wishes to pay the full duty
charged on them she can get back her ornaments."

The Collector burst out laughing.

"Any more?" he asked Old King Brady.

"Yes. See that short fat man? He is Mr. Jacobs, a stock broker. I guess
we'll have to pull off the gentleman's left boot. Hey, Mr. Jacobs!"

"Vell?" growled the fat broker, glancing at the detective in some surprise.

"Sit down on your trunk, please," said Old King Brady.

"Vot for?"

"I'll show you in a moment."

The broker sat down and Harry seized him and held him there.

At the same moment Old King Brady grabbed him by the left foot, gave it a
tug and the struggling man gave a yell, and demanded, excitedly, as the
boot slipped off and remained in the detective's hand:

"Py shiminey, vot yer mean py dot outrages alretty?"

"We think you are cheating the government," replied Old King Brady.

"Vot? Me? You vas grazy!"

"Am I?" blandly asked Old King Brady.

"Sure you are! Vot mein boot vas got mit it ter do?"

"I'll show you, my innocent friend," grimly replied the old detective, as
he drew out his pocket knife.

With the large blade he removed the first layer of leather from the heel
and showed that the heel was hollow.

Lying within this neat little opening was a small paper package which the
detective drew out. Opening the paper he showed its contents.

It consisted of five magnificent diamonds.

The broker gave a gasp of horror and Old King Brady said to him sweetly:

"You forgot to put these on the manifest, Mr. Jacobs, didn't you?"

"_Och, Gott!_" groaned the unlucky broker, in deep anguish of spirit, "I
vas ruint vunct. Vot vill I do? Vot vill I do?"

"Pay the duty and redeem them from the Custom House," replied the
detective, and the gems were seized on the spot.

All the inspectors looked envious of the two detectives.

The Collector regarded them with a cold glance and finally asked:

"Why didn't you find these things?"

"Didn't know they had 'em," sheepishly replied Gibson.

"We ain't half through yet," said Harry at this juncture.

"What else have you discovered?" demanded the Collector, curiously.

"Several hundred yards of fine point lace."

"Where is it?"

"In a false bottom under Miss Daisy Linden's trunk. See--there she
stands--that handsome big actress there. Do you think she's as fat as she
looks? Well, just notice how big around her body is, and how thin her arms
and neck are. If you'll get one of the lady inspectors to examine her
privately, you'll find she's got several valuable oil paintings wrapped
around her body, under her clothes."

The woman made a great fuss when they insisted upon rummaging in her trunk
a second time and reluctantly opened it again.

Harry threw everything out and the woman shrieked, scolded and protested.
But when the boy opened the false bottom of the trunk and withdrew the lace
he mentioned, she fainted.

When the actress came to, she found that a lady inspector had disrobed her
in a stateroom on the steamer and taken five very costly paintings away,
which she was smuggling under her clothes.

By the time the Bradys finished, they had nine smugglers exposed, and fully
quarter of a million dollars' worth of valuables were seized.

The Collector had been watching these proceedings with deep interest.

When his own men reached him, he said to them:

"I'm ashamed of you. Here you let two absolutely green men step in and do
the work you've been at for years, much better than you do it yourselves."

"Well," grimly admitted Gibson, "they've kept their boast and beaten us
badly, I'm sorry to say. I don't need to wish them luck for they've got
either a large amount of it, or else they had some inside information."

"Your latter surmise is the correct one," said Harry. "We sent a man down
the bay to meet the steamer. People who are going to smuggle anything
rarely take pains to conceal their contraband goods till they are nearing
port. We know something about the matter, you see. Moreover, we know
would-be smugglers who don't make a profession of it are very careless,
talkative about what they are going to smuggle, and apt to give themselves
away. By sending a good, smart spotter ahead we learned all about the
people we've exposed."

"That game may work very nicely with amateurs. But it would not go with a
professional smuggler by any means."

"I quite agree with you," assented Harry.

"Well," said the Collector, "I'm quite satisfied with your performance, Mr.
Brady, and am convinced that you are the very men to run down the big
smuggler I am so anxious to see arrested."

"We'll do our best," said Old King Brady.

The Collector and the inspectors then went away.

As they were leaving the pier, the quick, keen eyes of Harry observed a
young girl on the steamer acting in a mysterious manner.

She was standing in the gangway, peering out one of the port holes and
sharply watching the departing officials.

Every time one of them chanced to glance back, she suddenly dodged down
behind the bulwark out of sight.

She was a beautiful girl of about sixteen, handsomely clad in a short dress
and zouave waist of fine silk, while a stylish big Gainsborough hat with
black ostrich plumes crowned her short, yellow, curly hair.

Her skin was as white as milk and she had a pair of big brown eyes, a
pretty little Grecian nose and rosebud lips.

Young King Brady was charmed with her beauty, yet his suspicions of her
actions were aroused to the fever point.

He touched his partner on the arm and pointed at her.

"See there!" he exclaimed. "What can she be up to?"

"We'd better keep an eye on her, Harry," returned the old detective, after
a careful survey. "It looks to me as if she were up to some trick. She
wouldn't be watching those inspectors' departure that way unless it was of
vital importance to her."

"But surely she can't be so silly as to think there are no officers left
here. Everyone knows that a couple remain constantly on the watch in their
office at the entrance to the dock."

"Ha! What's that? She's waving her handkerchief to that man who is coming
out on the pier from West street."

Young King Brady gazed keenly at the person in question and suddenly
recognizing him he exclaimed in excited tones:

"Why, it's Paul La Croix, the diamond smuggler!"

"So it is, by thunder!"

"And this beautiful girl must be his daughter, for she greatly resembles
him."

"Harry, I believe that pair are up to some crooked work!"

"We can find out by watching them."

La Croix now went aboard the steamer and joined the girl in the gangway.




CHAPTER III.

CAUGHT IN AN ELEVATOR.


The Bradys felt convinced that the smuggler and his daughter were working
some scheme to take some valuables ashore, duty free.

Closely watching the pair they saw them enter the cabin.

Following them in, the Bradys observed the pair gliding swiftly down a
passage, out on which opened the doors of several staterooms.

La Croix and his daughter entered one of these rooms.

Rushing forward, the Bradys listened outside the partition and heard the
man ask:

"Did you geet eet, Clara?"

"Yes, papa," replied the girl in a low, pleasant tone of voice. "After I
left you on Maiden Lane, I came right here and mingled with the throng
waiting to meet the various passengers. As soon as the gangplank was down,
I slipped aboard and met the steward. He had the parcel and gave it to me."

"Open eet so we can distribute ze jewelry about our pairsons. Zen we geet
ze sings ashore ver' easy, an' no wong weel see ze package bulge out our
clothing. _Mon Dieu_, but I vas ver'--vot you call--ze--ze--worried."

The crackling of paper was heard.

For a few moments afterward there ensued a deep silence.

Old King Brady silently beckoned to Harry and they retreated a few paces.

"I'm going right in after La Croix," he whispered.

"We've got him dead to rights," replied the boy.

"Are you prepared for a fight?"

"Oh, yes. I've got a powerful persuader in my hip pocket."

"Then come on with me."

He strode forward and pushed the stateroom door open.

It opened inward and as the room was very small, it pushed La Croix against
the two bunks and wrung the startled cry from his lips:

"Look out, Clara!"

The girl glared at the detectives and demanded:

"What do you want in here?"

"That man!" said Harry, pointing at her father.

"What for?"

"Smuggling!"

"He isn't!"

"We'll search him and see."

The Bradys grasped the excited Frenchman.

His clothing in the region of his stomach was bulging suspiciously and Old
King Brady slapped the spot and demanded:

"What have you got there?"

"Nosing!" protested La Croix. "Zees ees an outrage, sair!"

"Oh, I don't know!" laughed Harry.

"Clara!" roared the man. "Go tell ze captaine, quick, to come 'ere."

The girl slipped out the door and vanished.

Left alone with the man, the detectives laughed and Harry said:

"Unbutton your coat and vest."

"_Sacre!_ For why?" growled La Croix.

"We want to see what you've got stuffed in there."

"Gentlemen, you wrong me!"

"Bosh! Open up quick, or we'll do it for you."

La Croix reluctantly opened his vest and a package dropped out.

He then was of normal size.

"This is what we are after!" laughed Harry, picking up the parcel.

"But, Monsieur, eet ees only a worthless--"

"Silence, sir!"

And Harry opened the mysterious parcel.

It was filled with sawdust.

The man laughed, shrugged his shoulders, and asked:

"Veil, sair, you ees satisfied?"

There was a look of disgust on Harry's face and he cried:

"He has cleverly duped us and the girl got away with the valuables."

Old King Brady was furious.

"Confound her!" he roared. "Come--search this man thoroughly, and if he has
not got any contraband stuff, we'll search the ship and arrest the girl."

Harry turned La Croix's pockets inside out.

Nothing was found upon his person.

Then they searched the room.

Still nothing came to light and Harry said:

"He has nothing with him."

"Very well. The girl has, then."

"Now, Monsieur, I hope you see zat you wrong me?" said La Croix.

Old King Brady gave him a peculiar look, shook his finger at the Frenchman
and replied in angry tones:

"We know you, La Croix. You are the worst smuggler in this port. It won't
be long before we run you in for your crooked work."

"Ah--how you can say zat?" innocently asked the man.

"We have no time to discuss the matter now, for we are very anxious to nab
your daughter Clara," said the old detective. "But you will meet us again
very soon. Then look out!"

They hastened out of the stateroom.

Once outside Harry whispered hastily:

"You go ahead and I'll fool him."

He thereupon slipped into an adjoining room.

Old King Brady knew at once what the boy wanted to do, and he left the
cabin and began to search the ship for the girl.

La Croix was peering cautiously from the room he was in and seeing the old
detective disappearing out the door, he emerged.

Watching Old King Brady to see that his own actions were not observed, the
smuggler finally left the steamer with Harry at his heels in a change of
appearance which even his keen eyes failed to penetrate.

Old King Brady saw them depart.

He transformed his own appearance.

Both he and Harry now had assumed their natural looks.

There was a big white felt hat on the old detective's head, his frock coat
of dark-blue was buttoned up to the neck, around which there now was a
standing collar and an old-fashioned stock and on his hands were cotton
gloves.

The boy's suit of brown plaid, and a bicycle cap on his head, were much
different from the reverse side of his clothing and the other hat he had
worn.

In the street Harry saw the man hail a cab and get in.

He saw his partner and beckoned to him.

When they met, Harry asked eagerly:

"Did you find the girl?"

"No. She must have hurried from the steamer."

"Well, La Croix is bound to meet her now."

"Of course."

"Our plan is to keep him shadowed."

"See if we can't get a cab, too."

They pursued the carriage on foot as far as Eighth avenue before they
encountered a public hack and got in.

Instructing the driver to pursue the other vehicle, they were carried up to
Fourteenth street, across town to Broadway and thence up to Twenty-third
street.

La Croix's vehicle paused before the Fifth Avenue Hotel and he alighted.

"We were not misinformed about his address," commented Harry.

"No. He is probably going in there to meet the girl."

"Let's get out here at the Arch so as not to attract his attention."

"Very well. Be careful now."

They dismissed the cab and hurried into the hotel.

La Croix had disappeared from view and the detectives hastened to the
office and said to the clerk:

"Got a party here named La Croix?"

"Yes, sir. They're in room 678. Wish to send up your name?"

"No," replied Old King Brady, with a smile, as he exhibited his badge.

"Oh," said the clerk, "detective, eh?"

"We're after La Croix. He's a crook."

"He is? What has he done?"

"Smuggler."

"I see. How about his wife and daughter?"

"They must be in his game too."

"Going to pull them in?"

"Probably. Is he in his room?"

"He just went up the stairs."

"I wish we could reach his apartments ahead of him."

"So you can by going up in the elevator. It's on the top floor."

"Well try it."

They hastened over to the elevators and found that the only one down was
one which had no conductor in it. As they did not wish to lose time, they
both got in, shut the door and pulled the wire cable.

Up they glided, story after story, without seeing him ascending the stairs.

He had gone up in an elevator from the floor above.

Above on the beams over the elevator shaft La Croix was crouching with a
big hatchet in his hand, as he peered down at the people ascending in the
cars.

He had detected them in pursuit and expecting trouble, he was waiting to
give the detectives a warm reception. He evidently recognized them without
their disguises.

As he caught view of his pursuers coming up in the car, he picked up the
hatchet he had found lying on the beam.

Raising it above his head, he brought it down upon the cable by which the
car was suspended, with all his strength.

The shock caused the Bradys to look up and they saw what he was doing.

Bang! went the keen blade upon the cable again where it crossed the wheel.

The weight of the car caused the wire rope to part where he cut it, and the
elevator's ascent was checked.

It began to fall with the detectives in it.




CHAPTER IV.

THE CLEW IN THE BASIN.


A cry of alarm escaped Old King Brady when he saw the Frenchman.

"Harry," he gasped, "he is trying to kill us."

"There goes the cable!" muttered the boy, and a cold chill darted through
him as he heard the ominous snap of the parting strands.

"The safety-clutch may save us, Harry."

"No! It don't work," groaned the boy as the car shot down.

A sickening sensation passed through the pair as the falling car went
plunging down at lightning speed.

They expected to get dashed to death at the bottom as they went flying down
past the different floors, and heard a fiendish chuckle from the Frenchman
above their heads.

Like rats in a trap, the two detectives were held so they could do nothing
to aid themselves.

All they could do was to wait for the final crash, and visions of the
wrecked car and their bodies crushed to a pulp flashed across their minds.

The desperation of their situation was appalling.

The speed of their fall took their breath away and both instinctively
grasped the sides of the car and clung to it tenaciously.

Down three stories they plunged.

Then there suddenly sounded a sharp "click."

The car paused, slid a few feet, then came to a sudden stop.

At the last moment the clutches flew out and tightened on the pilot rods,
holding the falling car in midair.

The sudden stopping hurled the detectives to the floor, but they quickly
scrambled to their feet, overjoyed at their salvation.

For an instant neither could speak.

To be so suddenly snatched from the very jaws of death was such a strain
upon their nerves that they could hardly stand it.

Old King Brady was the first to recover, and glancing upward he saw that
their enemy had disappeared from the beam overhead.

"By thunder!" he exclaimed. "La Croix is baffled!"

"I never expected such good luck," replied Harry, delightedly.

"The car is holding, all right."

"Yes, but how are we to get out of it?"

They were caught midway between the second and third floors.

But the parting of the cable had been detected by the engineer and the
conductor of an ascending car in the next shaft as the falling elevator
flew down past him, and help was coming.

As the news spread, people flocked out in the hall, filled with dread lest
the two officers had been killed.

They peered down the shafts through the grill work and when some saw the
car, a shout of relief went up, and a man yelled at the Bradys:

"Were you hurt?"

"No. We are all right, so far."

"Wait, and we'll have the car lowered."

Up came men with ropes, and the end of a line was passed down from the
floor above the car and Old King Brady made it fast.

When the danger of the car falling was obviated, another gang secured the
cut cable, passed it over the drum, brought it down to the roof of the car
and spliced it to the piece remaining there.

The elevator was then lowered to the ground floor and opening the door the
detectives passed out, none the worse for their adventure.

A crowd of anxious people surrounded them, but they quickly avoided them by
dodging into another car and saying to the conductor:

"Top floor--quick!"

Bang! went the gate and up they shot.

Reaching the upper story the detectives made a rush for the room La Croix
had been occupying and found it empty.

"The birds have flown!" muttered Old King Brady in disgust.

"No wonder. We were caged up in the elevator so long they had ample time."

"They may have left some clew behind. Let us search the room."

This was done, and in the slop basin they found a letter torn up in small
pieces.

Harry carefully gathered up the fragments and put them in his pocketbook.

"It's written in French," he commented, "but it may be of some use. I'll
put the pieces together and we'll have it translated."

They failed to find anything else and went downstairs.

Returning to the clerk, they asked if La Croix had been seen.

"He did not come out this way," replied the man, shaking his head.

"Sure?"

"Positive!"

"Well, he and his family are gone."

"Ain't they up in their room?"

"No."

"That's queer."

"Not at all. You heard how the elevator fell with us?"

"Yes."

"Well, La Croix saw us and cut the cable."

"Good Lord! Tried to kill you?"

"Exactly. That's why they fled."

"What a villain that fellow must be."

"Is there any other exit from here?"

"Yes, indeed. I'll have a boy show you."

He rang a hand-bell and a uniformed boy approached, to whom he gave an
order and the Bradys were escorted away.

By questioning the help they soon found that the smuggler, his wife and his
daughter had left the hotel by another exit.

A policeman in the street had seen them hire a cab and drive away through
Broadway at a rapid pace.

Unable to learn anything else, the detectives went home. They had very
comfortable apartments and spent the day there piecing out the torn letter
so it could be read.

On the following day they had it translated, and read the following
startling piece of information:

     "Paris, France, May 19.

     "My dear La Croix: In reply to yours of the 5th inst., I beg to say
     that I can easily meet your daughter at Havre, if she comes over on
     the Champagne. I shall then take her to Amsterdam, Holland, and
     procure the fifty packages of diamonds. She can then assume a
     fictitious name and take passage on the steamer Labrador, to
     Canada. You can meet her in Montreal, and the stones can be taken
     across the border at Niagara Falls, as you suggest. Should you
     follow this plan, wire me at once, and I shall so arrange matters
     that the American spies for the Customs officials who are on the
     lookout here shall know knothing about the transaction. Everything
     depends upon keeping this a secret from them, or they will cable
     back to the U.S. inspectors to keep a watch for Clara when she
     returns to Canada--"

The letter ended abruptly here, for the rest was missing.

But there was enough to expose the whole plan of smuggling a huge amount of
diamonds into the United States.

The Bradys were astonished and Harry said at once:

"This letter proves that La Croix must be the gigantic smuggler whom the
Customs department want run down."

"No question about it," replied Old King Brady. "And as we have the details
of a scheme he intends to operate, we had better make preparations to nip
the plan in the bud, or else to capture the girl smuggler when she makes
her attempt to beat the Custom House."

"Are you aware that the steamer Champagne sails for Havre to-day?"

"Does she?" muttered Old King Brady, glancing at his watch. "Well, we'll
barely have time to reach her if we go at once. Get a cab and we'll see if
we can catch her before she departs."

"Even if we miss her," said Harry, consolingly, "we will be pretty sure to
see La Croix on the pier, seeing his daughter off."

"I don't want to arrest him in that case," said Old King Brady, "for if the
girl gets away, we'll have to keep the man watched in order to let him lead
us to his daughter when she returns. As she's pretty sure to have all those
diamonds with her, we can nab them with evidence on their persons, of their
smuggling enterprise."

Harry nodded and they hurried out together.

A hack was engaged and they rode over to the French Trans-Atlantic
Company's pier on the North river.

By the time the cab reached the dock, however, the steamship's mooring
lines had been cast off, the gangplank was down and the vessel was being
pulled out into the stream.

The detectives were disappointed.

Eagerly scanning the throng of passengers on the upper deck, they suddenly
caught view of Clara La Croix.

The girl was standing in the stern waving her handkerchief and shouting to
a stylishly-dressed middle-aged woman on the stringpiece:

"Good-by, mamma!"

"Farewell, Clara--be very careful of yourself, my child!" replied the
woman, as she waved her handkerchief back at the girl.

Harry nudged Old King Brady.

"There's her mother," he muttered, "but La Croix has not shown up. He fears
arrest now, as he knows we are after him."

"So much the better," replied the old detective, drily. "This woman won't
know us. It will therefore be all the easier to follow her undetected."

The steamship soon went down the river and the friends and relatives of the
departing passengers began to leave the pier.

Mrs. La Croix was one of the last to go. She did not know that the Bradys
were close behind her.




CHAPTER V.

AT A VILLAIN'S MERCY.


The smuggler's wife leisurely left the pier, crossed the street and went in
the direction of Sixth avenue, on foot.

It did not seem to occur to her that she might be followed, for she never
once glanced back in the direction she came from.

Old King Brady and his partner did not know much about the woman.

Whether she was actually concerned in La Croix's smuggling games or not,
they had not the faintest idea.

She was a fine-looking woman, tall and stately, with brown hair, blue eyes
and handsome features. But she seldom laughed.

Hers was one of those set, inscrutable faces, hard to read, for she seldom
showed the emotions preying upon her mind.

"She don't seem to fear detection," commented Harry, as they walked along.
"She hasn't made the slightest effort to conceal her actions."

"Well," replied the old detective, as he thoughtfully took a fresh quid of
tobacco, "you must not forget that the woman isn't aware of the fact that
we are on her trail."

"She certainly must be interested in her husband's crooked work or she
would not see her daughter off to Europe in this manner. In fact, if she
were not so greatly interested, I doubt if she would allow her child to
make such a long, dangerous trip alone."

"Your reasoning is very sensible," commented Old King Brady, "but you must
recollect that the girl smuggler is very smart. She is used to danger. This
may not be her first voyage abroad alone. In fact, she has probably been
making many trips to the other side, bringing back jewels to be smuggled
ashore."

"Judging by what that letter said," remarked Harry, "the man and his wife
are likely to go to Canada now and wait there for the girl's return with
that large consignment of precious stones. We shall be obliged to follow
them there. We can't arrest them now on suspicion, nor can we pull La Croix
in for trying to murder us in the Fifth Avenue Hotel elevator. If we do, it
will interfere with our capturing the girl when she returns with those
jewels."

"I'm sorry to say your view of the matter is correct, Harry."

"There goes the woman up Sixth avenue. She's a good walker. It looks to me
as if she were heading for the French district in the neighborhood of Third
street. Queer she didn't ride."

They tracked her to West Broadway.

Here she suddenly turned into the hall of a very old house across the front
of which hung the sign of an artificial flower maker.

Old King Brady passed into the hall after her and Harry remained on guard
at the door.

Going up a flight of stairs, the woman knocked at a door and when it was
opened, she passed into a room, closing the door after her.

The detective glided over to the door and listened.

Voices were heard inside, a man crying out eagerly:

"Well, Lena, ees ze child gone?"

"Yes, Paul," Mrs. La Croix replied, in sad tones. "The Champagne just
departed with our daughter. We shall not see her for a month."

"Ah, but when she return we make ze largest stake of our lives."

"I wish this risky business was ended, Paul. I'm getting sick of it. We do
not lead the peaceful lives of other people. It is a constant excitement
and fear of police interference."

"Do not complain, Lena. Zees ees ze last treep ze child make. Eef eet ees
wong success, we make so much dollaires zat we can retiaire an' leeve ze
life of ease for ze rest of our days, by gar!"

He laughed and the woman replied, resignedly:

"Well, I hope your dream will come true, Paul."

"Take zees seat an' 'ave your suppair, my dear. You need ze rest, for
to-night we leave New York by rail for Canada, for I have sold all ze
stones I had, an' mail my draft to Paris."

Old King Brady smiled and muttered:

"I'm glad you've told me your business, old fellow."

The shadows of twilight had fallen by this time and the hall was getting
dark.

Hearing some one coming downstairs from an upper floor, the old detective
retreated along the hall and crouched back in a doorway.

He pressed himself back flat against the door hoping the person who was
coming would pass him in the gloom without observing his presence.

Unfortunately the door behind him was not shut tight.

As he pressed his back against it, it flew inward all of a sudden and
pitching over backward, the detective fell sprawling upon the floor of a
small room adjoining the one occupied by La Croix and his wife.

He heard the Frenchman utter a startled cry.

Like a tiger he sprang into the room and saw the detective.

"_Parbleu!_" he hissed, a look of rage and hate upon his dark face. "Ze
secret police. Watching me, eh? I show you, Monsieur."

He seized an iron bar standing in the corner and as the old detective was
upon the point of scrambling to his feet, he dealt the officer a fearful
blow that knocked him senseless.

He just had time to bang the door shut to prevent the person who was coming
from upstairs from seeing what was going on.

Just then his wife rushed in.

"What is the matter, Paul?" she demanded.

"Old King Brady!" he replied, pointing at the old detective excitedly.

"Ah;" was her cool reply. "He has found our refuge, eh?"

"Yes. An' probable he has been listen to our talk."

"That is very dangerous for us, Paul."

"Not since I 'ave him at my mercy. _Sacriste!_ When I geet through wiz heem
now, he not weel trouble us again een wong hurry."

Fearing the detective might recover he got a piece of rope and bound and
gagged Old King Brady.

When this was done an idea suddenly flashed across his mind, and he bounded
to his feet and exclaimed, hoarsely:

"Where ees ze othair?"

"I don't understand you," his wife replied.

"Young King Brady."

"Do they always travel together?"

"Sairtainly."

"Then the boy must be lurking near here."

"Wait. I find heem eef I can."

He hastened from the room and made a search of the hall. Then he quietly
passed downstairs and there caught view of the young detective keeping
guard outside the street door.

The Frenchman was greatly excited.

He retreated into the hall and went upstairs again, muttering:

"I must geet zat boy een my powair just as queek as possible. So long as ze
Bradys ees on my track, I may go to ze preeson at any moment. It makes me
nairvous, by gar!"

He took up a position at the head of the stairs, wondering how he could get
the best of the detectives.

Convinced that they knew all about his smuggling business and would arrest
him at the first opportunity, it made him so desperate that he would not
have hesitated to kill both of them.

He had not been standing at the head of the stairs long before he saw Harry
glide into the hall as quietly as a shadow.

The boy was becoming impatient over his partner's long absence and made up
his mind to find him.

Searching the lower hall, he failed to see anything of Old King Brady and
then cautiously made his way upstairs.

The Frenchman saw him coming.

He slipped into the room where the old detective lay.

Raising his finger to his wife, he hissed:

"Hush! He coming up ze stair! Put out ze light--hurry!"

Keeping the door open on a crack when darkness fell upon the room, he
peered out and listened intently.

It was too dark to see anything.

But he heard the young detective's soft footfalls passing the door and he
stepped out into the hall behind Harry.

Slight as the noise was which he made, the boy heard him and turned around,
striving to pierce the gloom with his sight.

La Croix had the boy located.

He suddenly sprang forward with both hands extended, struck against the
boy, clutched him by the throat and knocked him over backward.

A stifled cry escaped Harry.

He was knocked down and struck the floor with a crash.

As his head went back, with the Frenchman's grip on his windpipe, his skull
banged against the door-casing.

He was stunned.

"Lena! Lena!" roared La Croix.

"What is it, Paul?" asked the woman, appearing in the doorway.

"Breeng a light--queek!" he panted.

She struck a match and he saw that Harry was senseless.

With a look of evil triumph on his dark face, the man seized the boy,
dragged him into the room and his wife locked the door.

La Croix bound and gagged Harry.

"Got zem both!" he chuckled.

"What are you going to do with them, Paul?" demanded his wife.

"Do wiz zem? Put zem out of ze way, my dear. Dispose of zem so effectually
zat we not weel be trouble wiz zem again."

The woman met his evil glance and shuddered.

She saw what murderous thoughts were filling his mind.




CHAPTER VI.

TWO MEN IN A BOX.


On the following morning Paul La Croix went upstairs to the man who made
artificial flowers and said to him:

"Monsieur Reynard, to-day ve go avay to Europe. I 'ave some sings een ze
rooms ve occupy zat I weesh to send to a friend een Sacramento. To do so, I
must 'ave wong beeg packing case. I see an empty wong standing over zere
near ze hatchway. Can I buy him from you?"

"I'll make you a present of the big case, and be glad to get rid of it, as
it takes up valuable space," replied Mr. Reynard, pleasantly. "Come, I'll
help you to get it downstairs to your floor by means of the fall."

He opened the hatchway while La Croix was profusely thanking him, put a
sling around the box and lowered it.

La Croix pulled the box into his front room through a door in the partition
which surrounded the hatchway.

This done and Reynard out of the way, the smuggler turned to his wife,
pointed at the box and asked her, with a grim smile:

"You know what zat ees for, my dear?"

"No. I have no idea. What?"

"To pack ze detectives in."

"What for?"

"So I can ship zem away."

"Won't it kill them?"

"I don't know," he replied, indifferently, shrugging his shoulders.

"Well," she remarked, after a moment's reflection, "it will give us time to
get away to Canada without them knowing our destination."

"_Ma foi!_ Zat ees my object."

He was provided with a hammer and some nails, and taking the lid off the
box, he saw that it was amply big to hold the detectives' bodies.

Some of the joints were shrunk open, he noticed, which would admit air for
the officers to breathe. This would keep them alive some time if they were
not killed some other way in transit.

He did not care much about that, however.

Calling his wife to aid him, he went into the next room where the two bound
and gagged detectives laid upon the floor side by side.

Neither could move or speak.

They were wondering what their fate was to be.

It filled them with chagrin to reflect that this Frenchman had alone
overpowered them without the slightest trouble.

La Croix seized Old King Brady first and dragged him into the next room.

"Now, Lena," he remarked, "help me to leeft him in ze box."

He took the detective by the head and she grasped his ankles and they
quickly dropped their prisoner in the case.

Harry was served the same way.

There was just room enough to hold them.

When La Croix nailed on the lid, they realized what he intended to do with
them and it made them feel very downhearted.

"Going to ship us away," thought Old King Brady.

La Croix then borrowed Reynard's brush and marking pot and they heard him
chuckle and say to his wife:

"I weel direct ze box to wong fictitious address in Sacramento, California.
By ze time ze secret police arrive zere, _par Dieu_, zey weel be zez dead
mans!"

He then addressed the case and went after a truckman.

This done, between them they lowered the case through the hatchway into the
street, and it was banged with a hook, turned over and over and pushed up a
pair of rungs on the truck.

The Bradys were badly bumped and bruised.

But being gagged they had to suffer in silence.

Finally the truck was driven away with them, and reaching the Erie freight
depot, the driver got a receipt for the box and dumped it off his truck.

The shock upon the imprisoned detectives was awful.

They heard the driver say:

"Collect de charges. Dat box goes via Buffalo, don't it?"

"Yes," replied the freight agent.

"Well, yer'd better handle it wid care, as I tink it's got artificial
flowers in it, an' yer might smash de stuffins out o' dem."

"Mighty heavy artificial flowers," growled the agent.

Then the truck drove away.

The detectives laid in the freight building for some time, and the interior
of the box became hot and stifling.

Fortunately the box stood as they were lying on their sides.

About noontime their troubles began again, for the freight handlers got
hold of the box to send it over the river to Jersey with other freight. The
detectives were tumbled and slammed about roughly, at one moment resting on
their heads, at another on their faces, then they were picked up by a
hand-truck and banged upon their backs on the boat. For a while they had a
rest.

No one heard the groans of pain they uttered as they were bumped, bruised
and cut, and they were carried over the river.

Here the rough handling began again until they were laden on a freight car
due to go out that night.

The box now rested so that they were standing up.

It was such a painful attitude in those cramped quarters that they were in
misery, for they were face to face, with their bodies bent over on account
of the box being too short for the length of their bodies.

Both had made the most desperate efforts to get rid of their bonds and
gags, but found it impossible to do so.

Some hours later they felt the train get in motion and knew they were on
their way to Buffalo.

The time dragged very slowly.

Hour after hour passed by and the night passed and another day came.

Hunger and thirst were now added to the miseries they already endured and
the strain they were under brought them to the verge of fainting.

Toward noontime the train paused at a way station to take on some freight
and the box in which the detectives were packed was thrown over to make
room for it.

As it struck the floor, Old King Brady struck his face forcibly against the
side of the box and made his nose bleed.

He gave a deep groan and one of the freight handlers heard it.

"Good Lor'!" he exclaimed in startled tones, as he glared around. "What's
that? Sounded like a man's voice."

Another groan from the old detective attracted his attention to the packing
case, and he saw a tiny stream of blood trickling out of it through one of
the cracks, upon the floor.

A thrill of horror darted through the man.

He began to suspect a corpse was in the box, and visions of a dreadful
murder mystery floated through his mind.

"Hey, Tom! Hey, Bill! Come here, quick!" he yelled at his companions.

"What's the matter?"

"What do you want?"

"Bring a hammer here!"

"Did you bust open a box?"

"No. But I'm going to."

"What for?"

"I heard a man groaning in that--ha! Hear it?"

A third groan from Old King Brady reached their ears and seeing the blood,
they quickly realized that there was some one in the case.

Procuring a hammer, they pulled off the lid.

The two detectives were revealed.

Harry was senseless.

Cries of astonishment escaped the men, and observing that the pair were
still alive, they pulled them out of the box and laid them on the floor.

Removing the gags and bonds, the trainmen brought water and bathed the
bruised and swollen faces of the detectives.

This treatment revived Harry.

Both were very weak, and they ached all over.

"Give us a drink," Old King Brady implored.

When this was done they asked for something to eat.

The trainmen got some food at the station and a big crowd gathered round
when the news spread.

After eating and drinking and rubbing their legs and arms, the Bradys
recovered rapidly and told who they were and what befell them.

In a short time they were able to walk.

"Are you going back to New York to arrest the rascal who did this?" asked
the man who discovered them.

"No, indeed!" replied Harry, quickly. "We wouldn't find them there if we
did. They are probably on their way to Canada now."

"Going after them?"

"Yes."

"Then you'd better stay with us until we arrive in Buffalo and you won't
have so far to go to reach Montreal."

"We'll do that," said Old King Brady. "But don't let on about our escape.
If the newspapers get hold of the story and publish it, our enemy may learn
how we baffled his design and he will be on his guard against an attack
from us."

"I'll keep mum, Mr. Brady. We'll reach Buffalo to-night and you can then
attend properly to your injuries."

The train then moved on, and the detectives finally reached their
destination and put up in a hotel, where a physician attended to their
injuries.




CHAPTER VII.

A MYSTERIOUS WOMAN IN BLACK.


"Old King Brady, your life is in danger."

"From what?"

"The man you are persecuting."

"You mean Paul La Croix, I presume?"

"I do. Go back to New York at once."

"Madam, I shall do nothing of the kind."

"Then you must suffer for your obstinacy."

"I am prepared for anything, madam."

"Remember, I have given you fair warning. You cannot arrest La Croix on
Canadian soil for smuggling."

And the veiled woman in deep mourning, who accosted the old detective in a
dark street in Toronto, turned as if to walk away.

This happened several weeks after the Bradys reached Buffalo.

They had been vainly searching for La Croix and his wife.

On the night in question, Old King Brady had gone out from his hotel alone,
when the woman in mourning met him in the street.

The light of a street lamp fell upon them.

She gave a slight start and began to follow him.

When he discovered this and turned around, asking why she was dogging his
footsteps, she gave the above recorded answer.

By her mentioning his name, he realized that she knew him, and he at once
suspected she was La Croix's wife.

He resolved to fathom the mystery of her identity.

Seizing her arm, he exclaimed:

"Hold on a moment."

"Well?" she asked, pausing obediently.

"I want to know who you are that takes such a deep interest in my welfare.
I want to know who it is that knows me--who knows all about the private
business which has brought me to this city. Speak out. Who are you?"

"Your friend," replied the mysterious unknown.

"What is your name?" he persisted.

"I must decline to tell you."

"But I won't take a refusal. You must speak."

"No. Allow me to retain my incognito. It were best for us both."

Old King Brady was determined to know her, however, and he seized her long
crepe veil and attempted to remove it from her face.

A subdued cry of anger escaped her.

"Let that be!" she exclaimed, imperiously.

"Madam, I must see who you are!" he persisted.

"Is this the gratitude you show for the favor I have done you?"

"You have aroused my curiosity."

"Stand back, sir. Don't you dare lay a hand on me again."

"Why," he laughed, "is it dangerous?"

"Very!"

"How?"

She drew a slender dagger from the folds of her dark dress, and as the
lamplight glanced upon the blade, it flashed as she drew it back.

Old King Brady was startled.

He did not expect to see anything like this.

Raising the dagger, the mysterious woman hissed:

"If you attempt to penetrate my identity, I shall stab you!"

There was a ring of intense earnestness to her voice, and it froze the
smile that rose to the old detective's face.

He regarded her with a puzzled look.

It now began to dawn upon his mind that she was not Mrs. La Croix after
all. The voice was different. She was shorter and stouter than the
smuggler's wife. Her actions were different.

To gain time to form a different tactic he exclaimed:

"How can you be a friend of mine if you are going to stab me?"

"I am bound to keep my identity a secret," she replied, firmly.

"What object have you in befriending me?"

"You are a brave man and a dutiful officer. I know you are only following
up this case because you were ordered to do so. I therefore don't wish to
see you perish."

"How do you know I'm doomed to get killed?"

"Because I heard your enemies plot your destruction."

"In that case they know we are here on their trail?"

"Yes. Every move you make is being keenly watched by spies."

"Our enemies must be well-disguised and keep well under cover."

"You haven't thus far detected them, have you?"

"No," admitted Old King Brady.

"Then that shows how secure they are. A number of times they have been as
close to you as I am. Yet you did not know it. By this you can realize how
easy it would be for them to attack you unexpectedly, kill you, and
escape."

"Even that thought won't scare me off the case."

"You are very obstinate and persevering."

"Those two elements will yet make me win this fight."

"Foolish man. Don't delude yourself. Your enemies are very powerful people.
They will beat you in the end."

"I don't agree with your idea."

"Is my warning in vain?"

"Entirely so."

The veiled woman sighed and bowed her head in thought. Finally she strode
away, saying in impatient tones:

"Very well. Since I can't dissuade you from your set purpose, I shall not
bother myself any further about the matter."

She seemed to be very angry at the old detective.

He strode after her.

"Wait a moment longer!" he exclaimed.

"No. I have no more to say," she replied, sharply. "Don't attempt to follow
me. If you do, it will be as much as your life is worth."

"Humbug!" he replied.

"So you doubt me, eh? Well, look behind you."

He glanced over his shoulder and caught view of the shadowy figures of
several men lurking about the trees lining the street.

Old King Brady was astonished.

She evidently had a body-guard of watchful men.

"Who are those people?" he demanded.

"My friends," she replied, quietly. "If they saw you attack or follow me,
they would put a sudden end to your career at long range."

"By firing?"

"Yes."

"Let me walk as far as the corner with you."

"Very well, Mr. Brady. I have no objection to that."

The journey was made in utter silence, and the old detective noticed that
the shadowy men were following them.

When they reached the corner, Old King Brady glanced around, looking for
Harry, who agreed to meet him there.

The boy was nowhere in sight.

Old King Brady then coughed and dropped his handkerchief as a signal.

For a moment there was no notice paid to it, but presently he heard a
distant hissing sound of singular penetration.

It was an answer to his signal and meant that he was seen and understood.

With a satisfied feeling the old detective now said to the veiled woman:

"I shall leave you here. Don't think I am ungrateful for your kindness. On
the contrary, I appreciate it very much. But my duty compels me to pay no
heed to your valuable warning. I must run down my quarry. Good-night,
madam."

"Good-night, sir."

He tipped his hat and strode away to the Walker House, where he was
staying.

She stood watching him until he was several blocks distant and then gave
vent to a low, peculiar whistle.

Instantly four men came gliding from the shadows, and grouped around her,
as she started to walk away.

She was heading for the railroad depot.

When she was gone, Harry Brady slid down from the dense foliage of a nearby
tree where he had been a hidden watcher.

The boy had seen the woman and her body-guard, and knew that his partner
wanted him to shadow her from that point.

Accordingly he glided along after them.

Dodging from tree to tree, slinking along in the densest shadows and never
exposing himself for an instant in a ray of light which would betray him,
Harry dogged them to the railroad station.

He saw them purchase tickets and board a train.

Gliding over to the ticket office he asked the agent:

"Where did those five people buy tickets for?"

"Montreal," replied the man, "on the Grand Trunk road."

"Thank you," said Harry, politely.

And the boy ran behind a freight car to shelter him from the gaze of the
passengers in the waiting train.

Finding an opening between two of the cars he peered through.

Directly opposite him sat the woman in black, with two of her male
companions in the seat ahead and two behind her.

She was close to the window.

Just then she drew her veil aside and Harry saw her face.

A startled cry escaped the boy.

"By jove!" he gasped. "She's Clara La Croix, the girl smuggler!"

And so she was!




CHAPTER VIII.

GAINING A FEW POINTS.


Young King Brady, of course, knew nothing about the dialogue which passed
between his partner and the girl. But he felt pretty confident that Old
King Brady did not know who the girl was.

Without the slightest hesitation Harry made his way unseen to the rear car,
and boarded the train just as it pulled out of the station.

The boy wore a bicycle suit and a false beard.

He felt pretty sure he would not be known in this outfit, and passing
inside the car, he took a seat.

The distance between Toronto and Montreal was about 350 miles along the
Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence river.

"I don't believe La Croix or his wife are in Toronto," the boy muttered,
"for we've gone over the city with a fine-toothed comb, and failed to find
the slightest sign of them. They must be either in Montreal or Quebec, for
the girl is going to the former place. Miss Clara made a quick trip. She
could not have been here long from Holland. And I presume she is laden with
those diamonds she went after. La Croix is now doubtless scheming to
smuggle them over the border into the United States. We've got to watch
these people closely now. That Frenchman is a desperate man. We have seen
that he would not stop at murder to attain his purposes. When I reach
Montreal, I must telegraph Old King Brady to come on and meet me. He will
be wondering what has become of me now."

When the conductor came through, Harry paid his fare in cash.

A short time afterward one of the girl's male companions made a trip from
one end of the train to the other.

He sharply eyed every passenger on the cars and favored Harry with a
particularly keen and searching stare.

It made the boy imagine for an instant that his identity was known, but he
never flinched.

The man passed on, however, without making any remark.

It took fifteen hours to make the run, and it was three o'clock on the
following afternoon before the train pulled into Montreal.

Shadowing the girl smuggler and her companions, Harry saw them go to a
hotel, where the men left her.

While they went down to the Dominion Line dock, the girl passed into the
hotel and Harry saw her go upstairs.

The hotel clerk, a dudish young fellow, was staring after her when Harry
approached him and said:

"Deuced pretty girl that."

"Very," assented the clerk. "A widow, too!"

"Rather young to be a widow, don't you think?"

"Yes, indeed."

"What's her name?"

"Mrs. Marie P. Savoy."

"Been here long?"

"A week."

"Alone?"

"She came in on the steamer Dominion from Havre alone, but her mother and
father soon joined her here. She went down to Toronto a few days ago
leaving the old folks here. She's just returned."

"I see. I'd like to get acquainted with her."

"You may if you stop here."

"That's what I'm going to do. Give me a good room."

"Very well, sir. Got any baggage?"

"None, whatever. I came from Niagara in a hurry."

"You can have No. 37. That's right next to the one occupied by the
beautiful young widow. Perhaps it may lead to your becoming acquainted with
her as you wish."

"I hope so," laughed Harry, who was delighted at his good luck. "Got a
telegraph station here?"

"No. But there's one across the street."

Harry went out and telegraphed to Old King Brady to come and meet him in
Montreal and then went to his room.

While washing, he heard the hum of voices in Clara La Croix's room, and
gliding over to the wall, pressed his ear against the partition.

It was a hollow wall and nearly every word was quite audible.

The first thing he heard was a man's voice which he did not recognize, but
presumed was La Croix, asking:

"Well, how did you make out in Toronto, Clara?"

"All right," the girl replied. "I found your four spies there. They report
that the Custom House inspectors at Niagara Falls are on the alert. There
has been a shaking up of the department. The Collector of the Port of New
York is dissatisfied with the amount of smuggling that is being carried on,
and made it very hot for everybody."

"That ees bad for us."

"Very. We'll either have to keep shady a while or play a trick on them to
pass the diamonds I brought over from Holland. As there are $250,000 worth
of the gems, you can't afford to have them seized for duty and run chances
on going to prison for the job, papa."

"That ees a fact. It would ruin me. I'll have to think of some--vat you
call--plan to beat ze Custom House."

"I've got some bad news for you, too."

"Vat ees zat?" asked La Croix, nervously.

"The Bradys are in Toronto looking for you."

The smuggler started as if he were stung and turned deathly pale.

A look of blank dismay settled upon his sallow face, his dark eyes sparkled
angrily and he exclaimed:

"_Parbleu!_ I thought zey was done for!"

"You told me how you had shipped them in a box."

"Zen zey have escape, eh?"

"So it seems. One of your men discovered them. Before I came here, I met
Old King Brady in the street and warned him of the danger of following you
up. He refused to quit."

"Zat man ees a demon! I weel keel heem yet!" raved La Croix.

"Look out he don't kill you," replied his daughter.

"What wiz him deed you do?"

"Left him in Toronto."

"An' he not know we ees here?"

"No. I'm sure he don't."

"But eet puzzle me to know how he learn we ees in Canada."

"He may have had some method of finding out those things."

"I wondair how from ze box zey escape?"

"I'm sure I don't know."

"Where ees ze four men?"

"Gone down to the steamship dock for my trunk."

"Zen zey come back here soon, eh?"

"Yes. I presumed you wished to consult with them and therefore ordered them
to report here to you."

"So I do. Ve must vatch for ze detectives ver' sharp now."

"Where is mother?"

"Een my room."

"I'll go in and see her. I'm going to get rid of these uncomfortable
widow's weeds. They were all very well as a disguise in which to travel in
Europe and come back here, but I am heartily sick of wearing them. They
make me feel so old."

"Suit yourself, my dear."

The girl then left her room and as there was no more to hear, Harry resumed
his ablutions and put on his false beard again.

He kept a strict watch upon the smuggler all that day and saw La Croix hold
a meeting with his spies in his own room.

The boy failed to overhear what they had to say, but that did not worry
him, as long as he had his quarry under observation.

On the following afternoon an old farmer with a homespun suit, an old felt
hat, and gray whiskers, arrived at the hotel.

Harry was standing in the lobby when he came in and recognized him at once
as Old King Brady, but made no sign.

The old detective recognized the boy at the same moment, and calling for a
room, he seized his carpet bag and umbrella, and followed the bell-boy
upstairs.

Harry considered it safest to keep apart from his partner in public, and
for that reason failed to speak to him.

When he afterward learned which room Old King Brady occupied, he quietly
went up there and was admitted.

In whispers they explained to each other all that transpired and the old
detective was delighted over the boy's success.

"So the mysterious woman in black was the girl smuggler, eh?" asked the old
detective. "Well, I'm surprised."

"Her warning you, shows that she has some regard for us and don't wish to
see us come to grief," replied Harry, sentimentally.

"On the other hand, it may have been a diplomatic move on her part to bluff
us off until they smuggle that big consignment of diamonds over the
border," replied Old King Brady, practically.

"Well, she didn't succeed."

"By no means."

"Have you formed any plan of action?"

"Only one."

"And that is?"

"To catch them smuggling those diamonds and arrest them with the evidence
in their possession, which will send them to prison for many years,"
replied Old King Brady.




CHAPTER IX.

CROSSING THE BORDER.


As La Croix's party did not seem to be in any hurry to leave Montreal, the
Bradys had plenty of time to arrange their plans.

On the following day they went to the telegraph office and sent two
messages, the first being couched in the following terms:

     "Collector of Port, N.Y.: Swear out warrant for arrest of Clara La
     Croix, charge of smuggling, and mail at once to International,
     Niagara Falls. Brady."

The second was addressed to the Customs department at Suspension Bridge,
saying:

     "Keep watch for La Croix, wife and daughter with four spies. Are
     going to attempt to pass $250,000 worth of diamonds."

As La Croix was well known, details were useless.

The Bradys watched their quarry closely.

Knowing they had those diamonds with them, and that they would very likely
play a sharp trick to evade the inspectors, the Bradys were very careful.

Scarcely a move made by the family escaped them.

It soon became apparent to the detectives that an important move was soon
to be made, for the four spies were in frequent consultation with the
Frenchman and his family.

"They are evidently arranging a plan of action," Harry commented, as he and
his partner traced the men to La Croix's room for the fourth time.

"I wish there was some way of getting a clew to their design," Old King
Brady replied, in wistful tones. "We are completely in the dark."

"That's a sheer impossibility," Harry answered. "They are taking the most
extraordinary care not to let anyone hear a word they are saying or see a
thing they are doing. I've tried several times, and failed."

"We've got a sharp gang to deal with, my boy. And the worst of it is that
$250,000 worth of diamonds makes such a small package that they won't have
the slightest trouble to conceal it."

"As they are not likely to allow so valuable a parcel to leave their hands,
by arresting the whole gang the moment they reach the American side, we are
likely to find the jewels on the person of one or the other."

"And I quite agree with that plan," said Harry. "In fact, it's the only
safe method of securing them for a certainty."

"Have you noticed whether they made friends with any outsiders here?"

"No, they haven't. They keep strictly aloof from everybody. I made an
attempt to speak to each one of the party in a friendly way at the table,
but they gave me such a cold reception, I had to withdraw in a hurry."

That day, La Croix and his party left Montreal.

Boarding a train for Toronto, they went away.

The Bradys were on the same train.

Once more their disguises were changed, for they did not want the smugglers
to see them in Toronto in the same characters, as it might arouse their
suspicions.

They were now rigged out as two regular army soldiers, and pretended to be
sightseeing, as most Americans are up in that region.

La Croix and his party only remained a day in Toronto.

The detectives now discovered that two of the spies had disappeared and a
swift search was made to find them.

Harry did the investigating.

He finally discovered that one of them had gone to get married, and the
other acted as best man at the ceremony.

The spy married a pretty French-Canadian girl.

His companion returned to La Croix's party and the bride and groom started
off on a short wedding trip.

Young King Brady dropped them.

"They'll be so busy spooning and lally-gagging that he won't have any time
to attend to this smuggling game," thought the boy detective, as he went
back to his partner to report the occurrence.

Old King Brady was watching the Frenchman's party.

Next day the smugglers boarded the cars for Niagara, and the Bradys felt
that their work would soon be at an end.

As the Custom House officers of Niagara had been specially warned against
these people, they made a very careful search of their baggage and persons.

Every one underwent a most rigid examination.

Not a thing or place was overlooked in which there was the faintest chance
of concealing precious stones.

But despite the keenness of the scrutiny--despite the extraordinary
watchfulness--despite every care--not a diamond was found.

The Bradys looked on eagerly.

Each one expected a remarkable disclosure.

But when they saw the officers baffled, it worried them.

They could not understand this want of success, except by thinking that the
La Croix party were playing some deep, shrewd game.

The Frenchman laughed sardonically at the officers and said:

"Ah, Messieurs, zis ees ze time I fool you! _Comprong?_"

"If any of your party have anything contraband," grimly answered the
officer, in disappointed tones, "you must have swallowed it."

"Zen why you not examine us wiz ze X-ray?" chuckled La Croix.

"I'd like to take you at your invitation, you are such a slippery
customer," growled the officer, who had had some experience with him
before.

The party were permitted to go.

They headed for the International hotel and as the Bradys had already
arranged to go there, they followed the Frenchman's party.

Upon the arrival of the officers, a legal envelope was handed to Old King
Brady, and he opened it and withdrew a warrant for Clara La Croix.

"No need of this, yet," he grumbled, holding it up.

"We may want it very soon," replied Harry. "They had the diamonds, and if
they've eluded our vigilance, or given them to anyone else to smuggle over,
they'll have to get the jewels away from the smuggler and that will be the
time for us to grab them."

Several days passed by, during which La Croix's three spies returned to
Canada, as they were then of no further service.

The day after they had gone, the fourth spy, who had got married, suddenly
came over from Canada with his bride, and the detectives saw them go to the
hotel where the La Croix party was stopping.

With their suspicions aroused, the Bradys watched them.

They went up to the clerk, sent their card to La Croix's room, and Clara
presently came down and greeted them warmly.

"Papa is shaving," she remarked. "Can't you come to my room? I'll try to
entertain you until he is disengaged."

She had abandoned her widow's weeds and resumed her wonted attire in which
she looked very young and charming.

The bride smiled, patted her on the head and said:

"I like you. Nothing would please me better."

The moment she assented, the Bradys hastened upstairs.

Clara's room was open and they entered and glanced around.

It was a magnificently-furnished apartment and the trunk she brought over
from France stood in the middle of the room.

At one side was a closet.

The Bradys dodged into it and closed the door.

No sooner were they concealed when Clara and her two guests came in and at
her invitation, seated themselves.

"Well?" said the girl smuggler, in eager tones, "how did you make out?"

"Fine," laughed the spy, producing a package from his pocket. "We kept the
diamonds and remained in Canada, spending our honeymoon. When we started
for the American side, my wife had the package of diamonds fastened under
the lining of her skirt. No one suspected us, of course. The officers only
made a careless examination of our satchel and valise. We had no trouble
whatever."

"How lucky!"

"Is there any use for us to remain here to see your father? We are in a
hurry, and can come back in the course of an hour."

"That will do."

"We will go, then."

And they left the room.

A few moments later there came a knock at the door.

"Come in," cried the girl.

Her mother entered the room.

"Where are the bridal couple, Clara?" she asked, glancing around.

"Just gone. They'll return in an hour."

"Did they leave the package of diamonds?"

"Yes. And here it is."

Another knock came at the door.

"Hide the parcel!" gasped Mrs. La Croix, nervously.

The girl thrust it in her pocket.

"Enter!" she cried.

The door opened and a hall-boy came in.

"Did you ring, Miss La Croix?" he asked.

"Yes," she replied. "I want you to do something for me."

Rising to her feet she drew the boy aside and held a whispered talk with
him for several moments.

In the course of their conversation he said to her:

"I saw two men enter this room just before you came in with that lady and
gentleman, and they didn't go out again, either."

The girl looked startled.

She spoke to him rapidly a moment, and he started for the door.

Before he could depart, however, the closet door flew open with a bang and
the Bradys sprang from their place of concealment.

"Hold on, there!" cried Harry. "Let no one leave this room!"

The hall-boy paused, an alarmed look on his face.




CHAPTER X.

SERVING THE WARRANT.


Mrs. La Croix and her daughter were possessed of good nerves, for the
dramatic entrance of the Bradys did not seem to startle them in the least.

They glanced coolly at the detectives and Mrs. La Croix asked, haughtily:

"Who are these men?"

"Detectives, madam," replied Old King Brady, politely.

"Indeed! What were you sneaking in that closet for?"

"To learn the true inwardness of your gigantic smuggling scheme."

"You must be mad."

"No, indeed. We are quite sane, I assure you."

"What do you mean by our smuggling?"

"Simply this: We know all about your daughter's trip to Holland and we've
been watching her since she landed at Montreal."

"Oh," said the lady, icily, "you have, eh?"

"Yes, we have."

"Well, what do you want, now?"

"Madam," said Old King Brady, "here is a warrant for the arrest of your
daughter. The charge is smuggling!"

Calmly taking the document, the lady read it.

Harry opened the door and let the hall-boy go.

The young detective did not want the boy to hear all that transpired and
the hall-boy hastened away.

Rushing to Paul La Croix's room, he pounded on the door, entered and found
the smuggler shaving himself.

"There's two detectives in your daughter's room!" he gasped.

"_Sacre!_" roared La Croix in startled tones.

"They've got a warrant for your daughter's arrest."

"Who zey are?" groaned La Croix.

"The Bradys."

"We are lost!"

"Your daughter slipped me this package and told me to give it to you."

He handed over the parcel of diamonds, and with a glad cry, La Croix
eagerly seized it and thrust it in the bosom of his shirt.

"Here--five dollaire for you!" he panted, giving the boy a bill. "Keep ze
still tongue about our affairs. Now go!"

The boy shot out of the room and the man wrote a note and left it on the
bureau.

La Croix hastily dressed and rushed out of the hotel.

He was fearfully excited.

Reaching the street, he called a cab, doubled the driver's fare and was
driven furiously to the railroad depot.

Here he caught a departing train.

Meantime, the Bradys imagined they had Clara La Croix with the package of
diamonds in her possession.

Harry placed his hand on the girl smuggler's arm.

"I hate to do it, Miss," said he, half apologetically, "but you are my
prisoner."

She took her arrest with exasperating coolness.

Smiling up at him, she said in low, sweet tones:

"I'm charged with smuggling, ain't I?"

"Yes."

"What?"

"About $250,000 worth of diamonds."

"How ridiculous!"

"No, it isn't. We've got all the facts."

"Please name them."

"You went to Amsterdam and came back on the Dominion with the jewels I
mentioned. In Toronto you gave them to one of your father's spies who got
married. Your party crossed the border and were searched. Of course, no
jewels were found on you. A short time ago the spy and his bride followed
you; they smuggled the diamonds over the Suspension Bridge for you. A few
minutes ago they were here and delivered the package to you. You've got it
now, so hand it over."

"I haven't got any package of diamonds," protested the girl.

"Now, don't try to lie out of it. We've got the evidence against you which
you can't deny. Be sensible and save yourself further trouble by handing
over the gems. If you don't we'll take them by force."

"I am telling you the truth."

"Further concealment is useless."

"Then search us and convince yourself."

Harry accepted her offer and failed to find the stones.

While he was so employed, Old King Brady searched her mother with equal
non-success, and a surprised look spread over their faces.

"The girl hasn't got them!" exclaimed Harry, in disgust.

"Nor has her mother," added Old King Brady.

"They must have hidden them."

"Search the room."

"Don't move, ladies, or we'll handcuff you."

"No need of that ignominy," said the girl.

They made a thorough and painstaking search of the place, but failed to
meet with any success and finally gave it up.

The diamonds remained missing.

Both were greatly puzzled.

Suddenly an idea occurred to Harry and he cried:

"The hall-boy!"

"What about him?" asked his partner.

"He may have carried off the parcel."

"See!"

"You guard them."

"All right."

Harry rushed out of the room.

Finding the boy down in the office, Harry seized him.

"Where did you put the package that girl gave you?" he roared.

The boy turned pale with fright, and a panic seized him as he suddenly
thought his share in the matter was known.

With bulging eyes and chattering teeth, he gasped:

"For mercy's sake don't arrest me, and I'll tell you, sir."

"Well? Speak out--quick!"

"The young lady told me to give it to her father."

"And you did?"

"Yes, sir."'

"Where was he?"

"In his room."

"Is he there yet?"

"I don't know."

Harry rushed upstairs again.

Pushing open the door of Paul La Croix's room he entered.

None of the man's possessions was disturbed, but Harry caught view of the
note he had written and placed on his bureau.

The boy picked it up and read the following lines:

     "Monsieur Brady: By the time you get this letter I will be far
     away. You are duped. Do as you please with my innocent wife and
     daughter. You can prove nothing against them. An outsider did the
     smuggling. That lets us out. I defy you. Do your worst. La Croix."

Young King Brady smiled at the note.

"The raving of a madman!" he muttered scornfully. "If he imagines he has
beaten us, we will soon relieve him of that notion."

He carried the note to Old King Brady and exclaimed:

"La Croix has escaped with the diamonds."

"How did he get them?" asked the old detective, curiously.

"Clara sent them to him by the hall-boy."

"As I feared!"

"We can't convict these women."

"No. Release them."

"Ladies, you are free."

"Thank you," said Clara, with a pleasant smile.

"Go your way. We can't secure anything but revenge by prosecuting you, and
that isn't what we are after. I must say, though, Mrs. La Croix, that was
an inhuman thing for you and your husband to do, boxing us up and shipping
us to California. We are more merciful to you when it lies in our power to
put you in prison."

The woman's face reddened with shame.

She hung her head, but made no reply.

Old King Brady then said to Harry in hurried tones:

"Come. We must get on La Croix's trail. We'll run him down if it takes a
year to do it!"

They rushed from the room.

Harry, however, paused outside the door and listened.

The woman and her daughter uttered a merry peal of laughter.

"Good for papa!" cried the girl. "He'll save the gems yet."

"Those detectives have gone on a wild goose chase," contemptuously replied
her mother. "Paul will outwit them. To-morrow you and I will go back to New
York, and put up at the Waldorf. When your father has safely disposed of
those gems he will go there to look for us. It's a rendezvous we had
arranged beforehand in case trouble came up."

Harry nodded and smiled.

"Glad you've posted me," he muttered. "I won't lose sight of you two
charming creatures. It wasn't good policy to pull you in without the
diamonds if you only knew it, and that's the only reason you are at liberty
now. We'll play with you as a cat plays with a mouse."

And he walked away from the door feeling well satisfied with the shape the
case was taking.




CHAPTER XI.

SUBDUING A TARTAR.


Old King Brady had gone ahead in an effort to find out what had become of
Paul La Croix.

Reaching the street he accosted a man at the door with the question:

"Did you see a thin man with a black moustache, a high hat, and frock coat
come out of here in a hurry a few moments ago?"

"Yes, sir. He got in a cab and rode away."

"Did you notice the sort of cab it was?"

"I did. Do you know Pork Chops, the negro hackman?"

"Oh, yes."

"Well, it was his rig."

"Which way did they go?"

"In the direction of the railroad depot."

Thanking his informant, the old detective hastened away convinced that the
fugitive was going out of Niagara by rail.

When he reached the depot he described La Croix and asked where he had
gone.

"That's none of your business," growled the surly ticket agent.

"Oh, isn't it?" queried the detective, blandly.

"No!" shouted the man, "and I'll not tell you."

"It wouldn't hurt you to be polite and accommodating, would it?"

"I ain't here to keep inquisitive people posted about our passengers."

"That's a fact," assented Old King Brady, "but I have an urgent reason for
wishing to know where that man went."

"I don't care anything about your private reasons. If you don't want to buy
a ticket, get away from that window and don't annoy me."

"Very well," meekly answered the detective.

He thereupon stepped through the door into the agent's office, and the man
scowled, and glared at him and roared:

"What in thunder do you want in here, anyway?"

"I've come in to arrest you," quietly answered the old detective, as he
showed his badge. "I'm a detective, as you can plainly see, and the man I
inquired about is a fugitive smuggler. As you are aiding him to escape, by
withholding the information I want, you must be an accessory of his. As
such, you'll have to go to jail!"

The man wilted.

All his lordly, overbearing manners vanished.

Turning as pale as death and trembling like an aspen, he gasped
tremulously:

"For pity's sake don't lock me up. I didn't know the circumstances."

"You're an unmannerly dog."

"I know it, sir. I'm sorry if I offended you."

"Promise me to act more civilly in future."

"Yes. Yes. Certainly I shall."

"Then I'll let you go. Let this be a lesson to you. Now, where did he go?"

"He bought a ticket to New York."

"Why didn't you save all this bother by saying so in the first place?"

"I--I--I don't know," stammered the fellow in subdued tones.

Giving him a look of contempt, Old King Brady purchased a ticket for New
York, and said in angry tones:

"For two pins I'd notify the company what a brute you are, and have a
gentleman put here in your place."

And with this rebuke he departed.

He went to a telegraph office and flashed a message to the authorities of
various stations along the line to New York, asking them to hold La Croix
if they caught him on the cars.

He had to wait an hour for a train to Buffalo, and sent Harry a message
telling where he was going.

Finally he was carried away in his train.

The old detective stopped off at every station to which he telegraphed, but
in every instance he received the same answer, that nothing was seen of a
man answering La Croix's description.

That set the detective thinking.

"La Croix was probably keen-witted enough to suspect that we would find his
trail and pursue him. In order to conceal his identity he has doubtless
disguised himself and thus passed through unrecognized. He has got to
dispose of that big lot of diamonds yet. Carrying such a huge amount will
of course attract a great deal of attention. Therefore it should be an easy
matter to find out where he is operating when he reaches New York."

On the following day Old King Brady reached the city.

He instituted inquiries about La Croix at once in the jewelry district, but
no one seemed to have seen him yet.

That did not worry Old King Brady.

He was too astute a man to be discouraged by a trifling rebuff.

"The villain is keeping shady," was the conclusion he arrived at. "He is
going to let the fuss blow over before he exposes his stock. Very foxy, no
doubt, but I'm bound to land on him sooner or later."

He did not relax his hunt.

Nor did he let on to the authorities that he was in town again.

He believed in the golden principle of keeping his business to himself
until it became absolutely necessary to disclose it.

Two days later Harry joined him at their joint lodgings.

Young King Brady told how he had tracked Mrs. La Croix and her daughter to
swell apartments in the luxurious Waldorf.

Here the pair had taken up their abode under the fictitious name of Mrs.
Marie P. Savoy and daughter.

The Bradys conjectured that it would not take them long to let La Croix
know of their whereabouts.

They therefore carefully shadowed the big hotel.

Nearly a week passed by and one rainy night while Harry was on watch, under
an umbrella, across the street from the hotel, he saw a hansom cab dash up
to the door, and a man looking like La Croix alighted and hastily made his
way into the building on the Thirty-fourth street side.

"La Croix, as sure as fate!" the boy muttered, hastily crossing the street.

He was heading for the glass portico, when he happened to glance into the
spacious dining-room and saw the girl smuggler at supper.

Young King Brady paused and watched her.

Presently a waiter approached her with a card on a salver.

She glanced at it, said something to the man, and while he hastened away,
she resumed her supper in a leisurely manner.

There were many fashionable guests in the room.

In a few moments Harry saw her father approach her smilingly, and sit down
at the same table with her.

"Now is my time to nab him!" muttered Harry.

He ran into the hotel without ceremony, and making his way to the door of
the dining-room, he paid no heed to the servants who offered to take his
hat, mackintosh and umbrella.

In he dashed, his queer actions causing the guests to look up at him in
astonishment, and he headed for La Croix.

The Frenchman had a big carving knife in his hand with which he was going
to cut a steak instead of allowing the waiter to do it.

Harry's hand fell upon his shoulder.

"La Croix, you are my prisoner!" he exclaimed.

A hoarse cry escaped the smuggler and he became excited as he noticed that
most every one in the room overheard the remark.

Clara gave a suppressed shriek and sprang to her feet.

Quick to recover his composure the Frenchman put on his eyeglasses, stared
at Harry coolly from head to foot, and exclaimed:

"Young man, haf you not mek a meestake?"

"No, indeed!" replied the boy, resolutely. "You are my man all right."

"Why, sair, I don't know you. I nevair saw you before een my life."

"Come--come. You can't cheek it out that way, La Croix."

"Monsieur, please let go my arm or I have ze vatairs throw you out of
here!"

Harry's patience became exhausted.

He did not intend to mince matters, so he said:

"You stop your humbug and come with me, or I'll pull you out of here by the
neck, do you understand me?"

He took a firm grip on his man with one hand and drew a pair of handcuffs
out of his pocket with the other.

Seeing he could not brave the matter out, and fearing lest the boy would
attempt to handcuff him, the Frenchman wrenched himself free.

"You geet avay!" he hissed.

"Not without you!" retorted Harry, pluckily.

And he rushed forward to grasp the villain again.

By this time La Croix had become frantic with desperation.

Seeing the boy coming, he drew back the big carving knife with a quick
motion and aimed a blow at the boy, shouting in the meantime:

"Zen take zat!"

The deadly blade leaped toward Harry's breast.

He tried to avoid it by leaping back, but was too late.

The knife struck him and the point pierced his side.

A sudden cry of agony escaped Young King Brady, and he flung up his hands
and pitched over upon the floor.

Nearly every one in the room having had their attention attracted toward
the pair had witnessed the tragedy.

Men turned pale and leaped to their feet, women shrieked and fainted, and
some of the bolder waiters rushed at the Frenchman to disarm and capture
him.

La Croix brandished the knife.

"I keel ze fairst man who touch me!" he yelled.

Dashing out of the room, he rushed upstairs and flourished the knife at his
pursuers. He swore at every step and threatened to run the blade into the
first man who got within his reach.

That cowed the crowd and he disappeared on the floor above.




CHAPTER XII.

RUN TO COVER.


There was a scene of furious excitement in the hotel dining-room, and
during the confusion, Clara La Croix made her escape.

Among the guests who had been dining was a physician who ran to Harry's aid
and made a rapid examination of his wound.

To the many anxious, pale-faced spectators who gathered round, he said:

"Don't be alarmed. It's a mere flesh wound and will soon heal up."

"Isn't he dead?" demanded a gentleman in a dress-suit, anxiously.

"No. Simply fainted from the shock on his system."

"He's evidently a detective."

"Yes, sir, and his assailant is a criminal. Waiter, get me some water--a
sponge--bandages, and some linament. I'll bandage this wound and stop the
bleeding."

While the doctor was busy working over the unconscious boy, the hotel
detective and a policeman came running in and got the details.

They hastened away and scoured the hotel in quest of La Croix.

That worthy had gone to his wife's room.

Garbed in one of her bonnets, veils and dresses, he descended in the
elevator and swiftly got away from the Waldorf, undetected.

His wife and daughter followed as rapidly as possible.

Meantime Harry recovered.

The doctor brought him home in a carriage.

Old King Brady was at home and got the particulars.

His rage knew no bounds when Harry explained all, after the doctor's
departure, and he cried bitterly:

"That villain has caused us more trouble than any other criminal we ever
attempted to run down. I'll even matters up with him. Had you not retreated
just when you did, that knife would surely have killed you."

"I'll be laid up a few days, the doctor said," replied Harry, "but I'll
soon get over it. If I ever meet La Croix again, I won't have any mercy on
him. He's a bad man."

The boy then went to bed.

A week afterward, Old King Brady met Harry at police headquarters, and the
boy saw by the look of triumph on his face that he had good news.

"How are you feeling to-day?" he asked the boy.

"Fine. My wound don't bother me at all."

"I've been working hard, Harry."

"So I imagine, as I haven't seen anything of you since yesterday."

"La Croix's four spies have arrived in town."

"What! Come from Canada?"

"Yes. I saw them going up Broadway in a bunch, to-day."

"Why didn't you arrest them?"

"Couldn't. Had my hands full at the time."

"Of what?"

"Mrs. La Croix."

"Did you catch her?"

"Yes. Shopping in Twenty-third street."

"Good enough."

"She's locked up now. I've changed my plans."

"How?"

"Well, I think we've made a great mistake in allowing those women their
liberty, hoping they would lead us to Paul La Croix's hiding place. My new
plan is this: To yank every one of them in, the moment we catch them."

Harry pondered over the proposition a few moments.

As a fact, he did not fancy such a summary proceeding. He firmly believed
that using the different members of the gang as a bait to trap the others
was the most efficient method of acting.

However, Old King Brady was getting impatient over the slow progress they
were making to arrest the smugglers. His plan would show a quick result.
That's what he wanted.

The boy, therefore, did not contradict him.

"Any way you say," he replied, presently.

"I'm following out my idea now," said the old detective, as he took a chew
of tobacco. "The moment I saw Mrs. La Croix, I grabbed her."

"She protested, of course?"

"Vigorously. But I locked her up just the same."

"Couldn't you get any information out of her about the rest?"

"No. She wouldn't say a word."

"Acts like an old offender."

"Exactly. Her husband and daughter must be somewhere about the city. I
suppose La Croix sent for the spies. He may have use for them, else they
wouldn't be here. I only hope he hasn't disposed of any of those stones
yet."

"And I've sent a warning to all jewelers, pawnbrokers and dealers in gems,
not to handle La Croix's gems under penalty of the law. I've offered them a
reward for the smuggler's arrest. The villain is bound to keep shady now.
He must know the danger he is in. He's a very foxy Frenchman," said Harry.

"I wish I could find out where the woman lives."

"Nothing easier," said Harry.

"Don't you fool yourself. She won't confess."

"I don't expect she will."

"Then how am I to find out?"

"You said she was shopping in Twenty-third street?"

"I caught her coming out of Sterns' store."

"What's more likely than that she made some purchases and ordered the
things sent home?"

Old King Brady's face brightened.

He had not thought of her leaving her address.

"Your idea is all right!" he exclaimed.

"Of course it is. It only has one drawback."

"And what's that?"

"She may have given a fictitious name."

"True. But she favors the name of Marie Savoy."

"It wouldn't do any harm to try asking for it."

"Come with me and see what we can do."

They left headquarters and hastened to the big dry goods store.

Going to the delivery department they asked the head clerk if he had
anything on his books to be delivered to either Mrs. La Croix or Savoy.

A short search of the record elicited this response:

"I've got twenty yards of dress goods to be delivered to Mrs. M.P. Savoy."

"Bought a couple of hours ago?" asked Old King Brady.

"About that."

"Where are you going to deliver it?"

"At No. 160 Bleecker street."

"That's all."

"Anything wrong about it?"

"No. It's paid for, ain't it?"

"Yes."

"What time are you going to deliver the parcel?"

"Our wagon ought to reach there about five o'clock."

Old King Brady thanked him and they departed, leaving the clerk looking
very much mystified over their peculiar actions.

The Bradys went to the Bleecker street address and saw that it was one of a
row of old-fashioned brick houses with green blinds.

There was an ornamental iron stoop in front, and a furnished room sign
hanging in one of the windows.

"Shall we go in?" asked Harry, hesitatingly.

"No. Wait for the wagon. We can then see who comes to the door. I presume
they only have furnished rooms here."

"It's a poor neighborhood."

"So much the better for their purpose, perhaps."

They entered a saloon on the corner and took up a position where they could
watch the house over the window screen.

They had not been there long before Harry caught view of two familiar
figures coming down the street and called his partner's attention to them.

"Here comes two of La Croix's spies!" he exclaimed.

"Yes, and they are going into the house," muttered Old King Brady.

"That clinches our doubts. He surely must live there."

"No doubt of it. It's a strange servant admitting them. She's a mulatto."

The men disappeared in the house.

An hour passed by uneventfully.

Then Sterns' wagon came along and Old King Brady said hastily:

"When that driver rings, we must force our way in."

"Hurry up, then!"

Running across the street they arrived just in time to go up the stoop with
the driver, and when he rang, the colored girl answered the bell.

"Mrs. Savoy live here?" demanded the driver, who had a bundle.

"Yes," replied the girl. "Parcel for her?"

"Here it is."

He handed it over and went away.

"Is the lady in?" Old King Brady asked the girl.

"No, sir. But her daughter is."

"We'd like to see her on important business."

"Come inside, if you please."

She ushered them into the parlor and asked:

"What name?"

"The Bradys."

"Wait here, sir."

She left the room and they silently followed her.

Pushing open the door of the back parlor the girl said:

"Miss Savoy--the Bradys--"

"At your service!" added Harry.

And they strode into the room where Clara La Croix sat.




CHAPTER XIII.

A HUMAN SHIELD.


It was a beautifully furnished bedroom and the girl smuggler sat by the
window reading a novel when the detectives rushed in at her.

She was a cool, level-headed girl, and seemed to possess a remarkable set
of nerves for she did not look at all startled by their entrance.

Meeting the detectives' look with a cool stare, she asked, quietly:

"Well, gentlemen, what can I do for you?"

Then seeing the astonished servant lingering at the door, she added:

"You may go, Hattie."

The servant closed the door and vanished.

Old King Brady strode over to her and exclaimed:

"We want those smuggled diamonds."

"Really, you are provoking. I have no smuggled diamonds."

"But you know where they are!"

"Do I?"

"Yes. You fooled us once, very cleverly, by passing them to the hotel
hall-boy, but you shan't do so again, I can tell you."

She laughed as if enjoying a good joke.

"Well," she said, finally, "evasions are useless I see."

"Perfectly!"

"Do you want me to be frank with you?"

"My dear young lady, lies ain't going to do you any earthly good."

"The gems you are after are in my father's possession."

"We know that much already."

"To get them you must first get him."

"That's manifest."

"As for smuggling them onto American soil, none of us did that."

"But you caused one of your spies to do so for you."

"Admitted."

"And you have them now."

"So we have."

"That makes you as guilty as if you did the work of smuggling yourself."

"So I presume. We connived the trick, for our own benefit, to cheat the
Custom House. We ain't denying that. In fact, it's going to be a big thing
for us. Now, we don't wish to be pestered with your persecutions any
longer."

"I don't see how you can help yourself."

"We do."

"How?"

"Name your price to quit."

"You mean to bribe us off, eh?"

"That's about the size of it."

"We are not to be bought."

"Humbug! I never knew a Custom House officer to refuse."

"We ain't of that stamp, young lady."

She looked at him incredulously a moment, and saw by the stern look in his
deep gray eyes that he meant what he said.

It seemed to unnerve her for a moment.

She reflected and finally asked:

"Are you determined?"

"Absolutely!"

"You are bound to hound us?"

"We are, until we gain our point."

"This is astonishing."

"Are you aware that we have your mother in jail?"

A look of alarm swept over her face, the color fled from her cheeks and she
slowly rose to her feet and asked in strained tones:

"What! My mother in prison?"

"Yes, and you are going to join her in a few moments."

"Mr. Brady, you are very much mistaken."

"Why am I?"

"I'll show you, sir."

She gave utterance to a cough. It was a signal. Instantly the door of an
ante-room flew open. In the opening stood four men. They were the spies.

Each one was armed with a revolver.

These weapons were aimed at the Bradys and the girl laughed outright when
she saw the involuntary expressions of astonishment that swept over their
features.

"Quite a surprise, isn't it?" she asked in grim tones.

"We are in a trap!" Harry muttered.

"That's the situation!" said the girl, quietly. "If you move hand or foot,
you'll get shot. Those men never miss their mark. At such short range they
could kill you even if they were not expert shots."

The Bradys saw the force of her reasoning.

In a word, they were helpless.

Neither attempted to draw a weapon in self-defense.

To do so would be to seal their doom.

An awkward silence ensued.

Old King Brady finally asked in gruff tones:

"Well, what are you going to do about it?"

"Make prisoners of you and hold you until we have disposed of the
diamonds," quickly replied Clara.

The detectives looked disgusted.

"Shall we resist?" muttered Harry, desperately.

"No. It would be folly to attempt it," his partner replied.

Old King Brady was not so fiery and impetuous as the boy; he was more slow,
deliberate and cool in the face of danger.

He saw that the smugglers had concluded to throw off the mask and make no
further pretenses.

That meant bitter warfare.

He had no plan to suggest, and the girl exclaimed:

"Come in and bind them, Jean."

One of the men entered.

He was the man who had done the smuggling.

Walking over to the detectives, he said to them in low tones:

"If you resist, my friends will fire."

"We don't intend to," replied Old King Brady.

"Then I'll relieve you of your own handcuffs to secure you."

He felt in the old detective's pocket, brought out the steel bracelets and
snapped them on the detective.

Young King Brady was very restless.

To submit without a fight was more than he could bear.

His obstinacy suddenly got the best of his good judgment, and he made up
his mind to give them a tussle.

Leaping beside the girl he seized her, swung her around between himself and
the other men and cried:

"If you fire, you'll hit this girl!"

Clara gave a shriek.

"Harry!" roared Old King Brady in some dismay.

The men in the doorway dared not fire.

Jean, fearing an attack, plunged across the room in tending to get out of
danger in the hall.

"Let me go!" gasped the girl.

"Give up my advantage? Never!" panted the boy, a reckless, daring light
gleaming in his eyes.

He was close to the open window.

At a glance he saw a way to escape.

Unaided, he could not expect to arrest these men and the girl, for Old King
Brady was rendered powerless.

The yard was only eight feet below.

"Can you jump out the window?" he asked his partner.

"They'll fire if I budge."

This remark was certainly true.

While Harry had the advantage of using the girl as a shield, the four
Canadians held the old detective at their mercy.

Harry drew his pistol.

The girl began to struggle to get free.

"Keep still!" said the boy in threatening tones. "If any harm befalls my
partner, I'll put a bullet in you, young woman!"

The terrible earnestness of his voice alarmed her.

"You wouldn't injure a lady, would you?" she asked, appealing to his
manhood. "No gentleman would do that."

"You are only a criminal," he replied coldly, "and as it's a case of our
lives or yours, I wouldn't hesitate to shoot you to save ourselves."

Detectives are not sentimental.

On the contrary, their work makes them harsh.

Harry wanted to scare the girl and he succeeded well, for she remained
passive, and burst into tears.

The boy quickly saw his advantage and cried:

"Now, if any of your gang attempts to injure us, I'll kill you!"

As he spoke, he placed the muzzle of his pistol against her head, turned
her around and backed over to Old King Brady.

"Come!" he whispered. "We'll use her as a shield and back over to the door.
They'll bitterly rue it if they fire!"

The four spies looked desperate and one of them spoke to the girl in French
as the detectives retreated, holding her between them and their enemies.
The girl replied in English, saying:

"Never mind me. We must not let them escape. Tackle them."

Obeying her, they rushed toward the officers.

Harry aimed his pistol at them and fired twice.

"Go for the door!" he yelled.

And hurling the girl against the four Canadians, he and his partner rushed
out into the hall. The door was locked.




CHAPTER XIV.

ON HARLEM BRIDGE.


"Upstairs with you!" gasped Harry. "We can't get out the front door."

Old King Brady saw that the girl had collided with the four smugglers and
they all fell in a heap upon the parlor floor.

The detective rushed up the stairs.

On the top landing Old King Brady panted:

"Unlock these handcuffs!"

Harry obeyed in an instant.

Just then the gang came rushing from the parlor, and were about to ascend
the stairs when Harry opened fire on them.

Bang! Bang! Bang! went three shots.

He was a dead shot and could have killed those desperadoes had he been
inclined to. But he merely shot to wound them.

The yells of pain that followed showed how true his aim was.

Two of the Canadians were hit.

A stampede among them ensued.

Back to the parlor they rushed, swearing and groaning, and the detectives
laughed at them, for the tables were now turned.

The Bradys had the advantage.

At the head of those stairs they could have held an army at bay.

Old King Brady got his handcuffs from his wrists, put them in his pocket
and withdrew his own revolver.

"By thunder!" he muttered. "I'm glad you made that dash, Harry."

"We would now be helpless prisoners if I hadn't."

Just then several lodgers stuck their heads out of the doors of their
rooms, alarmed at the shots and yells.

Seeing the two armed detectives, they shouted with alarm, withdrew into the
rooms, banged their doors shut and some rushed to the windows, flung them
open and screamed:

"Murder! Murder! Help! Police!"

The cries startled the neighborhood.

For a moment everyone was in an uproar. A big crowd gathered before the
house and several policemen came running to the scene from different
directions, looking for trouble.

A suspicious silence ensued down on the parlor floor.

"Do you suppose they've skipped?" asked Harry.

"I'm going to venture down and see," replied his partner.

They dashed down the stairs, holding their pistols in readiness for use,
and ran into the parlor.

It was empty.

Passing back into Clara's room, they found it vacant.

"Gone!" exclaimed Harry.

"Not by the front," replied his partner. "The door and windows are locked."

"Let's try the basement."

Down they ran, nervous over the disappearance of the smugglers and in the
dining-room found the mulatto girl Hattie.

She sat in terror, with her face buried in her hands, and when she saw them
rush in with drawn pistols, she shrieked:

"Oh, don't kill me! Don't kill me!"

"Where did that Savoy girl and the four men go?" sternly asked Old King
Brady, glancing around the room.

"Out the back door."

"Into the yard?"

"Yes, sir."

The police began pounding on the front doors just as the Bradys rushed out
into the rear yard.

Just as they emerged. Harry saw the figure of Jean disappearing over the
back fence and pointing at it, he cried excitedly:

"There they go!"

"After them!" roared Old King Brady.

They rushed across the yard.

Over the fence they climbed like a couple of cats, and leaping into the
yard of an adjoining tenement, they ran for the hall.

Blood spots on the flags left a plain trail.

The wounded men had dropped it in their flight, and the detectives easily
traced the stains through the hall into the street.

Hearing wild yells, they saw a baker's wagon dashing along at a furious
gallop, and saw Clara and her friends in it.

The owner of the wagon was racing out of his store.

A small boy had told him that a gang had stolen his horse and wagon and it
was his yells the detectives heard.

He was a fat German and he paused in the middle of the street, wildly
waving his arms and crying in despairing tones:

"_Ach Gott!_ I vos robbed! Dey shtole mein horse und vagon!"

The Bradys started off on a run after the vehicle.

Block after block was covered until the wagon, far in advance of the
detectives, swung around the corner into West Broadway.

Here, panting and foam-covered, the horse was reined in.

The fugitives alighted.

"We are going to lose them now," groaned Old King Brady.

"I don't see why," returned Harry, breathlessly.

"Don't you see they're going for the elevated?"

"Oh, gee, so they are!"

The five rushed up the stairs on the downtown side, just as a train pulled
into the station.

After them ran the Bradys, hoping fervently that they would miss the train.
But they were doomed to disappointment.

When the detectives reached the platform, the train was steaming away and
they saw their enemies in the last car.

"That's the end of them!" said Old King Brady.

"Can't we have them headed off by telephoning down to the Battery station?"
eagerly asked the boy.

"Might try."

Down the street they went and as there was a public telephone near by, they
sent the message down.

Then they took the next train down.

The train on which the fugitives stopped was yet at the Battery station and
they found the gateman of the last car and Harry asked him:

"Did you notice where the four men in black, and a hatless girl of sixteen
who got on at the Bleecker street station alighted?"

"Oh, yes. I remember them. They only rode one station and got off at Grand
street."

This reply gave the Bradys a shock.

"We are baffled!" exclaimed Old King Brady in disgust.

"They're a shrewd set," Harry added.

They spoke to the stationmaster too, but he said they had not come down to
the Battery and repeated what the gateman said.

The Bradys rode back to Grand street.

Here they made careful and endless inquiries.

All the information they could get came from the boy who had the news-stand
on the corner.

He had seen the fugitives.

They had boarded a Grand street car going eastward.

He did not notice the number of the car, but thought the officers would
find it down at the ferry.

Hiring a cab they were driven fast.

Reaching the ferry, several blue cars were found.

Inquiry among the conductors followed, and they presently discovered the
one on whose car Clara and the spies had ridden.

He informed them that the fugitives alighted at the Bowery with transfer
tickets on the uptown side.

Back went the Bradys to the Bowery.

"If we stick to their trail long enough," commented Harry, "we may finally
locate them. But it's going to be a hard job."

"We'll beat the car they're in by taking the elevated," said the old
detective as he dismissed the cab. "Up at the stables we may learn which
car passed Grand street quarter of an hour ago."

"It's worth while trying."

So up they went.

When they reached the stable, they were disgusted to find that the cars
which passed the corner of Grand and the Bowery about the time the
smugglers boarded one, were all gone ten minutes before.

But one more course was open to the detectives.

That was to proceed to Harlem bridge on the elevated and make another
effort to head off the fugitives at the terminal of the road.

Once more they started.

Each defeat whetted their appetite more to capture the fugitives.

The elevated cars passed many of the surface cars, and when the 129th
street station was reached, they went down to the street.

Just as they were about to start for the surface cars, to begin making
inquiries, Harry glanced over at the Harlem bridge.

To his surprise and joy he saw Clara and the four spies hurrying over the
structure on foot.

"There they are at last!" he cried, pointing at the party.

Old King Brady was startled.

He saw them the next moment.

"Come on!" he cried.

Off on a run they went, and passed out on the bridge.

The fugitives were half way over the structure and two of the men who were
wounded in the legs were limping painfully.

Rushing up behind them noiselessly, Harry and his partner each grasped a
man by the neck.




CHAPTER XV.

PUMPING A PRISONER.


"Gentlemen, you are our prisoners!" cried Harry.

The bursting of a bomb could not have startled the smugglers more.

With cries of affright, they glanced around and seeing who was attacking
them, they were more startled than ever.

The detectives had grasped the wounded men.

Seeing their peril, the two uninjured Canadians rushed to the rescue.

With one accord, the detectives hurled their prisoners to the planks of the
bridge and sprang forward eagerly to meet their foes.

The next moment the smugglers drew their pistols.

Before they could fire a shot, the detectives let their fists fly, and in a
moment more a terrific fight was going on.

During the fracas Clara escaped.

Bang! went Old King Brady's powerful fist against the jaw of one of the
villains, and it knocked the man flat on his back.

He was stunned.

As he fell close to the wounded man whom Harry had flung down, the old
officer whipped out his handcuffs and linked the pair together.

Harry had kicked the pistol out of his opponent's hand.

The man now had to depend upon his fists.

Both he and Young King Brady met with a crash and were punching each other
furiously when the old detective arose.

It was Jean, the one who had smuggled the diamonds over the border, and
Harry was delighted over the discovery.

The young detective was a scientific boxer.

He warded off several heavy swings and gave Jean an upper cut on the mouth
that split his lips open.

The man recoiled, but Harry followed him up like a bull dog.

He received a painful blow in the stomach, and caught Jean's foot as he
aimed a swinging kick at the boy.

Harry clung to the man's ankle.

Giving it a jerk, he upset the Canadian's balance and Jean fell with a
crash, and rolled over.

He was just going to rise when the boy pounced on him, and a fierce
struggle began for the mastery.

Old King Brady would have gone to his pupil's aid had not the other wounded
man drawn a pistol and opened fire on him.

A bullet whistled past the old detective's head.

He sprang at the man just as he was about to fire a second shot and
grasping him by the wrist, turned the pistol aside.

The ball was spent harmlessly in the air.

Jabbering in French, the man made an effort to wrench the weapon free, but
Old King Brady was too quick for him.

He brought down his fist on the rascal's arm.

The force of that blow was awful.

It numbed the arm and the pistol fell from his nerveless fingers.

The next moment Old King Brady's fist caught him on the nose, almost
smashing that organ flat, and as the Canadian bit the dust, the detective
landed on top of him like a tiger seizing its prey.

"I've got you now!" exclaimed the old detective, fiercely.

"Mercy!" groaned the man.

"Roll over."

"Yes--yes."

"Place your hands behind your back."

"Yes."

"Now keep still, or I'll strangle you."

Old King Brady tied the man with his handkerchief and rose.

By the time he got upon his feet, Harry had overpowered Jean and had the
bracelets on his wrists.

"Victory!" chuckled the boy.

"Four," said the old detective. "That ain't a bad haul!"

"But the girl has escaped."

"Never mind, Harry. We are well paid for our work."

The shots, noise, fight and general excitement, had brought a crowd rushing
to the spot. There was a policeman among them.

But they arrived too late to be of any assistance.

Rushing up to the Bradys officiously, the panting policeman asked:

"What's the matter here?"

"Nothing," replied Harry.

"Do you call that nothing?" asked the policeman, grabbing the boy.

"Here--you!" exclaimed Old King Brady, showing his badge. "Let go that
detective and ring up the wagon so we can run in these prisoners. Step
lively now, and don't try to be too smart."

"Detective?" asked the policeman.

Harry showed his badge.

The policeman wilted, and the crowd laughed at him.

Without a word he hurried away to order the patrol wagon.

It soon arrived.

The prisoners were lifted aboard and accompanied by the Bradys, were driven
to the nearest police station.

Formal complaints were entered against the four Canadians and when they
were locked up, the detectives departed.

In the street Harry said to his partner:

"After all, we haven't accomplished such a lot."

"Why not?" demanded Old King Brady, in surprise.

"Because we've only got Mrs. La Croix and the four spies."

"Well, ain't they valuable?"

"Of course. But they are of the least consequence in this case. We don't
know where the diamonds are, and both La Croix and his daughter are yet at
large."

"Oh, we'll find them before long. As for the diamonds, why, La Croix can't
offer them to any big dealer in this city, Boston, Philadelphia, or
Chicago, but what we will be informed of the fact."

"He hasn't made any effort to dispose of them yet, then."

"No. We would have heard of it, if he had."

"There are plenty of unscrupulous people who would buy them in small lots,
and thus he'd gradually get rid of the whole lot."

"That ain't La Croix's game. He expects to save $35,000 duty on those
gems, besides about $15,000 profit which he expects to make. He's got to do
his work quick to gain his money. With a stake of $50,000 to work for, he's
going to give us a hard fight."

"Of course. Can't you put the screws on the prisoners?"

"Make them confess?"

"One of the bunch might squeal."

"Perhaps, if we give them the Third Degree."

"Try it. They must know where the Frenchman and his daughter are."

"I shall. It's our only chance to locate the diamonds."

They went home and laid out a plan.

Before the prisoners were brought to court next morning, the Bradys
appeared at the police station and had a talk with the captain.

He fell in with their views and said:

"You are at liberty to pump the prisoners here, if you can."

Accompanied by the doorkeeper, the detectives went back to the cell
occupied by Jean.

The man was nervously pacing to and fro and glanced at the detectives with
an ugly scowl, when they entered.

Pausing before them he demanded:

"Have you come to gloat over my misery?"

"No. We are not so cruel. All we want is some information."

"What about, Old King Brady?"

"The smuggled diamonds."

"And if I refuse?"

"We'll arrest your bride!"

The man turned pale, for the detective had touched his weakest point.

Grasping Old King Brady's arm, he said in appealing tones:

"Don't do that. She is innocent. Why drag her into my trouble?"

"She was with you when the diamonds were smuggled."

"True. But she didn't know anything about it. She didn't have anything to
do with the work. I alone am the guilty party."

"That don't make any difference to us. If you don't make a clean breast of
the matter, I'll pull her in. That settles it!"

The Canadian pondered a few moments.

Then he said with a sigh:

"Well, I may as well tell you La Croix has got them. You'd find it out
anyway, the way you are following up this case."

"Of course I will. And what's more, we know he's got them. But what I want
to know most of all, is, where is La Croix?"

"At the Astor House."

"Under what name?"

"His wife's maiden name: Savoy."

"Does Clara know it?"

"Certainly."

"Are any of the diamonds sold yet?"

"Not that I know. But they will be."

"When?"

"To-day."

"He has found a purchaser for the lot?"

"Exactly. They are to meet in the Astor House to-day at twelve and end the
sale."

Old King Brady glanced hastily at his watch.

It was then half-past eleven and to reach the Astor House would take
three-quarters of an hour!




CHAPTER XVI.

THE CAPTURE OF LA CROIX.


Leaving the prisoner's cell, the Bradys hastened from the police station
and hastily getting aboard a City Hall train on the elevated road, they
went downtown.

"As it takes about three-quarters of an hour to get down to the bridge,"
said Harry, in anxious tones, "I'm afraid we will reach the Astor House too
late to prevent the consummation of that diamond sale."

"Well, that depends upon how long it is going to take La Croix and his
customer to arrive at a bargain," said Old King Brady, quietly.

He was not very nervous over the matter.

Taking a chew of plug tobacco, he settled back comfortably in his seat,
drew a newspaper from his pocket and began to read the news.

Harry watched him restlessly.

The boy was very impatient.

"I can't understand how you can take it so cool," he muttered.

"What's the good of fuming and fretting? It isn't going to hurry us, is
it?"

"No. But La Croix may beat us."

"Keep cool. The more you worry, the warmer you'll get."

That ride downtown was torture to Young King Brady, and there wasn't a
minute he did not have his watch in his hand and kept counting the minutes
as they slipped by.

It was with a deep sense of relief that he saw the train stop at the bridge
and he was the first one off the cars.

"Quarter past twelve," he growled, feverishly, "and it will take us five or
ten minutes longer to reach the hotel."

"Have patience--" began Old King Brady.

"Can't do it. Let's run, or I'll get wild!"

They made rapid time down Park Row and crossing past the post-office, they
hastened into the hotel.

Going to the desk, they asked the clerk:

"Is Mr. Savoy here?"

"Yes. Room 76. Name, please."

"He's a friend. We wish to surprise him. Is he in?"

"Oh, yes. I'll send a boy up with you."

"Anyone call on him to-day?"

"Not a soul."

"Not a soul?" blankly asked Harry.

"Except yourselves," laughed the clerk.

Old King Brady burst into a hearty peal of laughter, but not at what the
clerk said, for he was laughing at Harry for being so impatient.

The boy drew a deep breath and wiped the sweat from his forehead.

"Thank fortune, we're in time!" he muttered.

"You've had all your stewing for nothing."

"I'm mighty glad of it. His customer must be late."

"All the better for us. This experience will teach you a good lesson in our
profession--namely, never to get excited."

"I'll try to profit by it," said Harry, quietly.

Just then a boy came running up and the clerk said:

"Show these gentlemen up to 76--Mr. Savoy's room."

Just as they were about to follow the boy, a tall, thin man, without
whiskers, came along and seeing the Bradys, gave a slight start.

The Bradys got a good look at him before he turned his back to them and
Harry clutched his companion's arm and whispered:

"By jove, that's Andrew Gibson, the Custom House inspector, in disguise."

"Yes," assented Old King Brady, nodding, "I recognized him. He knew us,
too, I could tell at a glance. That man hates us. I wonder what he is doing
here. Can he be after La Croix, too?"

Harry was startled at the very suggestion.

"He knows La Croix is a professional smuggler," he remarked, "and I
wouldn't be surprised if he got on to the man living here. He may be trying
to nab him as we are doing."

"He won't cheat us out of our prey this way, Harry."

Just then they heard the inspector say to the clerk:

"Send up my card to Mr. Savoy. He expects me. I was to meet him at twelve
o'clock on some business, but was detained."

The Bradys darted startled glances at each other.

Gibson's remark exposed his hand.

He was the supposed jeweler with whom La Croix had been negotiating to sell
the contraband diamonds.

The Bradys had arrived just in time to prevent this man from cheating them
out of their legitimate prey.

Had they been delayed a few minutes longer Gibson would have had La Croix
under arrest and the smuggled diamonds in his possession.

After all their arduous work, he would have stepped in at the last moment
and gained the credit for the arrest.

It made the Bradys shiver to think of it.

Harry said to the hall-boy:

"Go ahead, as fast as you can!"

They hastened upstairs while the hotel clerk was writing Gibson's name on a
card, and the boy knocked at the door of No. 76.

"Who ees zat?" demanded La Croix's voice from within.

"Boy, sir."

"Ah! An' vat you vant?"

"Gentlemen to see you, sir."

"Yes. I expect him. Wait, I open ze door."

"Go!" whispered Harry to the boy.

The little fellow ran downstairs.

La Croix unlocked the door and stuck out his head.

"Come in, Meestair Geebson--" he began.

And the Bradys interrupted him by rushing against the door; it hit La Croix
on the shoulder, sending him reeling back into the room, and he gave a yell
as the detectives dashed in.

"_Par Dieu!_ Ze detectives!" he screamed.

Then he began to yell, swear, and rave in French, as he scrambled to his
feet, and the officers made a rush for him.

"Ze Bradys! Ze Bradys!" he shrieked.

At first they imagined these cries were due to his excitement. But when he
backed up against a door opening into an adjoining room with his arms
stretched out, they saw through his purpose.

"Harry!"

"Well?"

"He's warning some one in the next room."

"I'll see!"

The boy dashed out into the hall.

Old King Brady had his pistol in his hand.

Taking aim at the man's head, he roared in stern tones:

"Drop on your knees!"

"Oh, don't fiair!" yelled La Croix, obeying.

"Raise your hands!"

"Sairtainly, Monsieur."

"Now don't budge, or--"

He made a threatening gesture with the pistol at the wild-eyed Frenchman,
from whose face all vestige of color had fled.

"No! No!" gasped La Croix, imploringly.

Reaching his side, the detective handcuffed him.

Just then a boy knocked at the hall door.

"Who's there?" cried the old detective.

"Boy, sir."

"What do you want?"

"Mr. Gibson wants to see you, sir."

"Send him up."

"Yes, sir."

Just then the door between the two rooms was flung open and Harry strode
through with a puzzled look upon his face.

"No one in here," he announced.

A pleased smile crossed La Croix's face.

Observing it, Old King Brady exclaimed:

"Your daughter was in that room, wasn't she?"

"She was," admitted La Croix, "but she hear ze attack and escape."

"You warned her by yelling our names?"

"I deed, Monsieur."

"Confound you! Where are those diamonds?"

"Clara has got zem."

"Don't lie."

"Sairch ze place an' you see."

The Bradys complied, but failed to find the missing diamonds.

"I'll go after her!" cried Harry, hastily, and he rushed out.

A few moments after he had gone, Gibson came in, and a look of mingled
surprise, rage and jealousy crossed his face when he saw the situation of
affairs.

"How are you, Gibson?" laughed Old King Brady. "I've got La Croix!"

"You've cheated me!" snarled the inspector, furiously.

"Bless your heart, you've got the matter twisted. It was you interfering
with our game. We've been after this man two months. And you ain't going to
skim the cream off our hard work, I can tell you."

"You lie, Brady--"

An angry light sparkled in the old detective's eyes at this insult and he
doubled up his fist, strode over to the inspector and struck him in the
face.

"Don't you dare insult me, you cur!" he exclaimed.

Gibson reeled back swearing, and seeing the old detective coming at him
again, he rushed from the room shouting wildly:

"I'll pay you off for that blow!"




CHAPTER XVII.

RECOVERING THE DIAMONDS.


When Harry ran from La Croix's room, he passed Andrew Gibson in the hall,
and smiled when he thought of the man's coming surprise.

Racing downstairs, the boy made inquiries at the different entrances to the
hotel, for information about the girl smuggler.

A man had seen her go out the Vesey street door.

As he was interested in her pretty face, he watched her a few moments and
had seen her go hurrying over to Broadway.

She had kept on the west side of the street and was evidently going
downtown on foot in the dense crowd thronging the street.

With this meagre clew to follow, Harry hurried away.

"She had the gems," he muttered. "Perhaps she had an idea of selling them
quick to raise money to aid her parents, both of whom she now knows are in
trouble. She's a wise girl, and must certainly know that she would be
helpless to aid them without money. Money will give her power. It's
possible, therefore, that she's heading for the jewelry district, which is
near by. As the street is crowded with vehicles and she'd have to cross to
reach Maiden Lane or John street, she must have gone over under the
protection of a policeman. He would remember her and might post me. I'll
try all the big cops from here down to Wall street, if necessary."

Harry knew that the largest part of the time of these officers was spent at
escorting people across the crowded street.

He therefore began with the policeman at Fulton street, giving him an
accurate description of Clara, but the officer had not seen her.

On the corner of Dey street he met with the same result.

At Cortlandt street he gained a clew.

The officer there had piloted a girl over who answered her description and
said she had gone down the Lane on the north side.

Harry hastened down the great jewelry center.

He scrutinized every one he met.

As a general rule, excepting girls who are employed in the business houses
of the downtown section of the city, but few females frequent the side
streets.

In fact, so few pass through these streets, that when they do, they are
noticed by the numerous boys and business men thereabouts.

Harry was relying upon this curious, but true fact, to gain some news of
the girl he was pursuing.

He therefore did not hesitate to ask everyone with whom he came in contact
if they had seen such a girl as Clara was.

In some cases he received a negative answer, while in others, not a few
people admitted they had noticed her.

According to the latter information, he traced her to Nassau street, and an
Italian apple vender with a push-cart near the corner, said he had seen her
turn the corner and proceed toward John street.

Following up this clew, Harry met a man standing near the window of a
haberdasher's store who asserted that he had seen such a person go through
John street toward Broadway.

He averred that she had gone into a building near the corner and pointed
out the place to the young detective.

When Harry reached the building in question, he paused and studied the
business men's signs in the doorway.

One in particular attracted his attention, worded this way:

     "Cliquot & Co., Diamonds, Second Floor Front."

A curious smile flitted over the young detective's face and he passed into
the narrow hall and ascended the stairs muttering:

"I wonder if she's in there?"

In the upper hall he saw the name of the dealer in precious stones, painted
on the ground-glass window.

Harry opened the door and strode in.

He found himself in a small office containing two huge Herring safes,
guarded with burglar alarm cabinets. A long table covered with blue cloth
served as a counter. Near the front windows was a bookkeeper working at his
desk. At the rear a small compartment was partitioned off to serve as a
private office.

A fat little Frenchman was behind the counter, but Harry did not see any
signs of Clara La Croix.

A feeling of disappointment overcame him.

The salesman bowed, looked at him inquiringly, and asked politely:

"Well, sir, what can I do for you to-day?"

"Is Mr. Cliquot in?" asked Harry, in low tones.

The salesman smiled and shook his head.

"No," he replied. "He is dead."

"Dead? But the name on your sign--"

"Is only kept as a firm name. His partner is in."

"Are you the gentleman?"

"No. His name is Decker. But he is engaged at present."

"I wish to see him personally."

"Won't you sit down?"

"Thank you. I am in a great hurry."

"In that case, perhaps I can arrange an interview."

"I won't detain him a minute."

The clerk passed into the little private office, and Harry heard the low
hum of voices. Then the proprietor said:

"Send him in."

The salesman reappeared, nodded, smiled and said:

"Go right in, sir, through that door in the partition."

Harry pushed the door open.

It was a small room containing a desk at which sat a bald-headed, little,
old man with a mass of diamonds spread before him on the desk.

He had a magnifying glass in his eye, a pair of tweezers in his hand, and a
small delicate scale in front of him.

Evidently he had been weighing and sizing up the stones.

In a chair beside him sat Clara La Croix!

As Harry stepped forward with a smile on his face, their glances met.

She half started from her chair, uttering a smothered cry of intense
dismay, and her face turned as pale as death.

"Young King Brady!" she gasped, faintly.

"Clara, I've run you down at last!"

She fairly groaned.

Her defeat was hard to bear.

"This is terrible!" she muttered.

Harry pointed at the diamonds in front of the astonished dealer.

"Ain't those the smuggled diamonds?" he asked.

Before she could reply, Mr. Decker sprang to his feet, crying in alarm:

"Good heavens! Are these smuggled diamonds?"

"Yes," replied Harry, with a nod.

"No wonder she wanted to sell them so cheap!"

"Mr. Decker, I am a Custom House officer."

"Ah!"

"This girl is a smuggler."

"I see!"

"We've been on her trail since she brought those gems from Holland to
Canada, and thence over the border without paying duty on them."

"The little wretch!"

"Are you a party to this deal?"

"No, indeed!" emphatically replied the dealer. "I'm a victim. She came in a
while ago and said her father died, leaving a stock of diamonds to her as
he had been an importer. As she offered to sell them very cheap, I was
selecting a lot to buy, when you came in."

"I believe you, sir."

"I am a respectable business man."

"Oh, there can't be any doubt of that. This girl is developing into one of
the most expert crooks in the country. For her own good it's a blessing
that I've caught her before she gets any worse."

"That's a fact."

"Kindly gather up those gems in a package for me."

"Certainly. I'm glad you arrived in time to save me from buying goods of
this kind. I have no desire to do any crooked business."

He made a package of the diamonds.

Harry then turned his attention to Clara who was weeping bitterly and said
to her in low tones:

"There's no use playing the baby act. We've got your father, mother and the
four spies. You and the diamonds are the last of the bunch."

"But I don't want to go to prison," she sobbed.

"I can't help that. You've broken the law and now you have got to take the
consequence of your evildoing."

"Can't you let me go?"

"No."

"I'll give you all those diamonds if you do."

"My dear girl, I'm going to take them anyway."

"But I mean for keeps. They're worth $250,000."

"I wouldn't let you go for ten times that amount."

"Very well," she replied, despairingly, "take me."

"If you'll go along peacefully I won't handcuff you and I'll take you in a
cab so people won't be staring."

"You are very kind. I'll do anything you ask."

Harry took the diamonds from Mr. Decker and ranging himself alongside of
the girl he led her down to the street.

A cab was procured and they drove away.




CHAPTER XVIII.

CONCLUSION.


After Andrew Gibson rushed from the room in the Astor House, Old King Brady
walked over to Paul La Croix and asked him:

"Were you going to sell him your diamonds?"

"Yes, sair," admitted the terrified prisoner, "but, by gar, I deed not know
zat he was wong Custom House inspectair."

"Well, that's exactly what he was."

"Hark! What eez zat?"

"Gibson in the hall, yelling bloody murder."

"Ze man ees crazy!"

Old King Brady was puzzled by the defeated inspector's actions. But he soon
was destined to learn what the man meant by it.

His yells brought up a policeman at the head of a crowd.

"What's the fuss about?" demanded the patrolman.

"See this badge?" demanded Gibson.

"Yes. You're a Custom House officer."

"That's what I am. I'm after a smuggler."

"Well, what of it?"

"He's in that room. Just as I was going to arrest him a friend of his
rushed in, armed with a gun and gave me a punch in the eye."

"I see he did."

"Well, I want you to arrest that fellow, so I can take in the smuggler."

"Very well. Come and point him out to me."

Gibson rushed to the door and flung it open.

Striking a dramatic attitude and pointing at Old King Brady, he shouted in
ferocious tones:

"There stands the man. Arrest him!"

Old King Brady was astonished to hear this, and bristling up with just
indignation, he demanded:

"Of what does this man accuse me?"

"Interfering with an officer in the discharge of his duty."

Instantly comprehending Gibson's game, the old detective burst out
laughing, and finally asked:

"How did I interfere with him?"

"He was arresting yonder man, he says."

"Lock him up, officer!" shouted the inspector. "Lock him up!"

The policeman took a firmer grip on his club and made a rush at Old King
Brady, whom he grasped by the collar.

"You're my prisoner!" he exclaimed. "If you resist, I'll club you!"

While this was going on, Gibson grabbed La Croix and dragged him over to
the door, exclaiming:

"You come with me!"

He designed to arrest the man and get the credit for it, while Old King
Brady was fighting with the policeman.

But his plot was doomed to dismal failure.

Old King Brady flung back the lapel of his vest, and exclaimed:

"Do you know I'm Old King Brady, the Secret Service detective?"

"What!" gasped the policeman, glaring at his badge.

"If you don't believe it, you can come to the station when I pull in my
prisoner. That fellow is a Custom House inspector all right, but he's
sailing under false colors. We were both after the same man, as I am
working for the Custom House. I caught the man, and now he wants to take
the glory of the capture. See through his game?"

The policeman did.

He released the detective.

Then he made a rush at the spiteful inspector, and poking and jabbing him
with his club, he put Gibson out of the hotel.

The inspector finding himself baffled, departed in a fury for the whole
crowd was laughing and jeering at him, and one of the spectators threatened
to report his meanness to the Collector.

Old King Brady now seized La Croix.

Accompanied by the policeman he went to the Church street station and there
met Harry, who had just brought in Clara.

The prisoners were put in cells and the Bradys departed.

Going straight to the Custom House, they were ushered into the Collector's
room and gave him the details of their work from start to finish.

When Harry handed over the seized diamonds he was delighted, and praised
the pair in the most glowing terms for their efficient work.

He declared that they had broken up the most dangerous gang of smugglers
who ever infested the United States, and expressed his regret that he was
unable to keep them permanently on his staff.

Gibson, he declared, would be dismissed in disgrace.

The detectives then went to Secret Service headquarters and reported to
their own chief, saying their work for the Custom House was finished.

Soon after that the trial and conviction of the La Croixs and their
accomplices took place.

It is safe to assume that they got the extreme penalty of the law upon the
evidence furnished by the Bradys.

When they were disposed of, the Secret Service detectives returned to their
regular duties on the force.

It was not long after that, when one of the most startling events in their
lives occurred. This happened when they were detailed upon a Secret Service
case. The adventures they met with were of the most thrilling description.
Their lives were threatened by dangers, and they did some of the most
marvellous work ever known in the department. But want of space here
prohibits our giving the details in this story. We have reserved it for a
new tale which will be issued in our next number.




THE END.

Read "THE BRADYS AND THE RUNAWAY BOYS; OR, SHADOWING THE CIRCUS SHARPERS,"
which will be the next number (80) of "Secret Service."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Bradys and the Girl Smuggler
by Francis W. Doughty

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BRADYS AND THE GIRL SMUGGLER ***

***** This file should be named 16919.txt or 16919.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/9/1/16919/

Produced by David Starner, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

