The Project Gutenberg EBook of St. Nicholas Magazine for Boys and Girls,
Vol. 5, September 1878, No. 11, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: St. Nicholas Magazine for Boys and Girls, Vol. 5, September 1878, No. 11

Author: Various

Editor: Mary Mapes Dodge

Release Date: December 28, 2005 [EBook #17409]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ST. NICHOLAS MAGAZINE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, LM Bornath, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration: SHIPWRECKED. Drawn by J.W. Champney.]




ST. NICHOLAS.

VOL. V.
SEPTEMBER, 1878.
No. 11.

[Copyright, 1878, by Scribner & Co.]




FERN-SEED.

BY CELIA THAXTER.


  She filled her shoes with fern-seed,
    This foolish little Nell,
  And in the summer sunshine
    Went dancing down the dell.
  For whoso treads on fern-seed,--
    So fairy stories tell,--
  Becomes invisible at once,
    So potent is its spell.
  A frog mused by the brook-side:
    "Can you see me!" she cried;
  He leaped across the water,
    A flying leap and wide.
  "Oh, that's because I asked him!
    I must not speak," she thought,
  And skipping o'er the meadow
    The shady wood she sought.
  The squirrel chattered on the bough,
    Nor noticed her at all,
  The birds sang high, the birds sang low,
    With many a cry and call.
  The rabbit nibbled in the grass,
    The snake basked in the sun,
  The butterflies, like floating flowers,
    Wavered and gleamed and shone.
  The spider in his hammock swung,
    The gay grasshoppers danced;
  And now and then a cricket sung,
    And shining beetles glanced.
  'Twas all because the pretty child
    So softly, softly trod,--
  You could not hear a foot-fall
    Upon the yielding sod.
  But she was filled with such delight--
    This foolish little Nell!
  And with her fern-seed laden shoes,
    Danced back across the dell.
  "I'll find my mother now," she thought,
    "What fun 't will be to call
  'Mamma! mamma!' while she can see
    No little girl at all!"
  She peeped in through the window,
    Mamma sat in a dream:
  About the quiet, sun-steeped house
    All things asleep did seem.
  She stept across the threshold;
    So lightly had she crept,
  The dog upon the mat lay still,
    And still the kitty slept.
  Patient beside her mother's knee
    To try her wondrous spell
  Waiting she stood, till all at once,
    Waking, mamma cried "Nell!
  Where have you been? Why do you gaze
    At me with such strange eyes?"
  "But can you see me, mother dear?"
    Poor Nelly faltering cries.
  "See you? Why not, my little girl?
    Why should mamma be blind?"
  And little Nell unties her shoes,
    With fairy fern-seed lined,
  And tosses up into the air
    A little powdery cloud,
  And frowns upon it as it falls,
    And murmurs half aloud,
  "It wasn't true, a word of it,
    About the magic spell!
  I never will believe again
    What fairy stories tell!"




MACKEREL-FISHING.

BY ROBERT ARNOLD.


When I was a boy, I lived on the rugged coast of New England. The sea
abounded in cod, hake, mackerel, and many other kinds of fish. The
mackerel came in "schools" in late summer, and sometimes were very
plentiful. One day, my uncle James determined to go after some of these
fish, with his son George, and invited me to go with them. We were to
start before day-break the next morning. I went to bed that night with
an impatient heart, and it was a long time before I could go to sleep.
After I did get asleep, I dreamed of the whale that swallowed Jonah, and
all kinds of fishes, big and little. I was awakened by somebody calling,
in a very loud voice, "Robert! Robert!" I jumped out of bed, with my
eyes not more than half opened, and fell over the chair on which I had
put my clothes. This made me open my eyes, and I soon realized that the
voice proceeded from my cousin George, who had come to arouse me for the
fishing-voyage.

I dressed as quickly as possible, and went downstairs. All was quiet in
the house except the old clock ticking in the kitchen. I went
out-of-doors and found the stars still shining. It was half-past three
o'clock in the morning. There was no sign of daylight, and even the
cocks had not begun to crow. In the darkness I espied George, who said,
"Come, it is time to start. Father is waiting for you."

We walked across the fields to my uncle's house. Taking each a basket
and knife, we began our journey, and soon entered the pine-woods. As we
walked along in the darkness, we could scarcely see each other or the
path. The wind was sighing mournfully among the tree-tops, and, as we
gazed upward, we could see the stars twinkling in the clear sky.

We soon emerged from the forest, and came to a sandy plain. Before us
was the ocean, just discernible. There were two or three lights,
belonging to vessels that were anchored near the shore. We could see the
waves and hear their murmur, as they broke gently upon the shore. A soft
breeze was blowing from the west, and the sea was almost as smooth as a
pond.

When we reached the beach, we found that it was low water. The boat was
at high-water mark. What should we do? We did as the fishermen in that
region always do in the same circumstances--took two rollers, perhaps
six inches in diameter, lifted the bow of the boat, put one of the
rollers under it, and the other upon the sand about eight feet in front
of it. We then pushed the boat until it reached the second roller, and
rolled it upon that until the other was left behind. Then the first was
put in front of the boat, and so we kept on until our craft reached the
water. Uncle James and George took the oars, and I sat in the stern,
with the tiller in my hand, to steer.

We got out over the breakers without difficulty, and rowed toward the
fishing-ground. It is queer that fishermen call the place where they
fish, "the ground," but that is only one of the many queer things that
they do. By this time, daylight had come. The eastern sky was gorgeous
with purple and red, and hues that no mortal can describe. Soon a red
arc appeared, and then the whole glorious sun, looking more grand and
beautiful than can be thought of by one who has never seen the sun rise
over the sea.

"How glorious!" I exclaimed, impulsively.

"Yes; it is a first-rate morning for fishing," said my uncle, whose mind
was evidently upon business, and not upon the beauties of nature.

After rowing about three miles, we stopped, and prepared for fishing.
Each of us had two lines, about twenty feet long. The hooks were about
as big as large trout-hooks. Pewter had been run around the upper part
of them, so that "sinkers" were not required. The pewter answered a
double purpose; it did duty as a sinker, and, being bright, attracted
the notice of the fish. Uncle James had brought with him some clams,
which we cut from their shells and put on the hooks. We threw in our
lines and waited for a bite. We did not wait long, for, in less than a
minute, George cried out, in the most excited manner, "There's a fish on
my hook!"

"Pull, then!" shouted his father.

He was too agitated to pull at first, but, at length, managed to haul in
his line, and, behold, a slender fish, about eight inches long, showing
all the colors of the rainbow, as he held it up in the morning sun! It
was our first mackerel. While admiring George's prize, I suddenly became
aware of a lively tug at one of my own lines. I pulled it in, and found
that I had caught a fish just like the other, only a little larger. No
sooner had I taken it from the hook than my other line was violently
jerked. I hauled it in hurriedly, and on the end of it was--not a
mackerel, but a small, brown fish, with a big head and an enormous
mouth. I was about to take it from the hook when my uncle called, "Look
out!" He seized it, and showed me the long, needle-like projections on
its back, with which, but for his interference, my hand might have been
badly wounded. This unwelcome visitor was a sculpin. Sculpins are very
numerous in this region.

[Illustration: MACKEREL-BOATS.]

Uncle James explained how I happened to catch one of them. They swim at
a much greater depth than mackerel usually do, and, while I was busy
with one line, the other had sunk some twelve or fifteen feet down where
the sculpins dwelt.

When mackerel are inclined to take the bait, they are usually close to
the surface of the water. They began now to bite with the greatest
eagerness, and gave us all the work that we could do. As soon as I had
taken a fish from one line, the other demanded my attention. I did not
have to _wait_ for a bite. Indeed, as soon as the hook was thrown into
the water, several mackerel would dart for it. As George said, they were
very anxious to be caught. This was very different from my previous
experience in fishing for trout in the little brooks near my home. I
used to fish all day and not get more than two or three trout, and often
I would not get one. Those that I did catch were not more than four or
five inches long. I guess some of my boy readers have had the same
experience.

The only drawback was baiting the hook whenever a fish was taken from
it. Uncle James soon remedied this difficulty. He cut from the under
side of a dead mackerel six thin pieces, about half an inch in diameter,
and gave each of us two. We put them on our hooks, and they served for
bait a long time. When they were gone, we put on more of the same kind.
Mackerel will bite at any very small object, almost, that they can see,
and sometimes fishermen fasten a small silver coin to their hooks, which
will do duty as bait for days. They wish to catch as many fish as they
possibly can, while they are biting, for mackerel are very notional.
Sometimes they will bite so fast as to tire their captors, and, ten
minutes after, not one can be felt or seen. Usually, they can be caught
best in the morning and toward evening. I suppose they have but two
meals a day, breakfast and supper, going without their dinner. In this
respect, they resemble trout and many other kinds of fish.

They are caught in great numbers off the coast of Maine and
Massachusetts in the months of August and September. Hundreds of
schooners, large and small, and thousands of men and boys are employed
in the business. Standing upon the shore, near Portland, and looking out
upon the Atlantic, on a bright summer's day, you can sometimes see more
white, glistening sails of "mackerel-catchers" than you can count. At
the wharves of every little village on the sea-shore, or on a river near
the shore, boats and fishermen abound. Of late years, immense nets or
"seines" have been used, and often, by means of them, enormous
quantities of fish have been secured in one haul. The season is short,
but most of the fishermen, before the mackerel come and after they go,
engage in fishing for cod and hake, which are plentiful also.
Mackerel-catching has its joys, but it also has its sorrows and
uncertainties. One vessel may have excellent luck while another may be
very unfortunate. In short, those engaged in the pursuit of mackerel
have to content themselves with "fishermen's luck."

While we were busily fishing, George called my attention to a dark fin,
projecting a few inches above the water, and gradually approaching the
boat with a peculiar wavy motion. Just before reaching us it sank out of
sight. I cast an inquiring glance at my cousin, who said, in a low tone
of voice, "A shark!" A feeling of wonder and dread came over me, and
doubtless showed itself in my face, for my uncle said, in an assuring
voice, "He will not harm us."

The mackerel stopped biting all at once. Our fishing was over. It was
now about ten o'clock, and the sun had become warm. Half a mile from us
was a small island, with a plenty of grass and a few trees, but no
houses. Uncle James proposed that we should row to it, which we gladly
did. Its shores were steep and rocky, and we found much difficulty in
landing; but at last we got ashore and pulled the boat up after us.
Among the rocks we found a quantity of drift-wood; we gathered some, and
built a fire. Uncle James produced some bread and crackers from his
basket, and, after roasting some of the nice, fat mackerel on sharp
sticks before the fire, we sat down to what seemed to us a delicious
breakfast. We were in excellent spirits, and George and I cracked jokes
and laughed to our hearts' content. After our hunger had been satisfied,
we wandered over the island, which we christened Mackerel Island, and,
sitting upon a high cliff, watched the seals as they bobbed their heads
out of the water, and turned their intelligent, dog-like faces, with
visible curiosity, toward us. They did not seem to be at all afraid, for
they swam close to the rock upon which we sat. We whistled, and they
were evidently attracted by the sound. These seals are numerous in some
of the bays on the New England coast. Most of them are small, but
occasionally one is seen of considerable size. Their fur is coarse and
of little value, but they are sought after by fishermen for the sake of
their oil, which commands a ready sale for a good price. After we had
got fully rested, we launched our boat, rowed homeward, and soon landed
upon the beach.




SPRING AND SUMMER.

BY DORA READ GOODALE.


  In Spring we note the breaking
    Of every baby bud;
  In Spring we note the waking
    Of wild flowers of the wood;
  In Summer's fuller power,
    In Summer's deeper soul,
  We watch no single flower,--
    We see, we breathe the whole.




THE AX OF RANIER.

BY THOMAS DUNN ENGLISH.


Once upon a time, there lived on the borders of a forest an old woman
named Jehanne, who had an only son, a youth of twenty-one years, who was
called Ranier. Where the two had originally come from no one knew; but
they had lived in their little hut for many years. Ranier was a
wood-cutter, and depended on his daily labor for the support of himself
and mother, while the latter eked out their scanty means by spinning.
The son, although poor, was not without learning, for an old monk in a
neighboring convent had taught him to read and write, and had given him
instructions in arithmetic. Ranier was handsome, active and strong, and
very much attached to his mother, to whom he paid all the honor and
obedience due from a son to a parent.

One morning in spring, Ranier went to his work in the forest with his ax
on his shoulder, whistling one of the simple airs of the country as he
pursued his way. Striding along beneath the branches of the great oaks
and chestnuts, he began to reflect upon the hard fate which seemed to
doom him to toil and wretchedness, and, thus thinking, whistled no
longer. Presently he sat down upon a moss-covered rock, and laying his
ax by his side, let his thoughts shape themselves into words.

"This is a sad life of mine," said Ranier. "I might better it, perhaps,
were I to enlist in the army of the king, where I should at least have
food and clothing; but I cannot leave my mother, of whom I am the sole
stay and support. Must I always live thus,--a poor wood-chopper, earning
one day the bread I eat the next, and no more?"

Ranier suddenly felt that some one was near him, and, on looking up,
sprang to his feet and removed his cap. Before him stood a beautiful
lady, clad in a robe of green satin, with a mantle of crimson velvet on
her shoulders, and bearing in her hand a white wand.

"Ranier!" said the unknown, "I am the fairy, Rougevert. I know your
history, and have heard your complaint. What gift shall I bestow on
you?"

"Beautiful fairy," replied the young man, "I scarcely know what to ask.
But I bethink me that my ax is nearly worn out, and I have no money with
which to buy another."

The fairy smiled, for she knew that the answer of Ranier came from his
embarrassment; and, going to a tree hard by, she tapped on the bark with
her wand. Thereupon the tree opened, and she took from a recess in its
center, a keen-edged ax with an ashen handle.

"Here," said Rougevert, "is the most excellent ax in the world. With
this you can achieve what no wood-chopper has ever done yet. You have
only to whisper to yourself what you wish done, and then speak to it
properly, and the ax will at once perform all you require, without
taxing your strength, and with marvelous quickness."

The fairy then taught him the words he should use, and, promising to
farther befriend him as he had need, vanished.

Ranier took the ax, and went at once to the place where he intended to
labor for the day. He was not sure that the ax would do what the giver
had promised, but thought it proper to try its powers. "For," he said to
himself, "the ranger has given me a hundred trees to fell, for each of
which I am to receive a silver groat. To cut these in the usual way
would take many days. I will wish the ax to fell and trim them speedily,
so,"--he continued aloud, as he had been taught by the fairy,--"Ax! ax!
chop! chop! and work for my profit!"

Thereupon the ax suddenly leapt from his hands, and began to chop with
great skill and swiftness. Having soon cut down, trimmed and rolled a
hundred trees together, it returned, and placed itself in the hands of
Ranier.

The wood-chopper was very much delighted with all this, and sat there
pleasantly reflecting upon his good fortune in possessing so useful a
servant, when the ranger of the forest came along. The latter, who was a
great lord, was much surprised when he saw the trees lying there.

"How is this?" asked the ranger, whose name was Woodmount. "At this time
yesterday these trees were standing. How did you contrive to fell them
so soon?"

"I had assistance, my lord," replied Ranier; but he said nothing about
the magic ax.

Lord Woodmount hereupon entered into conversation with Ranier, and
finding him to be intelligent and prompt in his replies, was much
pleased with him. At last he said:

"We have had much difficulty in getting ready the timber for the king's
new palace, in consequence of the scarcity of wood-cutters, and the
slowness with which they work. There are over twenty thousand trees yet
to be cut and hewn, and for every tree fully finished the king allows a
noble of fifty groats, although he allows but a groat for the felling
alone. It is necessary that they should be all ready within a month,
though I fear that is impossible. As you seem to be able to get a number
of laborers together, I will allot you a thousand trees, if you choose,
should you undertake to have them all ready to be hauled away for the
builders' use, within a month's time."

"My lord," answered Ranier, "I will undertake to have the whole twenty
thousand ready before the time set."

"Do you know what you say?" inquired the ranger, astonished at the bold
proposal.

"Perfectly, my lord," was the reply. "Let me undertake the work on
condition that you will cause the forest to be guarded, and no one to
enter save they have my written permission. Before the end of the month
the trees will be ready."

[Illustration: FELLING THE TREES.]

"Well," said Lord Woodmount, "it is a risk for me to run; but from what
you have done already, it is possible you may obtain enough woodmen to
complete your task. Yet, beware! If you succeed, I will not only give
you twenty thousand nobles of gold, but also appoint you--if you can
write, as you have told me--the deputy-ranger here; and for every day
less than a month in which you finish your contract I will add a hundred
nobles; but, if you fail, I will have you hanged on a tree. When will
you begin?"

"To-morrow morning," replied Ranier.

The next morning, before daylight, Ranier took his way to the forest,
leaving all his money save three groats with his mother, and, after
telling her that he might not return for a day or so, passed the guard
that he found already set, and plunged into the wood. When he came to a
place where the trees were thickest and loftiest, he whispered to
himself what he had to do, and said to the ax: "Ax! ax! chop! chop! and
work for my profit." The ax at once went to work with great earnestness,
and by night-fall over ten thousand trees were felled, hewn, and thrown
into piles. Then Ranier, who had not ceased before to watch the work,
ate some of the provisions which he had brought with him, and throwing
himself under a great tree, whose spreading boughs shaded him from the
moonlight, drew his scanty mantle around him, and slept soundly till
sunrise.

The next morning Ranier arose, and looked with delight at the work
already done; then, speaking again to the ax, it began chopping away as
before.

Now, it chanced that morning that the chief ranger had started to see
how the work was being done, and, on reaching the forest, asked the
guards if many wood-cutters had entered. They all replied that only one
had made his appearance, but he must be working vigorously, since all
that morning, and the whole day before, the wood had resounded with the
blows of axes. The Lord Woodmount thereupon rode on in great anger, for
he thought that Ranier had mocked him. But presently he came to great
piles of hewn timber which astonished him much; and then he heard the
axes' sound, which astonished him more, for it seemed as though twenty
wood-choppers were engaged at once, so great was the din. When he came
to where the ax was at work, he thought he saw--and this was through the
magic power of the fairy--thousands of wood-cutters, all arrayed in
green hose and red jerkins, some felling the trees, some hewing them
into square timber, and others arranging the hewn logs into piles of a
hundred each, while Ranier stood looking on. He was so angry at the
guards for having misinformed him, that he at once rode back and rated
them soundly on their supposed untruth. But as they persisted in the
story that but one man had passed, he grew angrier than ever. While he
was still rating them, Ranier came up.

"Well, my lord," said the latter, "if you will go or send to examine,
you will find that twenty thousand trees are already cut, squared, and
made ready to be hauled to the king's palace-ground."

The ranger at once rode back into the forest, and, having counted the
number of piles, was much pleased, and ordered Ranier to come that day
week when the timber would be inspected, and if it were all properly
done he would receive the twenty thousand nobles agreed upon.

"Excuse me, my lord," suggested Ranier, "but the work has been done in
two days instead of thirty; and twenty-eight days off at a hundred
nobles per day makes twenty-two thousand eight hundred nobles as my
due."

"True," replied the ranger; "and if you want money now--"

"Oh no!" interrupted Ranier, "I have three groats in my purse, and ten
more at home, which will be quite sufficient for my needs."

At this the ranger laughed outright, and then rode away.

At the end of a week, Ranier sought the ranger's castle, and there
received not only an order on the king's treasurer for the money, but
also the patent of deputy-ranger of the king's forest, and the allotment
of a handsome house in which to live. Thither Ranier brought his mother,
and as he was now rich, he bought him fine clothing, and hired him
servants, and lived in grand style, performing all the duties of his
office as though he had been used to it all his life. People noticed,
however, that the new deputy-ranger never went out without his ax, which
occasioned some gossip at first; but some one having suggested that he
did so to show that he was not ashamed of his former condition, folk
were satisfied,--though the truth was that he carried the ax for service
only.

Now it happened that Ranier was walking alone one evening in the forest
to observe whether any one was trying to kill the king's deer, and while
there, he heard the clash of swords. On going to the spot whence the
noise came, he saw a cavalier richly clad, with his back to a tree,
defending himself as he best might, from a half dozen men in armor, each
with his visor down. Ranier had no sword, for, not being a knight, it
was forbidden him to bear such a weapon; but he bethought him of his ax,
and hoped it might serve the men as it had the trees. So he wished these
cowardly assailants killed, and when he uttered the prescribed words,
the ax fell upon the villains, and so hacked and hewed them that they
were at once destroyed. But it seemed to the knight thus rescued that it
was the arm of Ranier that guided the ax, for such was the magic of the
fairy.

So soon as the assailants had been slain, the ax came back into Ranier's
hand, and Ranier went to the knight, who was faint with his wounds, and
offered to lead him to his house. And when he examined him fully, he
bent on his knee, for he discovered that it was the king, Dagobert, whom
he had seen once before when the latter was hunting in the forest.

The king said: "This is the deputy-ranger, Master Ranier. Is it not?"

"Yes, sire!" replied Ranier.

The king laid the blade of his sword on Ranier's shoulder, and said:

"I dub thee knight. Rise up, Sir Ranier! Be trusty, true and loyal."

Sir Ranier arose a knight, and with the king examined the faces of the
would-be assassins, who were found to be great lords of the country, and
among them was Lord Woodmount.

"Sir Ranier," said the king, "have these wretches removed and buried.
The office of chief ranger is thine."

Sir Ranier, while the king was partaking of refreshments at Ranier's
house, sent trusty servants to bury the slain. After this, King Dagobert
returned to his palace, whence he sent the new knight his own sword, a
baldrick and spurs of gold, a collar studded with jewels, the patent of
chief ranger of the forest, and a letter inviting him to visit the
court.

Now, when Sir Ranier went to court, the ladies there, seeing that he was
young and handsome, treated him with great favor; and even the king's
daughter, the Princess Isaure, smiled sweetly on him, which, when divers
great lords saw, they were very angry, and plotted to injure the
new-comer; for they thought him of base blood, and were much chagrined
that he should have been made a knight, and be thus welcomed by the
princess and the ladies of the court; and they hated him more as the
favorite of the king. So they conferred together how to punish him for
his good fortune, and at length formed a plan which they thought would
serve their ends.

It must be understood that King Dagobert was at that time engaged in a
war with King Crimball, who reigned over an adjoining kingdom, and that
the armies of the two kings now lay within thirty miles of the forest,
and were about to give each other battle. As Sir Ranier, it was
supposed, had never been bred to feats of arms, they thought if they
could get him in the field, he would so disgrace himself as to lose the
favor of the king and the court dames, or be certainly slain. For these
lords knew nothing of the adventure of the king in the forest,--all
those in the conspiracy having been slain,--and thought that Ranier had
either rendered some trifling service to the king, or in some way had
pleased the sovereign's fancy. So when the king and some of the great
lords of the court were engaged in talking of the battle that was soon
to be fought, one of the conspirators, named Dyvorer, approached them,
and said:

"Why not send Sir Ranier there, sire; for he is, no doubt, a brave and
accomplished knight, and would render great service?"

The king was angry at this, for he knew that Ranier had not been bred to
arms, and readily penetrated the purpose that prompted the suggestion.
Before he could answer, however, Sir Ranier, who had heard the words of
Dyvorer, spoke up and said:

"I pray you, sire, to let me go; for, though I may not depend much upon
my lance and sword, I have an ax that never fails me."

Then the king remembered of the marvelous feats which he had seen Ranier
perform in his behalf, and he replied:

"You shall go, Sir Ranier; and as the Lord Dyvorer has made a suggestion
of such profit, he shall have the high honor of attending as one of the
knights in your train, where he will, doubtless, support you well."

At this, the rest laughed, and Dyvorer was much troubled, for he was a
great coward. But he dared not refuse obedience.

The next morning, Sir Ranier departed along with the king for the field
of battle, bearing his ax with him; and, when they arrived, they found
both sides drawn up in battle order, and waiting the signal to begin.
Before they fell to, a champion of the enemy, a knight of fortune from
Bohemia, named Sir Paul, who was over seven feet in height, and a very
formidable soldier, who fought as well with his left hand as with his
right, rode forward between the two armies, and defied any knight in
King Dagobert's train to single combat.

Then said Dyvorer: "No doubt, here is a good opportunity for Sir Ranier
to show his prowess."

"Be sure that it is!" exclaimed Sir Ranier; and he rode forward to
engage Sir Paul.

When the Bohemian knight saw only a stripling, armed with a woodman's
ax, he laughed. "Is this girl their champion, then?" he asked. "Say thy
prayers, young sir, for thou art not long for this world, I promise
thee."

But Ranier whispered to himself, "I want me this braggart hewn to
pieces, and then the rest beaten;" and added, aloud: "Ax! ax! chop!
chop! and work for my profit!" Whereupon the ax leapt forward, and dealt
such a blow upon Sir Paul that it pierced through his helmet, and clave
him to the saddle. Then it went chopping among the enemy with such force
that it cut them down by hundreds; and King Dagobert with his army
falling upon them, won a great victory.

Now the magic of the ax followed it here as before, and every looker-on
believed he saw Sir Ranier slaying his hundreds. So it chanced when the
battle was over, and those were recalled who pursued the enemy, that a
group of knights, and the great lords of the court who were gathered
around the king, and were discussing the events of the day, agreed as
one man, that there never had been a warrior as potent as Sir Ranier
since the days of Roland, and that he deserved to be made a great lord.
And the king thought so, too. So he created him a baron on the field,
and ordered his patent of nobility to be made out on their return, and
gave him castles and land; and, furthermore, told him he would grant him
any favor more he chose to ask, though it were half the kingdom.

When Dyvorer and others heard this, they were more envious than ever,
and concerted together a plan for the ruin of Lord Treefell, for such
was Sir Ranier's new title. After many things had been proposed and
rejected, Dyvorer said: "The Princess Isaure loves this stripling, as I
have been told by my sister, the Lady Zanthe, who attends on her
highness. I think he has dared to raise his hopes to her. I will
persuade him to demand her hand as the favor the king has promised.
Ranier does not know our ancient law, and, while he will fail in his
suit, the king will be so offended at his presumption that he will
speedily dismiss him from the court."

This plan was greatly approved. Dyvorer sought out Ranier, to whom he
professed great friendship, with many regrets for all he might have said
or done in the past calculated to give annoyance. As Dyvorer was a great
dissembler, and Ranier was frank and unsuspicious, they became very
intimate. At length, one day when they were together, Dyvorer said:

"Have you ever solicited the king for the favor he promised?"

And Ranier answered, "No!"

"Then," said Dyvorer, "it is a pity that you do not love the Princess
Isaure."

"Why?" inquired Ranier.

"Because," replied Dyvorer, "the princess not only favors you, but, I
think, from what my sister Zanthe has said, that the king has taken this
mode of giving her to you at her instance."

Ranier knew that the Lady Zanthe was the favorite maiden of the
princess, and, as we are easily persuaded in the way our inclinations
run, he took heart and determined to act upon Dyvorer's counsel.

About a week afterward, as the king was walking in the court-yard of his
palace, as he did at times, he met with Ranier.

"You have never asked of me the favor I promised, good baron," said King
Dagobert.

"It is true, your majesty," said Ranier; "but it was because I feared to
ask what I most desired."

[Illustration: THE COMBAT WITH SIR PAUL.]

"Speak," said the king, "and fear not."

Therefore Ranier preferred his request for the hand of the princess.

"Baron," replied the king, frowning, "some crafty enemy has prompted you
to this. The daughter of a king should only wed with the son of a king.
Nevertheless, there is an ancient law, never fulfilled, since the
conditions are impossible, which says that any one of noble birth, who
has saved the king's life, vanquished the king's enemies in battle, and
built a castle forty cubits high in a single night, may wed the king's
daughter. Though you have saved my life and vanquished my enemies, yet
you are not of noble birth, nor, were you so, could you build such a
castle in such a space of time."

"I am of noble blood, nevertheless," said Ranier, proudly, "although I
have been a wood-chopper. My father, who died in banishment, was the
Duke of Manylands, falsely accused of having conspired against the late
king, your august father; and I can produce the record of my birth. Our
line is as noble as any in your realm, sire, and nobler than most."

"If that be true, and I doubt it not," answered King Dagobert, "the law
holds good for you. But you must first build a palace where we stand,
and that in a single night. So your suit is hopeless."

The king turned and entered the palace, leaving Ranier in deep sorrow,
for he thought the condition impossible. As he stood thus, the fairy,
Rougevert, appeared.

"Be not downcast," she said; "but build that castle to-night."

"Alas!" cried Ranier, "it cannot be done."

"Look at your ax," returned the fairy. "Do you not see that the back of
the blade is shaped like a hammer?"

So she taught Ranier what words to use, and vanished.

When the sun was down, Ranier came to the court-yard, and raising his ax
with the blade upward, he said aloud: "Ax! ax! hammer! hammer! and build
for my profit!" The ax at once leapt forward with the hammer part
downward, and began cracking the solid rock on which the court-yard lay,
and shaping it into oblong blocks, and heaping them one on the other. So
much noise was made thereby that the warders first, and then the whole
court, came out to ascertain the cause. Even the king himself was drawn
to the spot. And it seemed to them, all through the magic of the fairy,
that there were hundreds on hundreds of workmen in green cloth hose and
red leather jerkins, some engaged in quarrying and shaping, and others
in laying the blocks, and others in keying arches, and adjusting doors
and windows, and making oriels and towers and turrets. And still as they
looked, the building arose foot by foot, and before dawn a great stone
castle, with its towers and battlements, its portcullis, and its great
gate, forty cubits high, stood in the court-yard.

When King Dagobert saw this, he embraced Ranier, continued to him the
title of his father, whose ducal estates he restored to the son, and
sending for the Princess Isaure, who appeared radiant with joy and
beauty, he betrothed the young couple in the presence of the court.

So Ranier and Isaure were married, and lived long and happily; and, on
the death of Dagobert, Ranier reigned. As for the ax, that is lost,
somehow, and although I have made diligent inquiry, I have never been
able to find where it is. Some people think the fairy took it after King
Ranier died, and hid it again in a tree; and I recommend all
wood-choppers to look at the heart of every tree they fell, for this
wonderful ax. They cannot mistake it, since the word "Boldness" is cut
on the blade, and the word "Energy" is printed, in letters of gold, on
the handle.




THE PAINTER'S SCARE-CROW.

BY C.P. CRANCH.


  Miss Arabella Vandyke Brown
  Had a small studio in the town,
  Where, all the winter, blithe and gay,
  She drew and painted day by day.
  She envied not the rich. Her art
  And work made sunshine in her heart.
  Upon her canvas, many a scene
  Of summers past, in golden green
  Was wrought again. The snow and rain
  Pelted upon her window-pane;
  But she within her cozy room
  With joyous toil dispelled the gloom;
  And, sometimes, in an undertone,
  Sang to herself there, all alone.

  But, when the spring and summer came,
  Her studio grew so dull and tame
  She sought the rural solitudes
  Of winding streams and shady woods;
  For painters' works contract a taint
  Unless from Nature's self they paint.

  So out Miss Arabella went,
  To sketch from Nature fully bent.
  It was a lovely summer's day;
  A lovely scene before her lay;
  Her folding-stool and box she took,
  And, seated in a quiet nook,
  Her white umbrella o'er her head
  (Like a tall giant mushroom spread),
  Began to paint; when, lo! a noise
  She heard. A troop of idle boys
  Came flocking round her, rough and rude.
  Some o'er her shoulders leaned; some stood
  In front of her, and cried: "Paint _me_!--
  _My_ picter I should like to see."
  Some laughed, some shouted. "What a set!"
  Said Arabella, in a pet:
  "And no policeman within hail
  To send these ruffian imps to jail."
  In fine, she could not work, so went
  Straight homeward in great discontent.
  She had no brother to defend her,
  Nor country cousin to attend her.

  [Illustration]

  A plan occurred to her next day
  To keep these idle scamps away.
  An easel by her side she placed,
  And over it she threw in haste
  A hat and cloak:--and there it stood
  In bold and threatening attitude.
  The rabble at a distance spied
  The scare-crow standing by her side;
  And, thinking 't was the town-police,
  They left Miss A.V. Brown in peace.

  MORAL.

  Sometimes, an innocent pretense
  Is the best means of self-defense,
  And if a scare-crow keeps the peace,
  What need to summon the police?




[Illustration: BY THE SAD SEA WAVES.]




UNDER THE LILACS.

BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT.



CHAPTER XXI.

CUPID'S LAST APPEARANCE.


A picnic supper on the grass followed the games, and then, as twilight
began to fall, the young people were marshaled to the coach-house, now
transformed into a rustic theater. One big door was open, and seats,
arranged lengthwise, faced the red table-cloths which formed the
curtain. A row of lamps made very good foot-lights, and an invisible
band performed a Wagner-like overture on combs, tin trumpets, drums, and
pipes, with an accompaniment of suppressed laughter.

Many of the children had never seen anything like it, and sat staring
about them in mute admiration and expectancy; but the older ones
criticised freely, and indulged in wild speculations as to the meaning
of various convulsions of nature going on behind the curtain.

While Teacher was dressing the actresses for the tragedy, Miss Celia and
Thorny, who were old hands at this sort of amusement, gave a "Potato"
pantomime as a side show.

Across an empty stall a green cloth was fastened, so high that the heads
of the operators were not seen. A little curtain flew up, disclosing the
front of a Chinese pagoda painted on pasteboard, with a door and window
which opened quite naturally. This stood on one side, several green
trees with paper lanterns hanging from the boughs were on the other
side, and the words "Tea Garden," printed over the top, showed the
nature of this charming spot.

Few of the children had ever seen the immortal Punch and Judy, so this
was a most agreeable novelty, and before they could make out what it
meant, a voice began to sing, so distinctly that every word was heard:

   "In China there lived a little man,
    His name was Chingery Wangery Chan."

Here the hero "took the stage" with great dignity, clad in a loose
yellow jacket over a blue skirt, which concealed the hand that made his
body. A pointed hat adorned his head, and on removing this to bow he
disclosed a bald pate with a black queue in the middle, and a Chinese
face nicely painted on the potato, the lower part of which was hollowed
out to fit Thorny's first finger, while his thumb and second finger were
in the sleeves of the yellow jacket, making a lively pair of arms. While
he saluted, the song went on:

   "His legs were short, his feet were small,
    And this little man could not walk at all."

Which assertion was proved to be false by the agility with which the
"little man" danced a jig in time to the rollicking chorus:

   "Chingery changery ri co day,
    Ekel tekel happy man;
    Uron odesko canty oh, oh,
    Gallopy wallopy China go."

At the close of the dance and chorus, Chan retired into the tea garden,
and drank so many cups of the national beverage, with such comic
gestures, that the spectators were almost sorry when the opening of the
opposite window drew all eyes in that direction. At the lattice appeared
a lovely being; for this potato had been pared, and on the white surface
were painted pretty pink cheeks, red lips, black eyes, and oblique
brows; through the tuft of dark silk on the head were stuck several
glittering pins, and a pink jacket shrouded the plump figure of this
capital little Chinese lady. After peeping coyly out, so that all could
see and admire, she fell to counting the money from a purse, so large
her small hands could hardly hold it on the window seat. While she did
this, the song went on to explain:

   "Miss Ki Hi was short and squat,
    She had money and he had not;
    So off to her he resolved to go,
    And play her a tune on his little banjo."

During the chorus to this verse Chan was seen tuning his instrument in
the garden, and at the end sallied gallantly forth to sing the following
tender strain:

       "Whang fun li,
        Tang hua ki,
    Hong Kong do ra me!
        Ah sin lo,
        Pan to fo,
    Tsing up chin leute!"

Carried away by his passion, Chan dropped his banjo, fell upon his
knees, and, clasping his hands, bowed his forehead in the dust before
his idol. But, alas!--

   "Miss Ki Hi heard his notes of love,
    And held her wash-bowl up above;
    It fell upon the little man,
    And this was the end of Chingery Chan."

Indeed it was: for, as the doll's basin of real water was cast forth by
the cruel charmer, poor Chan expired in such strong convulsions that his
head rolled down among the audience. Miss Ki Hi peeped to see what had
become of her victim, and the shutter decapitated her likewise, to the
great delight of the children, who passed around the heads, pronouncing
a "Potato" pantomime "first-rate fun."

Then they settled themselves for the show, having been assured by
Manager Thorny that they were about to behold the most elegant and
varied combination ever produced on any stage. And when one reads the
following very inadequate description of the somewhat mixed
entertainment, it is impossible to deny that the promise made was nobly
kept.

After some delay and several crashes behind the curtain, which mightily
amused the audience, the performance began with the well-known tragedy
of "Blue-beard"; for Bab had set her heart upon it, and the young folks
had acted it so often in their plays that it was very easy to get up
with a few extra touches to scenery and costumes. Thorny was superb as
the tyrant with a beard of bright blue worsted, a slouched hat and long
feather, fur cloak, red hose, rubber boots, and a real sword which
clanked tragically as he walked. He spoke in such a deep voice, knit his
corked eyebrows, and glared so frightfully, that it was no wonder poor
Fatima quaked before him as he gave into her keeping an immense bunch of
keys with one particularly big, bright one, among them.

Bab was fine to see, with Miss Celia's blue dress sweeping behind her, a
white plume in her flowing hair, and a real necklace with a pearl locket
about her neck. She did her part capitally, especially the shriek she
gave when she looked into the fatal closet, the energy with which she
scrubbed the tell-tale key, and her distracted tone when she called out:
"Sister Anne, O, sister Anne, _do_ you see anybody coming?" while her
enraged husband was roaring: "Will you come down, madam, or shall I come
and fetch you?"

Betty made a captivating Anne,--all in white muslin, and a hat full of
such lovely pink roses that she could not help putting up one hand to
feel them as she stood on the steps looking out at the little window for
the approaching brothers, who made such a din that it sounded like a
dozen horsemen instead of two.

[Illustration: THE BLUE-BEARD GROUP.]

Ben and Billy were got up regardless of expense in the way of arms; for
their belts were perfect arsenals, and their wooden swords were big
enough to strike terror into any soul, though they struck no sparks out
of Blue-beard's blade in the awful combat which preceded the villain's
downfall and death.

The boys enjoyed this part intensely, and cries of "Go it, Ben!" "Hit
him again, Billy!" "Two against one isn't fair!" "Thorny's a match for
em." "Now he's down, hurray!" cheered on the combatants, till, after a
terrific struggle, the tyrant fell, and with convulsive twitchings of
the scarlet legs, slowly expired, while the ladies sociably fainted in
each others arms, and the brothers waved their swords and shook hands
over the corpse of their enemy.

This piece was rapturously applauded, and all the performers had to
appear and bow their thanks, led by the defunct Blue-beard, who mildly
warned the excited audience that if they "didn't look out the walls
would break down, and then there'd be a nice mess." Calmed by this fear
they composed themselves, and waited with ardor for the next play, which
promised to be a lively one, judging from the shrieks of laughter which
came from behind the curtain.

"Sanch's going to be in it, I know, for I heard Ben say, 'Hold him
still; he wont bite,'" whispered Sam, longing to "jounce" up and down,
so great was his satisfaction at the prospect, for the dog was
considered the star of the company.

"I hope Bab will do something else, she is so funny. Wasn't her dress
elegant?" said Sally Folsom, burning to wear a long silk gown and a
feather in her hair.

"I like Betty best, she's so cunning, and she peaked out of the window
just as if she _really_ saw somebody coming," answered Liddy Peckham,
privately resolving to tease mother for some pink roses before another
Sunday came.

Up went the curtain at last, and a voice announced "A Tragedy in Three
Tableaux." "There's Betty!" was the general exclamation, as the audience
recognized a familiar face under the little red hood worn by the child
who stood receiving a basket from Teacher, who made a nice mother with
her finger up, as if telling the small messenger not to loiter by the
way.

"I know what that is!" cried Sally; "it's 'Mabel on Midsummer Day.' The
piece Miss Celia spoke; don't you know?"

"There isn't any sick baby, and Mabel had a 'kerchief pinned about her
head.' _I_ say it's Red Riding Hood," answered Liddy, who had begun to
learn Mary Howitt's pretty poem for her next piece, and knew all about
it.

The question was settled by the appearance of the wolf in the second
scene, and such a wolf! On few amateur stages do we find so natural an
actor for that part, or so good a costume, for Sanch was irresistibly
droll in the gray wolf-skin which usually lay beside Miss Celia's bed,
now fitted over his back and fastened neatly down underneath, with his
own face peeping out at one end, and the handsome tail bobbing gayly at
the other. What a comfort that tail was to Sancho, none but a bereaved
bow-wow could ever tell. It reconciled him to his distasteful part at
once; it made rehearsals a joy, and even before the public he could not
resist turning to catch a glimpse of the noble appendage, while his own
brief member wagged with the proud consciousness that though the tail
did not match the head, it was long enough to be seen of all men and
dogs.

That was a pretty picture, for the little maid came walking in with the
basket on her arm, and such an innocent face inside the bright hood that
it was quite natural the gray wolf should trot up to her with deceitful
friendliness, that she should pat and talk to him confidingly about the
butter for grandma, and then that they should walk away together, he
politely carrying her basket, she with her hand on his head, little
dreaming what evil plans were taking shape inside.

The children encored that, but there was no time to repeat it, so they
listened to more stifled merriment behind the red table-cloths, and
wondered whether the next scene would be the wolf popping his head out
of the window as Red Riding Hood knocks, or the tragic end of that sweet
child.

It was neither, for a nice bed had been made, and in it reposed the
false grandmother, with a ruffled nightcap on, a white gown, and
spectacles. Betty lay beside the wolf, staring at him as if just about
to say, "Why, grandma, what great teeth you've got!" for Sancho's mouth
was half open and a red tongue hung out, as he panted with the exertion
of keeping still. This tableau was so very good, and yet so funny, that
the children clapped and shouted frantically; this excited the dog, who
gave a bounce and would have leaped off the bed to bark at the rioters,
if Betty had not caught him by the legs, and Thorny dropped the curtain
just at the moment when the wicked wolf was apparently in the act of
devouring the poor little girl, with most effective growls.

They had to come out then, and did so, both much disheveled by the late
tussle, for Sancho's cap was all over one eye, and Betty's hood was
anywhere but on her head. She made her courtesy prettily, however; her
fellow-actor bowed with as much dignity as a short night-gown permitted,
and they retired to their well-earned repose.

Then Thorny, looking much excited, appeared to make the following
request: "As one of the actors in the next piece is new to the business,
the company must all keep as still as mice, and not stir till I give the
word. It's perfectly splendid! so don't you spoil it by making a row."

"What _do_ you suppose it is?" asked every one, and listened with all
their might to get a hint, if possible. But what they heard only whetted
their curiosity and mystified them more and more. Bab's voice cried in a
loud whisper, "Isn't Ben beautiful?" Then there was a thumping noise,
and Miss Celia said, in an anxious tone, "Oh, do be careful," while Ben
laughed out as if he was too happy to care who heard him, and Thorny
bawled "Whoa!" in a way which would have attracted attention if Lita's
head had not popped out of her box, more than once, to survey the
invaders of her abode, with a much astonished expression.

"Sounds kind of circusy, don't it?" said Sam to Billy, who had come out
to receive the compliments of the company and enjoy the tableau at a
safe distance.

"You just wait till you see what's coming. It beats any circus _I_ ever
saw," answered Billy, rubbing his hands with the air of a man who had
seen many instead of but one.

"Ready? Be quick and get out of the way when she goes off!" whispered
Ben, but they heard him and prepared for pistols, rockets or
combustibles of some sort, as ships were impossible under the
circumstances, and no other "she" occurred to them.

A unanimous "O-o-o-o!" was heard when the curtain rose, but a stern
"Hush!" from Thorny kept them mutely staring with all their eyes at the
grand spectacle of the evening. There stood Lita with a wide flat saddle
on her back, a white head-stall and reins, blue rosettes in her ears,
and the look of a much-bewildered beast in her bright eyes. But who the
gauzy, spangled, winged creature was, with a gilt crown on its head, a
little bow in its hand, and one white slipper in the air, while the
other seemed merely to touch the saddle, no one could tell for a minute,
so strange and splendid did the apparition appear. No wonder Ben was not
recognized in this brilliant disguise, which was more natural to him
than Billy's blue flannel or Thorny's respectable garments. He had so
begged to be allowed to show himself "just once," as he used to be in
the days when "father" tossed him up on bare-backed old General, for
hundreds to see and admire, that Miss Celia had consented, much against
her will, and hastily arranged some bits of spangled tarletan over the
white cotton suit which was to simulate the regulation tights. Her old
dancing slippers fitted, and gold paper did the rest, while Ben, sure of
his power over Lita, promised not to break his bones, and lived for days
on the thought of the moment when he could show the boys that he had not
boasted vainly of past splendors.

Before the delighted children could get their breath, Lita gave signs of
her dislike to the foot-lights, and, gathering up the reins that lay on
her neck, Ben gave the old cry, "Houp-la!" and let her go, as he had
often done before, straight out of the coach-house for a gallop round
the orchard.

"Just turn about and you can see perfectly well, but stay where you are
till he comes back," commanded Thorny, as signs of commotion appeared in
the excited audience.

Round went the twenty children as if turned by one crank, and sitting
there they looked out into the moonlight where the shining figure
flashed to and fro, now so near they could see the smiling face under
the crown, now so far away that it glittered like a fire-fly among the
dusky green. Lita enjoyed that race as heartily as she had done several
others of late, and caracoled about as if anxious to make up for her
lack of skill by speed and obedience. How much Ben liked it there is no
need to tell, yet it was a proof of the good which three months of a
quiet, useful life had done him, that even as he pranced gayly under the
boughs thick with the red and yellow apples almost ready to be gathered,
he found this riding in the fresh air with only his mates for an
audience pleasanter than the crowded tent, the tired horses, profane
men, and painted women, friendly as some of them had been to him.

After the first burst was over, he felt rather glad, on the whole, that
he was going back to plain clothes, helpful school, and kindly people,
who cared more to have him a good boy than the most famous Cupid that
ever stood on one leg with a fast horse under him.

"You may make as much noise as you like, now; Lita's had her run and
will be as quiet as a lamb after it. Pull up, Ben, and come in; sister
says you'll get cold," shouted Thorny, as the rider came cantering round
after a leap over the lodge gate and back again.

So Ben pulled up, and the admiring boys and girls were allowed to gather
about him, loud in their praises as they examined the pretty mare and
the mythological character who lay easily upon her back. He looked very
little like the god of love now; for he had lost one slipper and
splashed his white legs with dew and dust, the crown had slipped down
upon his neck, and the paper wings hung in an apple-tree where he had
left them as he went by. No trouble in recognizing Ben, now; but somehow
he didn't want to be seen, and, instead of staying to be praised, he
soon slipped away, making Lita his excuse to vanish behind the curtain
while the rest went into the house to have a finishing-off game of
blindman's-buff in the big kitchen.

"Well, Ben, are you satisfied?" asked Miss Celia, as she stayed a moment
to unpin the remains of his gauzy scarf and tunic.

"Yes'm, thank you, it was tip-top."

"But you look rather sober. Are you tired, or is it because you don't
want to take these trappings off and be plain Ben again?" she said,
looking down into his face as he lifted it for her to free him from his
gilded collar.

"I _want_ to take 'em off; for somehow I don't feel respectable," and he
kicked away the crown he had help to make so carefully, adding with a
glance that said more than his words: "I'd rather be 'plain Ben' than
any one else, if you'd like to have me."

"Indeed I do; and I'm so glad to hear you say that, because I was afraid
you'd long to be off to the old ways, and all I've tried to do would be
undone. _Would_ you like to go back, Ben?" and Miss Celia held his chin
an instant, to watch the brown face that looked so honestly back at her.

"No, I wouldn't--unless--_he_ was there and wanted me."

The chin quivered just a bit, but the black eyes were as bright as ever,
and the boy's voice so earnest, she knew he spoke the truth, and laid
her white hand softly on his head, as she answered in the tone he loved
so much, because no one else had ever used it to him:

"Father is not there; but I know he wants you, dear, and I am sure he
would rather see you in a home like this than in the place you came
from. Now go and dress; but, tell me first, has it been a happy
birthday?"

"Oh, Miss Celia! I didn't know they _could_ be so beautiful, and this is
the beautifulest part of it; I don't know how to thank you, but I'm
going to try--" and, finding words wouldn't come fast enough, Ben just
put his two arms round her, quite speechless with gratitude; then, as if
ashamed of his little outburst, he knelt down in a great hurry to untie
his one shoe.

[Illustration: MISS CELIA AND BEN.]

But Miss Celia liked his answer better than the finest speech ever made
her, and went away through the moonlight, saying to herself:

"If I can bring one lost lamb into the fold, I shall be the fitter for a
shepherd's wife, by and by."



CHAPTER XXII.

A BOY'S BARGAIN.


It was some days before the children were tired of talking over Ben's
birthday party; for it was a great event in their small world; but,
gradually, newer pleasures came to occupy their minds, and they began to
plan the nutting frolics which always followed the early frosts. While
waiting for Jack to open the chestnut burrs, they varied the monotony of
school life by a lively scrimmage long known as "the wood-pile fight."

The girls liked to play in the half-empty shed, and the boys, merely for
the fun of teasing, declared that they should not, so blocked up the
door-way as fast as the girls cleared it. Seeing that the squabble was a
merry one, and the exercise better for all than lounging in the sun or
reading in school during recess, Teacher did not interfere, and the
barrier rose and fell almost as regularly as the tide.

It would be difficult to say which side worked the harder; for the boys
went before school began to build up the barricade, and the girls stayed
after lessons were over to pull down the last one made in afternoon
recess. They had their play-time first, and, while the boys waited
inside, they heard the shouts of the girls, the banging of the wood, and
the final crash as the well-packed pile went down. Then, as the lassies
came in, rosy, breathless, and triumphant, the lads rushed out to man
the breach, and labor gallantly till all was as tight as hard blows
could make it.

So the battle raged, and bruised knuckles, splinters in fingers, torn
clothes, and rubbed shoes, were the only wounds received, while a great
deal of fun was had out of the maltreated logs, and a lasting peace
secured between two of the boys.

When the party was safely over, Sam began to fall into his old way of
tormenting Ben by calling names, as it cost no exertion to invent trying
speeches and slyly utter them when most likely to annoy; Ben bore it as
well as he could, but fortune favored him at last, as it usually does
the patient, and he was able to make his own terms with his tormentor.

When the girls demolished the wood-pile they performed a jubilee chorus
on combs, and tin kettles played like tambourines; the boys celebrated
their victories with shrill whistles, and a drum accompaniment with
fists on the shed walls. Billy brought his drum, and this was such an
addition that Sam hunted up an old one of his little brother's, in order
that he might join the drum corps. He had no sticks, however, and,
casting about in his mind for a good substitute for the genuine thing,
bethought him of bulrushes.

"Those will do first-rate, and there are lots in the ma'sh, if I can
only get 'em," he said to himself, and turned off from the road on his
way home to get a supply.

Now, this marsh was a treacherous spot, and the tragic story was told of
a cow who got in there and sank till nothing was visible but a pair of
horns above the mud, which suffocated the unwary beast. For this reason
it was called "Cowslip Marsh," the wags said, though it was generally
believed to be so named for the yellow flowers which grew there in great
profusion in the spring.

Sam had seen Ben hop nimbly from one tuft of grass to another when he
went to gather cowslips for Betty, and the stout boy thought he could do
the same. Two or three heavy jumps landed him, not among the bulrushes
as he had hoped, but in a pool of muddy water where he sank up to his
middle with alarming rapidity. Much scared, he tried to wade out, but
could only flounder to a tussock of grass and cling there while he
endeavored to kick his legs free. He got them out, but struggled in vain
to coil them up or to hoist his heavy body upon the very small island in
this sea of mud. Down they splashed again, and Sam gave a dismal groan
as he thought of the leeches and water-snakes which might be lying in
wait below. Visions of the lost cow also flashed across his agitated
mind, and he gave a despairing shout very like a distracted "Moo!"

Few people passed along the lane, and the sun was setting, so the
prospect of a night in the marsh nerved Sam to make a frantic plunge
toward the bulrush island, which was nearer than the main-land, and
looked firmer than any tussock around him. But he failed to reach this
haven of rest, and was forced to stop at an old stump which stuck up,
looking very like the moss-grown horns of the "dear departed." Roosting
here, Sam began to shout for aid in every key possible to the human
voice. Such hoots and howls, whistles and roars, never woke the echoes
of the lonely marsh before, or scared the portly frog who resided there
in calm seclusion.

He hardly expected any reply but the astonished "Caw!" of the crow, who
sat upon a fence watching him with gloomy interest, and when a cheerful
"Hullo, there!" sounded from the lane, he was so grateful that tears of
joy rolled down his fat cheeks.

"Come on! I'm in the ma'sh. Lend a hand and get me out!" bawled Sam,
anxiously waiting for his deliverer to appear, for he could only see a
hat bobbing along behind the hazel-bushes that fringed the lane.

Steps crashed through the bushes, and then over the wall came an active
figure, at the sight of which Sam was almost ready to dive out of sight,
for, of all possible boys, who should it be but Ben, the last person in
the world whom he would like to have see him in his present pitiful
plight.

"Is it you, Sam? Well, you _are_ in a nice fix!" and Ben's eyes began to
twinkle with mischievous merriment, as well they might, for Sam
certainly was a spectacle to convulse the soberest person. Perched
unsteadily on the gnarled stump, with his muddy legs drawn up, his
dismal face splashed with mud, and the whole lower half of his body as
black as if he had been dipped in an inkstand, he presented such a
comically doleful object that Ben danced about, laughing like a naughty
will-o'-the-wisp who, having led a traveler astray, then fell to jeering
at him.

"Stop that or I'll knock your head off," roared Sam, in a rage.

"Come on and do it, I give you leave," answered Ben, sparring away
derisively as the other tottered on his perch and was forced to hold
tight lest he should tumble off.

"Don't laugh, there's a good chap, but fish me out somehow or I shall
get my death sitting here all wet and cold," whined Sam, changing his
tone, and feeling bitterly that Ben had the upper hand now.

Ben felt it also, and though a very good natured boy, could not resist
the temptation to enjoy this advantage for a moment at least.

"I wont laugh if I can help it, only you do look so like a fat, speckled
frog I may not be able to hold in. I'll pull you out pretty soon, but
first I'm going to talk to you, Sam," said Ben, sobering down as he took
a seat on the little point of land nearest the stranded Samuel.

"Hurry up, then; I'm as stiff as a board now, and it's no fun sitting
here on this knotty old thing," growled Sam, with a discontented squirm.

"Dare say not, but 'it is good for you,' as you say when you rap me over
the head. Look here, I've got you in a tight place, and I don't mean to
help you a bit till you promise to let me alone. Now then!" and Ben's
face grew stern with his remembered wrongs as he grimly eyed his
discomfited foe.

"I'll promise fast enough if you wont tell any one about this," answered
Sam, surveying himself and his surroundings with great disgust.

"I shall do as I like about that."

"Then I wont promise a thing! I'm not going to have the whole school
laughing at me," protested Sam, who hated to be ridiculed even more than
Ben did.

"Very well; good-night!" and Ben walked off with his hands in his
pockets as coolly as if the bog was Sam's favorite retreat.

"Hold on, don't be in such a hurry!" shouted Sam, seeing little hope of
rescue if he let this chance go.

"All right!" and back came Ben ready for further negotiations.

"I'll promise not to plague you if you'll promise not to tell on me. Is
that what you want?"

"Now I come to think of it, there is one thing more. I like to make a
good bargain when I begin," said Ben, with a shrewd air. "You must
promise to keep Mose quiet, too. He follows your lead, and if you tell
him to stop it he will. If I was big enough I'd _make_ you hold your
tongues. I aint, so we'll try this way."

"Yes, yes, I'll see to Mose. Now, bring on a rail, there's a good
fellow. I've got a horrid cramp in my legs," began Sam, thinking he had
bought help dearly, yet admiring Ben's cleverness in making the most of
his chance.

Ben brought the rail, but just as he was about to lay it from the
main-land to the nearest tussock, he stopped, saying, with the naughty
twinkle in his black eyes again: "One more little thing must be settled
first, and then I'll get you ashore. Promise you wont plague the girls
either, 'specially Bab and Betty. You pull their hair, and they don't
like it."

[Illustration: THE BROOK ABOVE THE MARSH.]

"Don't neither. Wouldn't touch that Bab for a dollar; she scratches and
bites like a mad cat," was Sam's sulky reply.

"Glad of it; she can take care of herself. Betty can't, and if you touch
one of her pig-tails I'll up and tell right out how I found you
sniveling in the ma'sh like a great baby. So now!" and Ben emphasized
his threat with a blow of the suspended rail which splashed the water
over poor Sam, quenching his last spark of resistance.

"Stop! I will!--I will!"

"True as you live and breathe!" demanded Ben, sternly binding him by the
most solemn oath he knew.

"True as I live and breathe," echoed Sam, dolefully relinquishing his
favorite pastime of pulling Betty's braids and asking if she was at
home.

"I'll come over there and crook fingers on the bargain," said Ben,
settling the rail and running over it to the tuft, then bridging another
pool and crossing again till he came to the stump.

"I never thought of that way," said Sam, watching him with much inward
chagrin at his own failure.

"I should think you'd written 'Look before you leap,' in your copy-book
often enough to get the idea into your stupid head. Come, crook,"
commanded Ben, leaning forward with extended little finger.

Sam obediently performed the ceremony, and then Ben sat astride one of
the horns of the stump while the muddy Crusoe went slowly across the
rail from point to point till he landed safely on the shore, when he
turned about and asked with an ungrateful jeer:

"Now, what's going to become of you, old Look-before-you-leap?"

"Mud-turtles can only sit on a stump and bawl till they are taken off,
but frogs have legs worth something, and are not afraid of a little
water," answered Ben, hopping away in an opposite direction, since the
pools between him and Sam were too wide for even his lively legs.

Sam waddled off to the brook above the marsh to rinse the mud from his
nether man before facing his mother, and was just wringing himself out
when Ben came up, breathless but good-natured, for he felt that he had
made an excellent bargain for himself and friends.

"Better wash your face; it's as speckled as a tiger-lily. Here's my
handkerchief if yours is wet," he said, pulling out a dingy article
which had evidently already done service as a towel.

"Don't want it," muttered Sam, gruffly, as he poured the water out of
his muddy shoes.

"_I_ was taught to say 'Thanky' when folks got _me_ out of scrapes. But
_you_ never had much bringing up, though you do 'live in a house with a
gambrel roof,'" retorted Ben, sarcastically quoting Sam's frequent
boast; then he walked off, much disgusted with the ingratitude of man.

Sam forgot his manners, but he remembered his promise, and kept it so
well that all the school wondered. No one could guess the secret of
Ben's power over him, though it was evident that he had gained it in
some sudden way, for at the least sign of Sam's former tricks Ben would
crook his little finger and wag it warningly, or call out "Bulrushes!"
and Sam subsided with reluctant submission, to the great amazement of
his mates. When asked what it meant, Sam turned sulky; but Ben had much
fun out of it, assuring the other boys that those were the signs and
pass-word of a secret society to which he and Sam belonged, and promised
to tell them all about it if Sam would give him leave, which, of course,
he would not.

This mystery, and the vain endeavors to find it out, caused a lull in
the war of the wood-pile, and before any new game was invented something
happened which gave the children plenty to talk about for a time.

A week after the secret alliance was formed, Ben ran in one evening with
a letter for Miss Celia. He found her enjoying the cheery blaze of the
pine-cones the little girls had picked up for her, and Bab and Betty sat
in the small chairs rocking luxuriously as they took turns to throw on
the pretty fuel. Miss Celia turned quickly to receive the expected
letter, glanced at the writing, post-mark and stamp, with an air of
delighted surprise, then clasped it close in both hands, saying, as she
hurried out of the room:

"He has come! he has come! Now you may tell them, Thorny."

"Tell us what?" asked Bab, pricking up her ears at once.

"Oh, it's only that George has come, and I suppose we shall go and get
married right away," answered Thorny, rubbing his hands as if he enjoyed
the prospect.

"Are _you_ going to be married?" asked Betty, so soberly that the boys
shouted, and Thorny, with difficulty, composed himself sufficiently to
explain.

"No, child, not just yet; but sister is, and I must go and see that is
all done up ship-shape, and bring you home some wedding-cake. Ben will
take care of you while I'm gone."

"When shall you go?" asked Bab, beginning to long for her share of cake.

"To-morrow, I guess. Celia has been packed and ready for a week. We
agreed to meet George in New York, and be married as soon as he got his
best clothes unpacked. We are men of our word, and off we go. Wont it be
fun?"

"But when will you come back again?" questioned Betty, looking anxious.

"Don't know. Sister wants to come soon, but I'd rather have our
honeymoon somewhere else,--Niagara, Newfoundland, West Point, or the
Rocky Mountains," said Thorny, mentioning a few of the places he most
desired to see.

"Do you like him?" asked Ben, very naturally wondering if the new master
would approve of the young man-of-all-work.

"Don't I? George is regularly jolly; though now he's a minister, perhaps
he'll stiffen up and turn sober. Wont it be a shame if he does?" and
Thorny looked alarmed at the thought of losing his congenial friend.

"Tell about him; Miss Celia said you might," put in Bab, whose
experience of "jolly" ministers had been small.

"Oh, there isn't much about it. We met in Switzerland going up Mount St.
Bernard in a storm, and--"

"Where the good dogs live?" inquired Betty, hoping they would come into
the story.

"Yes; we spent the night up there, and George gave us his room; the
house was so full, and he wouldn't let me go down a steep place where I
wanted to, and Celia thought he'd saved my life, and was very good to
him. Then we kept meeting, and the first thing I knew she went and was
engaged to him. I didn't care, only she would come home so he might go
on studying hard and get through quick. That was a year ago, and last
winter we were in New York at uncle's; and then, in the spring, I was
sick, and we came here, and that's all."

"Shall you live here always when you come back?" asked Bab, as Thorny
paused for breath.

"Celia wants to. I shall go to college, so _I_ don't mind. George is
going to help the old minister here and see how he likes it. I'm to
study with him, and if he is as pleasant as he used to be we shall have
capital times,--see if we don't."

"I wonder if he will want me round," said Ben, feeling no desire to be a
tramp again.

"_I_ do, so you needn't fret about that, my hearty," answered Thorny,
with a resounding slap on the shoulder which re-assured Ben more than
any promises.

"I'd like to see a live wedding, then we could play it with our dolls.
I've got a nice piece of mosquito netting for a veil, and Belinda's
white dress is clean. Do you s'pose Miss Celia will ask us to hers?"
said Betty to Bab, as the boys began to discuss St. Bernard dogs with
spirit.

"I wish I could, dears," answered a voice behind them, and there was
Miss Celia, looking so happy that the little girls wondered what the
letter could have said to give her such bright eyes and smiling lips. "I
shall not be gone long, or be a bit changed when I come back, to live
among you years I hope, for I am fond of the old place now, and mean it
shall be home," she added, caressing the yellow heads as if they were
dear to her.

"Oh, goody!" cried Bab, while Betty whispered with both arms round Miss
Celia:

"I don't think we _could_ bear to have anybody else come here to live."

"It is very pleasant to hear you say that, and I mean to make others
feel so, if I can. I have been trying a little this summer, but when I
come back I shall go to work in earnest to be a good minister's wife,
and you must help me."

"We will," promised both children, ready for anything except preaching
in the high pulpit.

Then Miss Celia turned to Ben, saying, in the respectful way that always
made him feel, at least, twenty-five:

"We shall be off to-morrow, and I leave you in charge. Go on just as if
we were here, and be sure nothing will be changed as far as you are
concerned when we come back."

Ben's face beamed at that; but the only way he could express his relief
was by making such a blaze in honor of the occasion that he nearly
roasted the company.

Next morning, the brother and sister slipped quietly away, and the
children hurried to school, eager to tell the great news that "Miss
Celia and Thorny had gone to be married, and were coming back to live
here forever and ever."

(_To be continued._)




[Illustration: SATURDAY AFTERNOON.]




LITTLE BEAR.

BY SAMUEL W. DUFFIELD.


[Illustration]


  There lives with us an Indian--
    A Paw-knee, I declare--
  And he utters dreadful war-whoops,
    And his name is Little Bear.

  A braver foe in a battle,
    When his hands are in your hair,
  There is none in all my knowledge
    Than this same Little Bear.

  But when the firelight shining
    Lights the room up with its glare,
  I often camp on the hearth-rug,
    Good friends with Little Bear.

  And I'm very sure I should miss him
    If ever he wasn't there--
  This irrepressible Indian,
    By the name of Little Bear!




MY ST. GEORGE.

BY ALICE MAUDE EDDY.


It is ten years ago to-day since Georgie May and I went to "Captain
Kidd's Cave" after sea-urchins. Georgie was a neighbor's child with whom
I had played all my short life, and whom I loved almost as dearly as my
own brothers. Such a brave, bright face he had, framed by sunny hair
where the summers had dropped gold dust as they passed him by. I can see
him now as he stood that day on the firm sand of the beach, with his
brown eyes glowing and his plump hand brandishing a wooden sword which
he himself had made, and painted with gorgeous figures of red and
yellow.

"You see, Allie," he was saying, "his name was Saint George, and he was
a knight. And so there was a great dragon with a fiery crest. And so he
went at him, and killed him; and he married the princess, and they lived
happy ever after. I'd have killed him, too, if I'd been there!"

"_Could_ you kill a dragon?" I asked, rather timidly.

"Course I could!" replied the young champion. "I'd have a splendid white
horse,--no, a black one,--and a sword like Jack the Giant Killer's,
and--and--oh, and an invisible ring! I'd use him up pretty quick. Then
I'd cut off his head and give it to the princess, and we'd have a feast
of jelly-cake, and cream candy, and then I would marry her!"

I could only gasp admiringly at this splendid vision.

"But mamma said," went on Georgie, more thoughtfully, "that there are
dragons now; and she said she would like me to be a Saint George. She's
going to tell some more to-night, but there's getting angry, that's a
dragon, and wanting to be head of everything, that's another, and she
and me are going to fight 'em. We said so."

"But how?" I asked, with wide open eyes. "I don't see any dragon when
I'm angry!"

"Oh, you're a girl," said Georgie, consolingly; and we ran on
contentedly, wading across the shallow pools of salt water, clambering
over the rocks, and now and then stopping to pick up a bright pebble or
shell. The whole scene comes vividly before me as I think of it
now:--the gray and brown cliffs, with their sharp crags and narrow
clefts half choked up by the fine, sifting sand, the wet "snappers"
clinging to the rocks along the water's edge; the sea itself clear and
blue in the bright afternoon, and the dancing lights where the sunbeams
struck its rippling surface. A light wind blew across the bay. It
stirred in Georgie's curls, and swept about us both as if playing with
us. We grew happier and happier, and when at last we saw "Captain Kidd's
Cave" just before us, we were in the wildest spirits, and almost sorry
that our walk was ended.

There was plenty to be seen in the cave, however, beside the excitement
of searching for the pirate's treasures, which the country people said
were buried there. The high rocks met, forming a wide, arched cavern
with a little crevice in the roof, through which we could just see the
clear sky. The firm floor was full of smaller stones, which we used for
seats, and one high crag almost hid the entrance. It was delicious to
creep through the low door-way, and to sit in the cool twilight that
reigned there, listening to the song of the winds and waters outside, or
to clamber up and down the steep sides of the cave, playing that we were
cast-aways on a desert island. We played, also, that I was a captive
princess, and Georgie killed a score of dragons in my defense. We were
married, too, with the little knight's sword stuck in the sand for the
clergyman. Quite tired out, at last, we went into the cave and sat on
the sand-strewn floor, telling stories and talking of dragons and
fairies, until a drop of rain suddenly fell through the cleft in the
roof. Georgie sprang up.

"We must go home, Allie!" he cried. "What if we were to be caught in a
shower!"

Just as he was speaking, a peal of thunder crashed and boomed right
above us, and I clung to the boy, sobbing for very terror.

"O Georgie!" I cried, "don't go out. We'll be killed! Oh, what shall we
do?"

But Georgie only laughed blithely, saying, "No, we wont go if you don't
want to. Let's play it's a concert and the thunder's a drum. It will be
over in a minute," and he began to whistle "Yankee Doodle," in which
performance I vainly endeavored to join. But as time went on, and the
storm became more violent, we were both frightened, and climbing to a
ledge about half-way up the wall, sat silent, clinging to each other,
and crying a little as the lightning flashed more and more vividly. Yet,
even in his own terror, Georgie was careful for me, and tried to cheer
me and raise my heart. Dear little friend, I am grateful for it now!

At last, leaning forward, I saw that the water was creeping into the
cave and covering the floor with shallow, foaming waves. Then, indeed,
we were frightened. What if the rising tide had covered the rocks
outside? We should have to stay all night in that lonely place; for,
though the tide went down before midnight, the way was long and
difficult, and we could not return in the darkness.

"Hurry, Allie!" cried Georgie, scrambling down the side of the cave. "We
can wade, may be."

I followed him, and we crept out upon the beach. The water had risen
breast high already, and I was nearly thrown down by the force with
which it met me.

"Lean on me, Allie," said Georgie, throwing his arm about me and
struggling onward. "We must get to the rocks as soon as we can."

It was with great difficulty that we passed over the narrow strip of
sand below the high cliffs. I clung wildly to Georgie, trying in vain to
keep a firm footing on the treacherous sand, that seemed slipping from
beneath my feet at every step.

The water had reached my neck. I cried out with terror as I felt myself
borne from my feet. But Georgie kept hold of me, and bracing ourselves
against the first low rock, we waited the coming of the great green wave
that rolled surging toward us, raising its whitening crest high over our
heads. It broke directly above us, and for a moment we stood dizzy with
the shock, and half blinded by the dashing salt spray. Then we ran on as
swiftly as was possible in the impeding water. Fortunately for us, the
next wave broke before it reached us, for in the rapidly rising tide we
could not have resisted it.

We were thoroughly exhausted when, after a few more struggles, we at
last climbed the first cliff and sat on the top, resting and looking
about us for a means of escape. It was impossible for us to scale the
precipice that stretched along the beach. We must keep to the lower
crags at its foot for a mile before we could reach the firm land. This,
in the gathering twilight, was a difficult and dangerous thing to
attempt. Yet there was no other way of escape. We could not return to
the cave. I shuddered as I looked at the foaming waves that rolled
between us and it.

"What shall we do, Georgie?" I cried. "I _can't_ be drowned!"

"Hush, Allie!" answered Georgie, bravely; "we must go right on, of
course. This place will be covered soon. Take off your shoes. You can
climb easier. There now! take hold of my hand. I'll jump over to that
rock and help you to come on, too!"

Well was it for me that Georgie was a strong, agile boy, head and
shoulders taller than I. I needed all his help in the homeward journey.
I tremble even yet as I think of the perils of the half mile that we
traversed before darkness fell. The rough rocks tore our hands and feet
as we clambered painfully over them. They were slippery with sea-weed
and wet with the waves that from time to time rolled across them. More
than once I slipped and would have fallen into the raging water below,
but for Georgie's sustaining arm. Looking back now to that dark evening,
Georgie's bravery and presence of mind seem wonderful to me. He spoke
little, only now and then directing me where to place my feet, but his
strong, boyish hand held mine in a firm grasp, and his clear eyes saw
just when to seize the opportunity, given by a receding wave, to spring
from one rock to another.

"Georgie, shall we _ever_ reach home?" I sighed at last as we gained the
end of a spur of rock over which we had been walking. Georgie made no
answer, and I turned, in surprise, to look at him. His face was very
white, and his great eyes were staring out into the twilight with such a
frightened gaze that I looked about me with a sudden increase of terror.
I had thought the worst of the way over, and in the gathering darkness
had hardly noticed where we were going, following Georgie with perfect
trust in his judgment. Now I suddenly saw that we could proceed no
farther. We stood, as I have said, on a long ridge of rock. Before us,
at our very feet, was the wildly surging water, tearing at the rocks as
if to wrest them from their foundation. Beyond, we could see the strong
cliffs again, but far out of reach. Behind were only the narrow rocks
over which we had come; and on either side the cruel sea cut us off from
all hope of gaining the land. I sank on the slippery sea-weed, in an
agony of terror, sobbing out my mother's name. Georgie sat down beside
me. "Don't cry, Allie!" he said, in a trembling voice. "Please don't! We
may be saved yet. Perhaps they'll come after us in a boat. Or we can
stay here till morning."

"But oh! I want to go home! I want mamma," I sobbed; "and I'm so cold
and tired, and my feet ache so! O Georgie, _can't_ we go on?"

Georgie was silent for a few moments. "No," he said, at last, "we must
stay here, but don't be afraid. Here, I'm not cold, take my coat, and
I'll tie our handkerchiefs round your feet. There, lean on me, now. We
must hold on to the rock, you know, or we might tumble. Now, let's both
scream 'help' as loud as we can. May be, some one will hear us and
come."

But though we shouted till we were hoarse, the only answering voices
were those of the roaring wind and "the wild sea water."

It was quite dark now. I could see nothing as I clung there, half
sitting, half lying, with my face on Georgie's shoulder. Strangely vivid
were the pictures that passed before my closed eyes. I saw my pretty
nursery, with the clear lamplight falling on the pictured walls and the
little white beds; I saw my mother seated by the fire, with the baby in
her arms, and heard her low, sweet voice singing:

   "Sleep, baby, sleep,
    Thy father watches the sheep!"

I saw my father, laughing and frolicking with my little brothers, as his
wont was on a leisure evening. How I longed to be among them. Then my
hair, blowing across my eyes, blotted out the pleasant picture, and the
hoarse shouting of the sea drove the sweet cradle-song from my ears.

Georgie's voice stopped my weary sobbing. "Allie," he said, softly,
"mamma told me that true knights prayed for help when they were
fighting. So I shall ask God to help us now. I think He will."

Then, clear and soft, amid the roaring of the storm, arose the childish
voice repeating his evening prayer:

   "Now I lay me down to sleep,
    I pray the Lord my soul to keep!
    If I should die before I wake,
    I pray the Lord my soul to take."

I felt a little quieter when he had finished. Georgie's strong, sweet
faith strengthened me unawares, and involuntarily I repeated the little
prayer after him. Then we were silent for a long time. I was strangely
weak and weary. The fear of death was gone now; I thought no more of
even my mother. I think I was fast lapsing into unconsciousness when
Georgie's voice half aroused me. "Allie! Allie!" he cried. "Wake up! You
are slipping down! O, Allie, dear, do try to get up! You'll be drowned!"
But even this failed to arouse me from the stupor into which I had
fallen. I felt myself slipping from my seat. Already my feet were in the
icy water, and the spray was dashing about my face. I heard Georgie call
me once again, felt my hands firmly grasped in his, and then I knew
nothing more.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Alice, dear little Alice!" I opened my eyes at the words. Somebody's
arms were about me; warm tears were falling on my head, and the scent of
roses was in the air. Where was I? Was this my own little bed, with its
snowy curtains and soft, fresh pillows? Was Baby Robin lying beside me,
stroking my cheek with his tiny hand? I was not dead, then? Where were
the water and the cold sea-weed? A kiss fell on my forehead, and a voice
murmured soft love-words in my ear. "Allie! my little girl! Mamma's
darling!"

[Illustration: ON THE ROCK.]

Then I raised my head and looked straight into my mother's sweet,
tearful eyes. "Mamma," I said, throwing my arms around her neck, "O,
mamma, I was so afraid! I wanted you so!"

"But you are safe, Allie, now. Lie down again, dear. You are weak yet."

So I lay back on the soft pillow with a feeling of rest and content in
my heart, such as had never been there before. I cared to ask no
questions. It was enough that I was safe, with my mother beside my bed
and the early sunbeams flickering on the wall opposite. It was a long
time before I thought of even Georgie. When I asked for him, mamma's
eyes filled with tears. "Dear Allie," she said, "Georgie saved your
life. My little girl would have been taken away from me, but for him. He
caught you when you slipped, and, tired as he was, held you up till help
came. He fainted as soon as papa took him into the boat. We thought you
were both dead!" Her voice broke in a sob, and she clasped me closer in
her arms. "He is better now," she went on. "Allie, we must never forget
his courage. Thank God, he was with you!"

"Mamma, O mamma!" I cried, "he said he was trying to be like Saint
George. _Isn't_ he like him? He saved me, and he prayed there in the
dark--and, O mamma, I love him so for it!"

"Yes, Allie," answered my mother, "not one of the old knights was braver
than ours, and not one of all the saints did better service in the sight
of God than our little Saint George last night."




BORN IN PRISON.

BY JULIA P. BALLARD.


[Illustration: THE PRISONERS.]

I am only a day old! I wonder if every butterfly comes into the world to
find such queer things about him? I was born in prison. I can see right
through my walls; but I can't find any door. Right below me (for I have
climbed up the wall) lies a queer-looking, empty box. It is clear, and a
pale green. It is all in one piece, only a little slit in the top. I
wonder what came out of it. Close by it there is another green box, long
and narrow, but not empty, and no slit in the top. I wonder what is in
it. Near it is a smooth, green caterpillar, crawling on the edge of a
bit of cabbage-leaf. I'm afraid that bright light has hurt my eyes. It
was just outside of my prison wall, and bright as the sun. The first
thing I remember, even before my wings had opened wide, or I was half
through stretching my feet to see if I could use them in climbing, there
was a great eye looking at me. Something round was before it, with a
handle. I suppose it was a quizzing-glass to see what I was about. I
heard somebody say, "Oh! oh!" twice, just as if they wondered I was
here. Then they held the great bright light close to the wall till my
eyes were dazzled. I don't like this prison. It isn't worth while to fly
about. It seems as if I ought to have more room. There must be something
inside that green box. It moves! I saw it half tip over then, all of
itself. I believe that caterpillar is afraid of it. He creeps off slowly
toward the wall. How smooth and green he is! How his rings move when he
crawls! Now he is gone up the wall. He has stopped near the roof. How he
throws his head from side to side! He is growing broader! He looks just
as if he was turning into one of these green boxes! How that box shakes!
There, I see it begin to open! There is a slit coming in the back!
Something peeps out! A butterfly's head, I declare! Here it comes,--two
long feelers, two short ones! Four wings, two round spots on each of the
upper pair, and none on the other two. Dressed just like me. I wonder
why it hid away in that box?

First Butterfly.--"What made you hide in that green box?"

Second Butterfly.--"What box? I haven't hid anywhere. I don't know what
box you mean?"

First Butterfly.--"That one. You just crawled out of it. I saw you."

Second Butterfly.--"That's the first I knew of it. There are _two_ boxes
just alike. _Both_ empty. May be you were hid in the other!"

First Butterfly.--"Ho! There goes up our prison wall! That's the big
hand that held the bright light. How good the air feels! Now for a
chance to try our wings! Away we go!"




HOW LILY-TOES WAS CAUGHT IN A SHOWER.

BY EMILY H. LELAND.


Lily-toes, though quite a pet, was the fourth baby, and, consequently,
was not so great a wonder in the eyes of her family as she might have
been. She and her mamma were on a visit to her grandma's, in the
country. As she had been there a week, the excitement attendant on her
arrival had so far subsided that grandma was beginning to turn her
attention to cheese-making, her two aunties to sew vigorously on their
new cambric dresses, and grandpa and the big hired man to become so
engaged in the "haying" that they scarcely saw Lily-toes except at
supper-time.

Lily-toes, as if to make amends for being the fourth, was a lovely
chubby baby of eight months, so full of sunshine and content and blessed
good health, that although her two first teeth were just grumbling
through, she would sit in her high chair by the window or roll and
wriggle about on the floor, singing tuneless songs and telling herself
wordless stories, an hour at a time, without making any demands on
anybody, so that grandma and the aunties declared that half the time
they would not know there was a baby in the house. Perhaps it is
sometimes a fault to be too good-natured; for there came a certain
afternoon when Lily-toes would have been pleased if somebody had
remembered there _was_ a baby in the house.

It happened in this way. There was company at grandma's. Not the kind of
city company that comes to dine after babies are in bed for the night,
but country company,--that comes early in the afternoon and stays and
talks over whole life-times before tea. Grandma, mamma, and the aunties
were enjoying it all very much; and Lily-toes, who was, if possible,
more angelic than ever, had wakened from a blessed nap, lunched on bread
and milk and strawberries, and was stationed in her high chair on the
back piazza where she could admire the landscape and watch the cows and
sheep feeding upon the hill-sides. A honeysuckle swung in the breeze
above her head, and little chickens, not big enough to do harm to
grandma's flower-beds, ran to and fro in the knot-grass, hunting for
little shiny green bugs, and fluttering and peeping in a way that was
very interesting to Lily-toes. No baby could be more comfortably
situated on a hot summer day; at least, so her mamma thought, as she
tied Lily-toes securely in her chair with a soft scarf, and went back to
the sitting-room and the busy sewing and talking with her dear old
girlhood friends. I presume if Lily-toes had been a first baby, her
mamma would have hesitated about leaving her there. She would have
feared--may be--that the chickens would eat her up or that she might
swallow the paper-weight. As it was, she only kissed the little thing
with a sort of mechanical smack and left her alone, as coolly as if
lovely Lily-toe babies were an every-day affair.

Meanwhile, and for many days before, great distress was going on in the
fields and gardens for lack of rain. The young corn was drooping, the
vines fainting, the sweet red roses opening languidly, the grasses
growing dry and brittle to the bite of the patient cows and nibbling
sheep. Everything, except Lily-toes, was expressing a desire for rain.
In fact, all through the night before this story of a wronged baby
opens, the hills, woods, fields, and gardens, had been praying for rain
according to their individual needs, the maples and elms desiring a
"regular soaker," while the lowly pansies lifted their fevered little
palms to the stars and begged but a few drops.

And the rain came. Slowly up the western skies rose a solid cloud. No
attention was paid it for some time, it came on so quietly and serenely.
But, by and by, the cows came sauntering down to the barn-yard bars as
if they thought it was milking-time, and the sheep huddled together
under the great elms. Grandpa and his big man commenced raking the hay
together vigorously, and a sudden, cool, puffy breeze began to ruffle
the little rings of hair on Lily-toes' head, and send the small chickens
careening over the knot-grass in such fashion that the careful
mother-hen put her head out of her little house and called them in. And
still in the cool, pleasant sitting-room, with its cheerful talk and
laughter, the approach of the storm was hardly noticed. Grandma, the
most thoughtful body present, remarked that she believed it was
"clouding up a little," and mamma said she hoped so. And then the talk
went on about making dresses and the best way to put up strawberries and
spiced currants. But when big drops came suddenly plashing against the
windows and a lively peal of thunder rolled overhead, then there was a
scattering in the sitting-room. The aunties scampered out through a side
door to snatch some clothes from the grass-plot, and to gather up the
bright tin pans and pails that had been sunning on the long benches.
Grandma, throwing her apron over her head, ran to see that some precious
young turkeys were under shelter. The visitors hurried to the door,
bewailing the windows they had left open at home, and hoping their
husbands _would_ have sense enough to see to things. And the mamma ran
upstairs to close the windows and potter over some collars and ruffles
that had blown about, never thinking of baby on the uncovered piazza.

[Illustration: LILY-TOES IN THE SHOWER.]

Oh, how it poured! Grandpa and his man got as far as the wagon-shed just
as the worst came, and they stayed there. Grandma was weather-bound
along with her young turkeys in the granary. And Lily-toes!--no one will
ever know what her reflections were for a few moments. I imagine she
rather liked the first drops; for she was always fond of plashing about
in her bath-tub, and had no fear of water in reasonable quantities. But
when the wind began to dash the rain in her face, probably she first
gasped in astonishment, and then kicked, and, eventually, as everybody
knew, screamed! Yes; aunties, visitors, and mamma, as they met in the
hall and shrieked to each other about the storm, heard, at last, in the
lull of the gale, a sound of indignant squalling.

Then there was another scamper. Lily-toes was snatched in-doors and
borne along amid a tempest of astonishment and pity, until one visitor
burst out laughing; and then all laughed except the mamma, who kept a
straight face until baby stopped crying and smiled around on them like
wet sunlight.

Before grandma could reach the house, Lily-toes had been rubbed very dry
and put into dry clothes; but her wrapper and petticoats and stockings
and blue shoes, lying in a sopping heap on the floor, told the tale to
grandma and grandpa and the hired man, who all agreed it was a burning
shame to forget Lily-toes, even for five minutes; and the hired man went
so far as to remark that, "If there had been a few more women-folks in
the house, she'd most likely been drown-ded." And Lily-toes looked at
him gratefully, as if he had spoken the very words she had longed to
say.




"THANKS TO YOU."

BY MARY E. BRADLEY.


[Illustration]


  Every day for a month of Sundays,
  Saturdays, Tuesdays, Fridays, Mondays,
  Jack had pondered the various means
  And methods pertaining to grinding machines,
  Until he was sure he could build a wheel
  That, given the sort of dam that's proper,
  Would only need some corn in the hopper
  To turn out very respectable meal.

  Jerry and Jane and Jo, and the others,
  Jack's incredulous sisters and brothers,
  Gave him credit for good intentions,
  But took no stock in the boy's inventions.
  In fact they laughed them quite to scorn;
  Instead of wasting his time, they said,
  He would be more likely to earn his bread
  Planting potatoes or hoeing corn!

  Bessie alone, when all the rest
  Crushed his spirit with gibe and jest,
  Whispered softly, "Whatever they say,
  I know you will build the wheel some day!"
  Chirping crickets and singing birds
  Were not so sweet as her heartsome words;
  Straight he answered, "If ever I do,
  I know it will only be thanks to you!"

  Many a time sore heart and brain
  Leap at a word, grown strong again.
  Thanks to her, as the story goes,
  Hope and courage in Jack arose;
  Till one bright day in the meadow-brook
  There was heard a sound as of water plashing,
  And Bessie watched with her happy look
  The little wheel in the sunlight flashing.

  By and by as the years were fraught
  With fruit of his earnest toil and thought,
  Brothers and sisters changed their tune,--
  "Our Jack," they cried, "will be famous soon!"
  Which was nothing more than Bessie knew,
  She said, and had known it all the while!
  But Jack replied with a kiss and a smile,
  "If ever I am, it is thanks to you!"




[Illustration]

HOW BIRDS FLY.

BY PROF. W.K. BROOKS.


In our last talk about birds (in ST. NICHOLAS for July), I told you
about birds and their nests. Now I wish to say, first, a few words about
the different kinds of birds, and then we will see how birds manage to
fly. Naturalists have divided the class, birds, into several smaller
groups which are called orders. One of these includes the birds of prey,
such as the hawks, eagles, and owls. In the picture of a bird of prey
you can see the strong, hooked bill and powerful claws, which are well
fitted for seizing and tearing its prey.

The second order includes the climbing birds, such as the woodpeckers.
The birds of this order can readily be recognized, since two of the toes
of each foot point backward, to give support in climbing.

The next order, that of the perching birds, includes all our common
song-birds, such as the robin, bluebird, and blackbird, as well as a few
larger birds, like the crow.

The scratching birds form another order, including our domestic fowls
and many wild game-birds.

The next order comprises the ostrich and a few other large birds, which
have such small wings that they are unable to fly, but with very large
and powerful legs, so that they are excellent runners. Although this
order includes the largest bird at present living, there were formerly
running birds very much larger than any which now exist; for, in
Madagascar and New Zealand, the bones, and even the eggs, of gigantic
birds have been found. One of these eggs was over a foot in length, and
contained more than ten quarts or as much as six ostrich eggs or one
hundred and fifty hen's eggs. A nearly complete skeleton of one of these
birds has been found, and this must have belonged to a bird fifteen feet
high, or taller than the largest elephant!

The next order includes the wading birds such as the snipe, plover,
woodcock, heron, and rail.

Another order is that of the gulls, ducks, geese, pelicans, penguins,
and other swimming birds.

Besides these living birds, fossil birds have been found in the rocks.
Some of these are very different from any species now living, and very
much like reptiles, so that it is not easy to decide whether they are to
be called birds or reptiles.

The chief peculiarity of birds is their power of flight, and, although
there are a few birds which do not fly, most of them do, and the various
organs of their bodies are all constructed in such a way as to fit them
for a life in the air. Their bodies are very solid and compact, in order
that most of their weight shall be near the place where the wings are
attached. The feet, legs, head, and neck are light, and so arranged that
they may be drawn up close to the body while the bird is flying. As the
neck is long and very flexible, the body does not need to be pliant, as
with most creatures having backbones; but it is important that the wings
should have a firm support, so the bones of the back are united. The
body of a bird must also be well protected from the cold; for, as it
ascends and descends through the air, it passes through regions of very
different temperatures, and it must be provided with a thick and warm
covering in order to be able to endure these sudden changes, and one
also which shall be very light and able to shed the water; for,
otherwise, a bird would be unable to fly. The feathers of a bird answer
to all these needs, and are so placed upon the body that they form a
smooth surface which does not catch against the air when the bird is
passing through it. In its rapid ascents and descents, the bird is
exposed to another danger even greater than the sudden changes of
temperature. You all know that air presses in every direction with great
force, and that we do not feel it because there is air in all parts of
our bodies as well as outside them, and the pressure of the air inside
exactly balances that of the outside air. If we should suddenly take
away the outside air in any way, such as covering a person up with an
air-pump receiver, and quickly and completely exhausting the air, the
consequences of the inside pressure would be very terrible, and if the
experiment could be tried quickly enough the body would burst like an
exploding gun, with a loud noise.

[Illustration: THE EAGLE (BIRD OF PREY).]

When people go up rapidly in a balloon or climb very high mountains,
they are troubled by a ringing noise and a feeling of great pressure in
the ears and head, and by palpitation of the heart, bleeding at the
nose, and fainting. These unpleasant and often dangerous symptoms are
caused by the expansion of the air inside their bodies. In ascending
very high mountains it is necessary to go very slowly and to stop very
often, to give time for some of the expanded air to escape, and equalize
the pressure again. Now, many birds, the condor, for example, fly over
the tops of the highest mountains, and nearly all birds, either
occasionally or habitually, ascend to very great altitudes, and, unless
there were some plan for regulating the pressure of the air inside their
bodies, they would suffer great inconvenience and even pain and danger.
But they are provided with an arrangement by which the air within them
can escape easily as it expands and thus keep the pressure within just
equal to that outside, so that they can ascend and descend as rapidly as
they wish, without feeling the least inconvenience. In the body of the
bird there are several large bags, like the lungs, called air-chambers;
many of their bones are hollow, and others are pierced with long winding
tubes called air-tubes. All these air-chambers and air-tubes are
connected with the lungs so that air can pass into and out of them at
each breath. The connection between these chambers and the lungs is so
complete that a wounded hawk can breathe through a broken wing almost as
well as through its mouth. When a bird mounts upward, the air inside its
body gradually expands, but the bird does not feel any inconvenience;
for, at each breath, part of the air passes from the air-chambers into
the lungs, so that the pressure on the inside does not become greater
than that on the outside.

[Illustrations: PENGUINS (SWIMMERS AND DIVERS).]

I could easily fill the whole of this chapter with an account of the
different ways in which the body of a bird is fitted for life in the
air, but we have room to examine only one of these,--the way in which
the wing is adapted to its use.

Did you ever look at a bird's wing carefully, and try to find out from
it the way in which it is used? People usually suppose, either that a
bird flies because it is lighter than the air, like a balloon, or that
it rows itself along as a boat is rowed through the water. Neither of
these suppositions is true. A bird is not lighter than the air, and does
not float; for when a bird is shot on the wing it falls to the ground
just as quickly as a squirrel. On the contrary, a bird flies by its own
weight, and could not fly at all if it were not heavier than the air.

You know that when you move a large, flat surface rapidly through the
air, it meets with considerable resistance. A bird's wing is so large,
and is moved so rapidly, that the resistance of the air is enough to
raise the bird a short distance each time the wings are flapped
downward; but after each down-flap there must be an up-flap, and the air
resists this just as it does the down-flap; so, unless there were some
arrangement to prevent it, the bird would drive itself down each time it
raised its wings, just as far as it had raised itself by the down-stroke
before, so that it would never get into the air at all. To meet this
difficulty, the wing is so shaped that it is concave or hollow upon its
lower surface, so that it gathers the air together and prevents it from
escaping; while the upper surface is convex or bulging, so that the air
slides off from it when the wing is moved upward. If you have ever been
caught in a sudden squall of wind with an open umbrella, you will easily
understand how great a difference in resisting power this difference in
the shape of the two sides of the wing will make. As long as you can
keep the bulging side of the umbrella pointed toward the wind, you find
no difficulty in holding it; but if the wind strikes the hollow
under-side of the umbrella, it pulls so violently that, unless you are
able to turn around and face the wind, the chances are that the umbrella
will either be pulled away from you or turned inside out. But in the
latter case, the wind slides out over the edges again, so that there is
no trouble in holding on to the umbrella.

The peculiar shape of the wing is only one of the ways by which the
down-stroke is made to strike the air with more force than the
up-stroke. If you will look at a quill-feather, you will see that, on
each side of the central shaft or quill, there is a broad, thin portion,
which is called the _vane_. The vane on one side of the shaft is quite
broad and flexible, while that on the other side is narrow and stiff;
and by looking at a wing with the feathers in their places, you will
find that they are placed so that they overlap a little, like the slats
on a window-blind. Each broad vane runs under the narrow vane of the
feather beside it, so that, when the wing is moved downward, each
feather is pressed up against the stiff narrow vane of the one beside
it, and the whole wing forms a solid sheet like a blind with the slats
closed. After the down-stroke is finished and the up-stroke begins, the
pressure is taken off from the lower surface of the wing, and begins to
act on the upper surface and to press the feathers downward instead of
upward. The broad vanes now have nothing to support them, and they bend
down and allow the air to pass through the wing, which is now like a
blind with the slats open. By these two contrivances,--the shape of the
wing, and the shape and arrangement of the feathers,--the wing resists
the air on its down-stroke and raises the bird a little at each flap,
but at each up-stroke allows the air to slide off at the sides, and to
pass through between the feathers, so that nothing is lost.

[Illustration: QUAIL (SCRATCHERS).]

So much for the way in which the bird is raised into the air. Rising in
the air is not flying, for a balloon and a kite rise but do not fly.
Now, how is a bird able to move forward? This is not quite as easy to
understand as the other, but I hope to be able to make it clear to you.
I must first say, however, that it is not done by rowing with the wings,
for they move up and down, not backward and forward, and no amount of
rowing up and down would drive a bird forward, any more than rowing
backward and forward would lift a boat up into the air.

You will find, if you carefully examine a bird's wing, that all the
bones and muscles are placed along the front edge, which is thus made
very stiff and strong. The quill feathers are fastened in such a way
that they point backward, so that the hind edge of the wing is not stiff
like the front edge, but is flexible and bends at the least touch. As
the air is not a solid, but a gas, it has a tendency to slide out from
under the wing when this is driven downward, and of course it will do
this at the point where it can escape most easily. Since the front edge
of the wing is stiff and strong, it retains its hollow shape, and
prevents the air from sliding out in this direction, but the pressure of
the air is enough to bend up the thin, flexible ends of the feathers at
the hinder border of the wing, so the air makes its escape there, and
slides out backward and upward. The weight of the bird is all the time
pulling it down toward the earth; so, at the same time that the air
slides out upward and backward past the bent edge of the wing, the wing
itself, and with it the bird, slides forward and downward off from the
confined air. You will have a much better idea of this if you will cut
out a little paper model of a bird's wing and watch the way in which it
falls through the air.

[Illustration]

Take a sheet of stiff paper and cut it in the shape shown in the diagram
above, but considerably larger. Be very careful to have the two sides
alike, so that they shall balance each other. Now fold up the front
margin of each wing, along the dotted lines _a_, _a_, _a_, _a_, to form
a stiff rim to represent the rim of bone along the front edge of a
bird's wing, and cut out a small strip of wood, about as thick as a
match and twice as long, and run this through the two slits, _b_, _b_,
to represent the body of the bird. If you hold this model about three
feet from the ground, and allow it to fall gently, you will see that,
instead of falling straight to the ground, it will slide forward, and
strike the ground two or three feet ahead of you. It is really its
weight which causes it to do this, so that the statement that a bird
flies by its own weight is strictly true.

[Illustration: A SKILLFUL FLYER.]

This is true, also, of insects and bats. They all have wings with stiff
front edges, and flexible hind edges which bend and allow the air to
pass out, so that flying is nothing but sliding down a hill made of air.
A bird rises, then, by flapping its wings, and it flies by falling back
toward the earth and sliding forward at the same time. At the end of
each stroke of its wings it has raised itself enough to make up for the
distance it has fallen since the last stroke, and accordingly it stays
at the same height and moves forward in a seemingly straight line. But
if you watch the flight of those birds which flap their wings slowly,
such as the woodpecker, you can see them rise and fall, and will have no
trouble in seeing that their path is not really a straight line, but is
made up of curves; although most birds flap their wings so rapidly that
they have no time to fall through a space great enough to be seen. Birds
also make use of the wind to aid them in flight, and by holding their
wings inclined like a kite, so that the wind shall slide out under them,
they can sail great distances without flapping their wings at all. They
are supported, as a paper kite is, by the wind, which is continually
pushing against their wings, and sliding out backward and downward, thus
lifting or holding up the bird, and at the same time driving it forward.

The birds are not compelled to face the wind while they are sailing, but
by changing the position of the wings a little they can go in whatever
direction they wish, much as a boy changes his direction in skating by
leaning a little to one side or the other. Some birds are very skillful
at this kind of sailing, and can even remain stationary in the air for
some minutes when there is a strong wind; and they do this without
flapping their wings at all. It is a difficult thing to do, and no birds
except the most skillful flyers can manage it. Some hawks can do it, and
gulls and terns may often be seen practicing it when a gale of wind is
blowing, and they seem to take great delight in their power of flight.

Of all birds the albatross is the most skillful in the art of sailing in
the air. It is a large sea-bird, about the size of a swan, and has very
long and powerful wings. It lives far out upon the open ocean, hundreds
of miles from land, and spends nearly all of its life in the air, very
seldom alighting upon the water. It flies almost entirely by the aid of
the wind, and sometimes does not flap its wings for an hour at a time.
Albatrosses often follow a ship clear across the ocean, or, rather, they
keep company with the ship, for as they are able to fly one hundred
miles an hour with ease, the rate at which a ship travels is much too
slow for them; so they make long journeys ahead and behind, like a dog
taking a walk with his master, returning occasionally to the ship to
pick up any food which may have been thrown overboard.




NANCY CHIME.

BY S. SMITH.


[Illustration]


  Untarnished by the breath of fame,
    Untouched by prose or rhyme,
  The world has never heard that name,--
    The name of Nancy Chime.

  Domestic, friend, and monitor,
    She served us long and well;
  Not many "helps" could equal her,
    And none, perhaps, excel.

  No evil lurked within her breast;
    Her face was always bright;
  Her trusty hands, scarce needing rest,
    Were busy day and night.

  Her voice was sweet as voice of birds
    That to each other call;
  And when she spoke, her striking words
    Were listened to by all.

  E'en Baby Bunting--darling boy,
    The happiest of his race--
  Would clap his little hands with joy,
    And look up in her face.

  But none can reach perfection here;
    Like all beneath the sun,
  She, too, could err, and her career
    Was not a faultless one.

  She only did, here let me tell,
    Each day the best she could;
  Would young folks all but do as well,
    The world might soon grow good.

  But all is past! Ah! cold that face!
    That bosom throbs no more!
  Oh! must another take her place,
    And we our loss deplore?

  Nay, nay, we could not bear the pain
    Of losing one so true;--
  Old Nancy Chime shall tick again,
    And be as good as new.




HOW HE CAUGHT HIM.


[Illustration: HANS GETS A FIRST-RATE BITE.]

[Illustration: THEN HE CATCHES A FISH AND PULLS HIM OUT.]

[Illustration: HANS FINDS IT HARDER TO HOLD THE FISH THAN TO CATCH HIM.]

[Illustration: THEN HANS BEGINS TO WONDER WHETHER HE OR THE FISH IS
CAUGHT.]

[Illustration: THE FISH NOW CATCHES HANS AND PULLS HIM IN.]

[Illustration: HANS AND THE FISH AGREE TO STOP CATCHING EACH OTHER.]




WHO PUT OUT THE TEA-PARTY?

BY ELLEN FRANCES TERRY.


One day, when I was a small girl, my little sister Katy and I found in
the yard a dry-goods box, in which the new carpets had been sent home.
As usual, we ran to where grandma sat knitting and nodding:

"Oh, grandma, _mayn't_ we have it?" cried I.

"Yet hab it, dranma?" echoed Katy.

"You know we never had a baby-house."

"No, nebber had no baby-'ouse."

"Oh, say yes!"

"'Ay 'et!"

"Do, do!"

"Pede do!"

Then, before she knew what she was to do, or say, or what she never had
done, or said, we coaxed her to the back door and pointed to our
treasure. She couldn't refuse us, and the box was given to us.

John made us a card-board chimney, and cut a square window in either
end, for, of course, we set it on its feet, turning its back to the lane
against whose fence it stood, looking into the yard. Grandma gave us red
curtains for the windows, and a big striped apron, which hung across the
front and did for a door. We had to have a door, for, when we took tea,
the chickens came, without invitation, peeping inside, looking for
crumbs. And, seeing what looked like a party, down flew, with a whir and
rustle, a flock of doves, saying, "Coo-oo! how do-oo-do!" and prinking
themselves in our very faces. Yes, we really had too many of these
surprise-parties; for, another time, it was a wasp that came to tea, and
flew from me to Katy, and from Katy to me, till we flew, too, to hide
our heads in grandma's lap. Then she gave us the apron, which was very
grand, though the blue stripes were walking into the red ones, and there
were a good many little holes which let small arrows of light fly out.
That was when we lighted the chandelier, and they (the holes and the
arrows) were the very things to let people know what grand doings there
were inside.

Then, when our crockery was arranged on the shelf at the back, a stool
set in the middle for a table, our two small green chairs placed one at
either end, and a good many nails driven into the "walls" to serve as
hooks,--then we gave a party. The dolls were invited, of course, and
their invitations Katy wrote on her slate. To be sure, the letters
looked a good deal like Jack and Jill,--climbing up hill and tumbling
down again,--still the dolls understood us. There were no little girls
invited, because little girls couldn't have squeezed in, unless they
were willing to be hung up, like the extra dollies.

But oh! wouldn't they have liked to go? We had ice-cream, just made of
vanilla, cream-candy, and water,--delicious! Then there was a whole
tea-potful of chocolate-tea, which was a chocolate-cream drop scraped
fine and mixed with water. Do just try it sometime. Thimble-biscuits,
too, and holes with cookies round them. I never expect to be as happy
again as I was when I dropped the curtain at half-past four precisely,
and lighted the chandelier, which I forgot to say was a candle cut in
two, stuck in cologne-bottles of different shapes and colors.

We well knew--for didn't we go out twice to look?--how splendidly the
light streamed through the two windows and the eight holes. Why, the
chickens knew it, too, on their perches, for they opened one sleepy eye
after another, solemnly changed legs, and dozed off again. Those long
rays of light, playing truant, ran down the lane and flashed into the
very eyes of naughty Billy Quinn, who was going home from a visit,
whistling, and with his hands in his pockets.

Of course the dolls arrived promptly, and took off their shawls in the
best bedroom, which was that convenient shelf that was turned into
anything on short notice. The baby-dolls had to go early to bed under
the table, and you can imagine how much pleasanter it is to say,
"Bed-time, children!" than to have it said to you. Mrs. Green was a
perfect little Mrs. Herod in her treatment of her children. Indeed,
their yells under punishment were heart-rending; but when she was only
dear Katy she was tender as one of those cooing doves.

So we ate up the ice-cream, and turned the tea-pot upside down to
squeeze out the last drop of chocolate-tea. Mrs. Green was just doing
this very thing when the most dreadful event happened.
Crash!--bang!--clatter!--the whole world had turned upside down. Out
went the lights, and everything fell together in a dismal heap; but
whether up or down nobody could tell. There was a splash of cold, cold
water in my face as the wash-bowl and pitcher fell and crashed beside
me. Katy lay with her small nose buried in the butter-plate. _The house
had tumbled over!!_

For a few seconds not a sound was heard, but then there was a
half-stifled burst of laughter, which quickly died away as some thickly
shod feet scampered down the alley. Yes, the beautiful house was tipped
over, and the tea-party put out, as an extinguisher is slipped over a
candle, or a hat clapped upon a butterfly. Inside, there was a confused
heap, with legs uppermost,--table-legs, chair-legs, little legs clad in
white stockings, and, mixed hopelessly up with these, the dolls, the
dishes, the candles.

[Illustration: THE TEA-PARTY.]

This heap, however, was silent only for a moment. Then a feeble cry
struggled up through it,--a cry which, reaching the upper air, grew
loud, doubled itself, became two cries, and rushed out through a window,
which, having lost its way, was where the roof ought to be. Then growing
fast and shrill, the cry ran toward the house, waking up the Brown baby,
who at once joined in. The rooster waked suddenly, and feeling that
something had happened, thought it could do no harm to crow, and that
agitated his household to the last hen. Then to the cackling and
crowing, Beppo added a bark of duty, and nearly turned inside out,
tugging at his chain, and howling between times. The canary began his
scales, and the scream grew and grew and rushed into the house through
every door and window. Uncle John was reading the paper, but, hearing
the fearful uproar, he dashed into the yard, turned back the house with
one hand, with the other picked out from the heap of legs all the white
ones, and dragged us from the wreck of our residence. It was quickly
done, but not too soon, for a little flame, which was hiding under the
close mass of ruins, now hopped merrily up on the tarletan skirts of
Alice Isabella, the prettiest of the dolls.

While we were being taken to grandma to be cried over and comforted, and
the poor old house lay on its side forgotten, that flame finished off
poor dolly, ran up to the roof, ate up the red-striped curtain in the
twinkling of an eye, and, in fact, made short work of the whole thing.
We knew nothing of this that night, but were so honored and indulged as
to make us think everything else had turned a new leaf as well as the
house.

The next morning, grandma, coming into the breakfast-room, was called to
the window by Uncle John, who was looking at something in the yard.
There was a forlorn little figure sitting on a log among the charred
embers of the burnt house. It was I, sobbing as if my heart would break,
and beside me was Katy, who stood sadly by, trying with a corner of her
apron to dry my tears. But her eyes were wet, too, and in the fat arms
were squeezed a leg and shoe, which was all that was left of Alice
Isabella.

What wicked eye had watched the festivities through the window, or what
cruel heart had yielded to the temptation to turn over the house upon it
all, we never knew. I heard that Billy Quinn was punished that night for
coming home late to supper, and now, looking impartially at the matter
over all these years, I am inclined to think it was that very Billy
Quinn, and no other, who put out the tea-party.




THE FOX, THE MONKEY, AND THE PIG.

BY HOWARD PYLE.


[Illustration]


The fox, the monkey, and the pig were once inseparable companions. As
they were nearly always together, the fox's thefts so far reflected upon
his innocent associates, that they were all three held to be wicked
animals.

At length, the enemies of these three laid a snare, in a path they were
known to use.

The first that came to the trap was the pig. He viewed it with contempt,
and, to show his disdain of his enemies and his disregard for their
snare, he tried to walk through it with a lofty tread. He found he had
undervalued it, however, when, in spite of his struggles, he was caught
and strangled.

The next that came was the monkey. He inspected the trap carefully;
then, priding himself upon the skill and dexterity of his fingers, he
tried to pick it to pieces. In a moment of carelessness, however, he
became entangled, and soon met the fate of the unfortunate pig.

The last that came was the fox. He looked at the snare anxiously, from a
distance, and, approaching cautiously, soon made himself thoroughly
acquainted with its size and power. Then he cried, "Thus do I defeat the
machinations of my enemies!"--and, avoiding the trap altogether, by
leaping completely over it, he went on his way rejoicing.




DAB KINZER: A STORY OF A GROWING BOY.

BY WILLIAM O. STODDARD.



CHAPTER XIV.


The next day's newspapers, from the city, brought full accounts of the
stranding of the "Prudhomme," as well as of the safety of her passengers
and cargo; but they had nothing whatever to say about the performances
of the "Swallow." The yacht had been every bit as well handled as the
great steamship, but then she had got home safely, and she was such a
little thing, after all. Whatever excitement there had been in the
village died out as soon as it was known that the boys were safe; and
then, too, Mrs. Lee found time to "wonder wot Dab Kinzer means to do wid
all de money he done got for dem blue-fish."

Dab himself had been talking with Ford Foster and Frank Harley, and an
original idea of his own was beginning to take some sort of form in his
mind. He did not, as yet, mention it to any one, as he wanted very much
to consult with Ham Morris about it. As for Frank, Mr. Foster had
readily volunteered to visit the steamship office, in the city, when he
went over to business, next day, and do whatever might be needed with
reference to the young gentleman's baggage. At the same time, Mrs.
Foster wrote to her sister, Mrs. Hart, giving a full account of what had
happened, and saying she meant to keep Frank as Ford's guest for a
while.

The Hart boys hardly knew whether to submit or not, when that letter
came, as they had planned for themselves all sorts of rare fun with "the
young missionary" in their own home.

"Never mind, Fuz," said Joe, "we'll serve him out when we get to
Grantley."

"Yes," replied Fuz; "I'd just as lief not see too much of him before
that. He wont have any special claim on us if he doesn't go there from
our house."

Other talk they had together, and the tone of it promised very lively
times at Grantley Academy for the stranger from India. But while the
Hart boys were laying their plans for the future, they were themselves
the subjects of more than one discussion, for Ford Foster gave his two
friends the benefit of all he knew of his cousins.

"It's a good thing for you that the steamer didn't go ashore anywhere
near their house," he said to Frank Harley. "They're a pair of born
young wreckers. Just think of the tricks they played on my sister
Annie."

After that conversation, it was remarkable what daily care and attention
Dab Kinzer and Frank paid to their sparring lessons. It even exceeded
the pluck and perseverance with which Dab went to work at his French.

Plenty of fishing, bathing, riding, boxing. Three boys together can find
so much more to do than one can alone, and they made it four as often as
they could, for Dick Lee had proved himself the best kind of company.
Frank Harley's East Indian experience had made him very indifferent to
the mere question of color, and Ford Foster had too much manhood to
forget that long night of gale and fog and danger on board the
"Swallow."

It was only a day or so after the perilous "cruise" that Dab Kinzer met
his old playmate, Jenny Walters, just in the edge of the village.

"How well you look, Dabney!" remarked the sharp-tongued little lady.
"Drowning must agree with you."

"Yes," said Dab; "I like it."

"Do you know what a fuss they made over you when you were gone? I s'pose
they'd nothing else to do."

"Jenny!" suddenly exclaimed Dab, holding out his hand, "you mustn't
quarrel with me any more. Bill Lee told me about your coming down to the
landing. You may say anything you want to."

Jenny colored and bit her lip, and she would have given her bonnet to
know if Bill Lee had told Dab how very red her eyes were as she looked
down the inlet for some sign of the "Swallow." Something had to be said,
however, and she said it almost spitefully.

"I don't care, Dabney Kinzer. It did seem dreadful to think of you three
boys being drowned, and you, too, with your new clothes on.
Good-morning, Dab!"

"She's a right good girl, if she'd only show it," muttered Dab, as Jenny
tripped away; "but she isn't a bit like Annie Foster. How I do wish Ham
would come back!"

Time enough for that; and as the days went by, the Morris homestead
began to look less and less like its old self, and more and more like a
house made for people to live and be happy in. Mrs. Kinzer and her
daughters had now settled down into their new quarters as completely as
if they had never known any others, and it seemed to Dab, now and then,
as if they had taken almost too complete possession. His mother had her
room, as a matter of course, and a big one. There could be no objection
to that. Then another big one, of the very best, had to be set apart and
fitted up for Ham and Miranda on their return, and Dab delighted in
doing all in his power to make that room all it could be made. But,
then, Samantha had insisted on a separate domain, and Keziah and Pamela
imitated their elder sister to a fraction. The "guest-chamber" had to be
provided as well, or what would become of the good old Long Island
customs of hospitality?

[Illustration: THE FIRE (SEE PAGE 748.)]

Dab said nothing for a while, but one day, at dinner, just after the
arrival of a letter from Miranda announcing the speedy return of herself
and husband, he quietly remarked:

"Now I can't sleep in Ham's room any longer,--I suppose I'll have to go
out on the roof. I wont sleep in the garret or in the cellar."

"That'll be a good deal as Mrs. Morris says, when she comes," calmly
responded his mother.

"As Miranda says!" said Dab, with a long breath.

"Miranda?" gasped Samantha and her sisters.

"Yes, my dears, certainly," said their mother. "This is Mrs. Morris's
house, or her husband's,--not mine. All the arrangements I have made are
only temporary. She and Ham both have ideas and wills of their own. I've
only done the best I could for the time being."

The girls looked at one another in blank amazement over the idea of Mrs.
Kinzer being anything less than the mistress of any house she might
happen to be in, but Dabney laid down his knife and fork with:

"It's all right, then. If Ham and Miranda are to settle it, I think I'll
take the room Sam has now. You needn't take away your books, Sam. I may
want to read some of them or lend them to Annie. You and Kezi and Meli
had better take that upper room back. The smell of the paint's all gone
now, and there's three kinds of carpet on the floor."

"Dabney!" exclaimed Samantha, reproachfully, and with an appealing look
at her mother, who, however, said nothing on either side, and was a
woman of too much good sense to take any other view of the matter than
that she had announced.

Things were all running on smoothly and pleasantly before dinner was
over, but Dab's ideas of the way the house should be divided were likely
to result in some changes. Perhaps not exactly the ones he indicated,
but such as would give him a better choice than either the garret, the
cellar, or the roof. At all events, only three days would now intervene
before the arrival of the two travelers, and everything required for
their reception was pushed forward with all the energy Mrs. Kinzer could
bring to bear. She had promised Ham that his house should be ready for
him, and it was likely to be a good deal more "ready" than either he or
his wife had dreamed of.



CHAPTER XV.


One of the most troublesome of the annoyances which come to dwellers in
the country, within easy reach of the great city, is the kind of
patrolling beggar called the "tramp." He is of all sorts and sizes, and
he goes everywhere, asking for anything he wants, very much as if it
belonged to him, so long as he can ask it of a woman or a sickly-looking
man.

There had been very few of these gentry seen in that vicinity that
summer, for a wonder, and those who had made their appearance had been
reasonably well behaved. Probably because there had been so many
healthy-looking men around, as a general thing. But it came to pass, on
the very day when Ham and Miranda were expected to arrive, by the last
of the evening trains, as Dab Kinzer was coming back from the landing,
where he had been for a look at the "Swallow," to be sure she was all
right for her owner's eyes, that a very disreputable specimen of a
worthless man stopped at Mrs. Kinzer's to beg something to eat, and then
sauntered away down the road.

It was a little past the middle of the afternoon, and even so
mean-looking, dirty a tramp as that had a perfect right to be walking
along then and there. The sunshine and the fresh salt air from the bay
were as much his as anybody's, and so was the water in the bay, and no
one in all that region of country stood more in need of water than he.

The vagabond took his right to the road, as he had taken his other right
to beg his dinner, until, half-way down to the landing, he was met by an
opportunity to do more begging.

"Give a poor feller suthin," he impudently drawled, as he stared
straight into the sweet, fresh face of Annie Foster. Annie had been out
for only a short walk, but she happened to have her pocket-book with
her, and she thoughtlessly drew it out, meaning to give the scamp a
trifle, if only to get rid of him.

"Only a dime, Miss," whined the tramp, as he shut his dirty hand over
Annie's gift. "Come, now, make it a dollar, my beauty. I'll call it all
square for a dollar."

The whine grew louder as he spoke, and the wheedling grin upon his
disgusting face changed into an expression so menacing that Annie drew
back with a shudder, and was about to return her little portemonnaie to
her pocket.

"No you don't, honey!"

The words were uttered in a hoarse and husky voice, and were accompanied
by a sudden grip of poor Annie's arm with one hand, while with the other
he snatched greedily at the morocco case.

Did she scream? How could she help it? Or what else could she have done
under the circumstances? She screamed vigorously, whether she would or
no, and at the same moment dropped her pocket-book in the grass beside
the path, so that it momentarily escaped the vagabond's clutches.

"Shut up, will you!" and other angry and evil words, accompanied with
more than one vicious threat, followed thick and fast, as Annie
struggled to free herself, while her assailant peered hungrily around
after the missing prize.

It is not at all likely he would have attempted anything so bold as that
in broad daylight if he had not been drinking too freely, and the very
evil "spirit" which had prompted him to his rascality unfitted him for
its immediate consequences. These latter, in the shape of Dab Kinzer and
the lower "joint" of a stout fishing-rod, had been bounding along up the
road from the landing at a tremendous rate for nearly half a minute.

A boy of fifteen assailing a full-grown ruffian?

Why not? Age hardly counts in such a matter, and then it is not every
boy of even his "growth" that could have brought muscles like those of
Dab Kinzer to the swing he gave that four feet length of seasoned
ironwood.

Annie saw him coming, but her assailant did not until it was too late
for anything but to turn and receive that first hit in front instead of
behind. It would have knocked over almost anybody, and the tramp
measured his length on the ground, while Dabney plied the rod on him
with all the energy he was master of.

"Oh, don't, Dabney, don't; you'll kill him!" pleaded Annie.

"I wouldn't want to do that," said Dabney, but he added, to the tramp:
"Now you'd better get up and run for it. If you are caught around here
again it'll be the worse for you."

The vagabond staggered to his feet, looking savagely enough at Dab, but
the latter seemed so very ready to put in another hit with that terrible
cudgel, and the whole situation was so unpleasantly suggestive of
further difficulty, that the youngster's advice was taken without a
word.

"Here it is. I've found my pocket-book," said Annie, as her enemy made
the best of his way off.

"He did not hurt you?"

"No, he only scared me, except that I s'pose my arm will be black and
blue where he caught it. Thank you ever so much, Dabney! You're a brave
boy. Why, he's almost twice your size."

"Yes, but the butt end of my rod is twice as hard as his head," replied
Dabney. "I was almost afraid to strike him with it, because I might have
broken his skull."

"You didn't even break your rod."

"No, and now I must run back for the other pieces and the tip. I dropped
them in the road."

"Please, Dabney, see me home first," said Annie. "I know it's foolish
and there isn't a bit of danger, but I must confess to being rather
frightened."

Dab Kinzer was a little the proudest boy on Long Island, as he marched
along in compliance with her request. He went no further than the gate,
to be sure, and then returned for the rest of his rod, but, before he
got home, Keziah hurried back from a call on Mrs. Foster, bringing a
tremendous account of Dab's heroism, and then his own pride was a mere
drop in the bucket compared to that of his mother.

"Dabney is growing wonderfully," she remarked to Samantha. "He'll be a
man before any of us know it."

If Dabney had been a man, however, or if Ham Morris or Mr. Foster had
been at home, the matter would not have been permitted to drop there.
That tramp ought to have been followed, arrested and shut up where his
vicious propensities could have been restrained for a while. As it was,
after hurrying on for a short distance and making sure that he was not
pursued, he sprang over the fence and sneaked into the nearest clump of
bushes. From this safe covert he watched Dab Kinzer's return after the
lighter joints of his rod, and then even dared to crouch along the fence
until he saw which house his young conqueror went into.

"That's where he lives, is it?" exclaimed the tramp, with a scowl of the
most ferocious vengeance. "Well, they'll have fun before bed-time, or
I'll know the reason why."

The bushes were a good enough hiding-place for the time, and he went
back to them with the air and manner of a man whose mind is made up to
something.

Ford Foster and Frank Harley were absent in the city that day, with Mr.
Foster, attending to some affairs of Frank's, and when the three came
home and learned what had happened, they were all on the point of
rushing over to the Morris house to thank Dab, but Mrs. Foster
interposed.

"I don't think I would. To-morrow will do as well, and you know they're
expecting Mr. and Mrs. Morris this evening."

It was harder for the boys than for Mr. Foster, that waiting, and they
lingered near the north fence two hours later, even though they knew
that the whole Kinzer family were down at the railway station waiting
for Ham and Miranda.

There was a good deal of patience to be exercised, for that train was
behind time, and the darkness of a moonless and somewhat cloudy night
had settled over the village and the outlying farms long before the
engine puffed its way in front of the station platform. Just at that
moment, Ford Foster exclaimed, "What's that smell?"

"It's like burning hay," replied Frank.

"Where can it come from, I'd like to know? We haven't had a light out at
our barn."

"Light?" exclaimed Frank. "Just look yonder!"

"Why, it's that old barn away beyond the Morris and Kinzer house.
Somebody must have set it on fire. Hullo! I thought I saw a man running.
Come on, Frank."

There was indeed a man running just then, but they did not see him, for
he was already very nearly across the field, hidden by the darkness. He
had known how to light a fire that would smolder long enough for him to
get away. There had been no sort of lingering at the railway station,
for Ham and Miranda were as anxious to get at the "surprise" they were
told was waiting for them as their friends were to have them come to it.
Before they were half-way home, however, the growing light ahead of them
attracted their attention, and then they began to hear the vigorous
shouts of "Fire" from the throats of the two boys, now re-enforced by
Mr. Foster himself. Dabney was driving the ponies, and they had to go
pretty fast for the rest of that short run.

"Surprise!" exclaimed Ham. "I should say it was. Did you light it before
you started, Dabney?"

"Don't joke, Hamilton," remarked Mrs. Kinzer. "It may be a very serious
affair for all of us. But I can't understand how that barn could have
caught fire."



CHAPTER XVI.


The Morris farm, as has been said, was a pretty large one, and the same
tendency on the part of the owners which had made them set up so very
extensive and barn-like a house, had led them, from time to time, to
provide the most liberal sort of storage for their crops. The first barn
they had ever built, which was now the oldest and the furthest from the
stables and the residence, was a pretty large one. It was now in a
somewhat dilapidated condition, to be sure, and bowed a little northerly
by the weight of years which rested on it, but it had still some hope of
future usefulness, if it had not been for that tramp and his box of
matches.

"There isn't a bit of use in trying to save it," exclaimed Ham, as they
were whirled in through the wide gate. "It's gone."

"But," said Mrs. Kinzer, "we can save the other barns, perhaps. Look at
the cinders on the long stable. If we could only keep them off somehow."

"We can do it, Ham!" exclaimed Dab, very earnestly. "Mother, will you
send me out a broom and a rope, while Ham and I set up the ladder?"

"You're the boy for me," said Ham. "I guess I know what you're up to."

The ladder was one the house painters had been using, and was a pretty
heavy one, but it was quickly set up against the largest and most
valuable of the barns, and the one, too, which was nearest and most
exposed to the burning building and its flying cinders. The rope was on
hand, and the broom, by the time the ladder was in position.

"Ford," said Dab, "you and Frank help the girls bring water till the men
from the village get here. There's plenty of pails. Now, Ham, I'm
ready."

Up they went, and were quickly astride the ridge of the roof. It would
have been perilous work for any man to have ventured further unassisted,
but Dab tied one end of the rope firmly around his waist, Ham Morris
tied himself to the other, and then Dab could slip down the steep roof
in any direction without fear of falling.

But the broom? As useful as a small engine. The flying cinders, burning
hay or wood, as they alighted on the sun-dried shingles of the roof,
needed to be swept off as rapidly as they fell. Here and there the
flames had so good a start that the broom alone would have been
insufficient, and there the fast-arriving pails of water came into
capital play. They had to be used economically, of course, but they did
the work as effectually as if they had been the streams of a steam
fire-engine. Hard work for Ham and Dab, and now and then the strength
and weight and agility of the former were put to pretty severe tests, as
Dab danced around under the scorching heat or slipped flat upon the
sloping roof.

There were scores and scores of people from the village, now, arriving
every moment, and Mrs. Kinzer had all she could do to keep them from
"rescuing" every atom of her furniture from the house and piling it up
in the road.

"Wait," she said, quietly. "If Ham and Dab save the long barn, the fire
wont spread any further. The old barn wont be any loss to speak of,
anyhow."

Fiercely as the dry old barn burned, it used itself up all the quicker
on that account, and it was less than thirty minutes from the time Ham
and Dabney got at work before roof and rafters fell in and the worst of
the danger was over. The men and boys from the village were eager enough
to do any thing that now remained to be done, but a large share of this
was confined to standing around and watching the "bonfire" burn down to
a harmless heap of badly smelling ashes. As soon, however, as they were
no more wanted on the roof, the two volunteer "firemen" came down, and
Ham Morris's first word on reaching the ground was:

"Dab, my boy, how you've grown!"

Not a tenth of an inch, in mere stature, and yet Ham was correct about
it. There was plenty of light, just then, moon or no moon, and Ham's
eyes were very busy for a minute. He noted the improvements in the
fences, sheds, barns, the blinds on the house, the paint, a host of
small things that had changed for the better, and then he simply said:
"Come on, Dab," and led the way into the house. Her mother and sisters
had already given Miranda a hurried look at what they had done, but Ham
was not the man to do anything in haste. Deliberately and silently he
walked from room to room and from cellar to garret, hardly seeming to
hear the frequent comments of his enthusiastic young wife. That he did
hear, however, was manifest, for at last he asked:

"Dab, I've seen all the other rooms, where's yours?"

"I'm going to let you and Miranda have my room," said Dab. "I don't
think I shall board here long."

"I don't think you will, either," said Ham, emphatically. "You're going
away to boarding-school. Miranda, is there any reason why Dabney can't
have the south-west room, upstairs, with the bay-window?"

That room had been Samantha's choice, and she looked at Dab
reproachfully, but Miranda replied:

"No, indeed; not if you wish him to have it."

"Now, Ham," said Dabney, "I'm not big enough to fit that room. Give me
one nearer my size. That's a little loose for even Sam, and she can't
take any tucks in it!"

Samantha's look changed to one of gratitude, and she did not notice the
detested nickname.

"Well, then," said Ham, "we'll see about it. You can sleep in the spare
chamber to-night. Mother Kinzer, I couldn't say enough about this house
business if I talked all night. It must have cost you a deal of money. I
couldn't have dared to ask it. I guess you'd better kiss me again."

Curious thing it was that came next. One that nobody could have reckoned
on. Mrs. Kinzer--good soul--had set her heart on having Ham's house and
Miranda's "ready for them" on their return, and now Ham seemed to be so
pleased about it she actually began to cry. She said, too: "I'm so sorry
about the barn!" But Ham only laughed in his quiet way as he kissed his
portly mother-in-law, and said:

"Come, mother Kinzer, you didn't set it afire. Can't Miranda and I have
some supper? Dab must be hungry, after all that roof-sweeping."

There had been a sharp strain on the nerves of all of them that day and
evening, and they were glad enough to gather around the tea-table, while
what was left of the old barn smoldered away, with the village boys on
guard. Once or twice Ham or Dab went out to make sure all was right, but
there was no danger, unless a high wind should come.

By this time the whole village was aware of Dabney's adventure with the
tramp, and it was well for that individual that he had walked fast and
far before suspicion settled on him, for men went out to seek for him on
foot and on horseback.

"He's a splendid fellow, anyway."

Odd, was it not, but Annie Foster and Jenny Walters were half a mile
apart when they both said that very thing, just before the clock in the
village church hammered out the news that it was ten and bed-time. They
were not speaking of the tramp.

It was long after that, however, before the lights were out in all the
rooms of the Morris mansion.



CHAPTER XVII.


Sleep?

One of the most excellent things in all the world, and very few people
get too much of it nowadays.

As for Dabney Kinzer, he had done his sleeping as regularly and
faithfully as even his eating, up to that very night after Ham Morris
came home to find the big barn afire. There had been a few, a very few
exceptions. There were the nights when he was expecting to go
duck-shooting before daylight, and waked up at midnight with a strong
conviction that he was already too late about starting. There were
perhaps a dozen or so of "eeling" expeditions which had kept him out
late enough for a full basket and a proper scolding. There, too, was the
night when he had stood so steadily by the tiller of the "Swallow,"
while she danced through the dark across the rough waves of the
Atlantic.

But on the whole, Dab Kinzer had been a good sleeper all his life till
then. Once in bed, and there had been an end of all wakefulness.

On that particular night, for the first time, sleep refused to come,
late as was the hour when the family circle broke up. It could not have
been the excitement of Ham's and Miranda's return. He'd have gotten over
that by this time. No more could it have been the fire, though the smell
of the smoldering hay came in pretty strongly, at times, through the
wide-open windows. If any one patch of that great roomy bed was better
made up for sleeping than the rest of it, Dab would surely have found
the spot, for he tumbled and rolled all over it in his restlessness.
Some fields on a farm will "grow" better wheat than others, but no part
of the bed seemed to grow any sleep. At last Dab got wearily up and took
a chair by the window. The night was dark, but the stars were shining,
and every now and then the wind would make a shovel of itself and toss
up the hot ashes the fire had left, sending a dull red glare around on
the house and barns for a moment, and flooding all the neighborhood with
a stronger smell of burnt hay.

"If you're going to burn hay," soliloquized Dab, "it wont do to take a
barn for a stove. Not that kind of a barn. But what did Ham Morris mean
by saying I was to go to boarding-school? That's what I'd like to know."

The secret was out.

He had kept remarkably still, for him, all the evening, and had not
asked a question; but if his brains were ever to work over his books as
they had over Ham's remark, his future chances for sound sleep were all
gone. It had come upon him so suddenly, the very thing he had been
wishing for during all those walks and talks and lessons of all sorts
with Ford Foster and Frank Harley ever since the cruise of the
"Swallow."

It was a wonderful idea, and Dab had his doubts as to the way his mother
would take to it when it should be brought seriously before her. Little
he guessed the truth. Ham's remark had found other ears as well as
Dabney's, and there were reasons, therefore, why good Mrs. Kinzer was
sitting by the window of her own room, at that very moment, as little
inclined to sleep as was the boy she was thinking of. So proud of him,
too, she was, and so full of bright, motherly thoughts of the man he
would make "one of these days, when he gets his growth."

There must have been a good deal of sympathy between Dab and his mother,
for, by and by, just as she began to feel drowsy and muttered, "Well,
well, we'll have a talk about it to-morrow," Dab found himself nodding
against the window-frame, and slowly rose from his chair, remarking:

"Guess I might as well finish that dream in bed. If I'd tumbled out o'
the window I'd have lit among Mirandy's rose-bushes. They've got their
thorns all on at this time o' night."

It was necessary for them both to sleep hard after that, for more than
half the night was gone and they were to be up early. So indeed they
were; but what surprised Mrs. Kinzer when she went into the kitchen was
to find Miranda there before her.

"You here, my dear? That's right. I'll take a look at the milk-room.
Where's Ham?"

"Out among the stock. Dab's just gone to him."

Curious things people will do at times. Miranda had put down the
coffee-pot on the range. There was not a single one of the farm "help"
around, male or female, and there stood the blooming young bride, with
her back toward her mother, and staring out through the open door. And
then Mrs. Kinzer slipped forward and put her arms around her daughter's
neck.

Well, it was very early in the morning for those two women to stand
there and cry; but it seemed to do them good, and Miranda remarked, at
last, as she kissed Mrs. Kinzer: "O mother, it is all so good and
beautiful, and I'm so happy."

And then they both laughed in a subdued and quiet way, and Miranda
picked up the coffee-pot while her mother walked away into the
milk-room.

Such cream as there seemed to be on all the pans that morning!

As for Ham Morris, his first visit, on leaving the house, had been to
the ashes of the old barn, as a matter of course.

"Not much of a loss," he said to himself; "but it might have been but
for Dab. There's the making of a man in him. Wonder if he'd get enough
to eat if we sent him up yonder. On the whole, I think he would. If he
didn't, I don't believe it would be his fault. He's got to go, and his
mother'll agree, I know. Talk about mothers-in-law. If one of 'em's
worth as much as she is, I'd like to have a dozen. Don't know, though.
I'm afraid the rest would have to take back seats while Mrs. Kinzer was
in the house."

Very likely Ham was right; but just then he heard the voice of Dab
Kinzer behind him.

"I say, Ham, when you've looked at the other things I want to show you
the 'Swallow.' I haven't hurt her a bit, and her new grapnel's worth
three of the old one."

"All right, Dab. I think I'd like a sniff of the water. Come on. There's
nothing else like that smell of the shore with the tide half out."

No more there is, and there have been sea-shore men, many of them, who
had wandered away into the interior of the country, hundreds and
hundreds of long miles, and settled there, and even got rich and old
there, and yet who have come all the way back again just to get another
smell of the salt marshes and the sea breeze and the outgoing tide.

Ham actually took a little boat and went on board the "Swallow" when
they reached the landing, and Dab kept close by him.

"She's all right, Ham. But what are you casting loose for?"

"Dab, they wont all be ready for breakfast in two hours. The stock and
things can go. The men 'll 'tend to 'em. Just haul on that sheet a bit.
Now the jib. Look out for the boom. There. The wind's a little ahead,
but it isn't bad. Ah!"

The last word came out in a great sigh of relief, and was followed by a
chuckle which seemed to gurgle up all the way from Ham's boots.

"This is better than railroading," he said to Dabney, as they tacked
into the long stretch where the inlet widened toward the bay. "No
pounding or jarring here. Talk of your fashionable watering-places! Why,
Dab, there aint anything else in the world prettier than that reach of
water and the sand island with the ocean beyond it. There's some ducks
and some gulls. Why, Dab, do you see that? There's a porpoise inside the
bar."

It was as clear as daylight that Ham Morris felt himself "at home"
again, and that his brief experience of the outside world had by no
means lessened his affection for the place he was born in. If the entire
truth could have been known, it would have been found that he felt his
heart warm toward the whole coast and all its inhabitants, including the
clams. And yet it was remarkable how many of the latter were mere empty
shells when Ham finished his breakfast that morning. He preferred them
roasted, and his mother-in-law had not forgotten that trait in his
character.

Once or twice in the course of the sail Dabney found himself on the
point of saying something about boarding-schools, but each time his
friend suddenly broke away to discuss other topics, such as blue-fish,
porpoises, crabs, or the sailing qualities of the "Swallow," and Dab
dimly felt it would be better to wait till another time. So he waited.

And then, as they sailed up the inlet, very happy and very hungry, he
suddenly exclaimed: "Ham, do you see that? How could they have guessed
where we had gone? There's the whole tribe, and the boys are with 'em,
and Annie."

"What boys and Annie?"

"Oh, Ford Foster and Frank Harley. Annie is Ford's sister."

"What's become of Jenny?"

"You mean my boat? Why, there she is, hitched a little out, there by the
landing."

And Dabney did not seem to guess the meaning of Ham's queer, quizzical
smile.



CHAPTER XVIII.


There was a sort of council at the breakfast table of the Foster family
that morning, and Ford and Annie found themselves "voted down."

"Annie, my dear," said Mrs. Foster, in a gentle but decided way, "I'm
sure your aunt Maria, if not your uncle, must feel hurt about your
coming away so suddenly. If we invite Joe and Foster to visit us, it
will make it all right."

"Yes!" sharply exclaimed Mr. Foster. "We must have them come. They'll
behave themselves here. I'll write to their father; you write to Maria."

"They're her own boys, you know," added Mrs Foster, soothingly.

"Well, mother," said Annie, "if it must be. But I'm sure they'll make us
all very uncomfortable."

"I can stand 'em for a week or so," said Ford, with the air of a man who
can do or bear more than most people. "I'll get Dab Kinzer to help me
entertain them."

"Excellent," said Mr. Foster, "and I hope they will be civil to him."

"To Dabney?" asked Annie.

"Fuz and Joe civil to Dab Kinzer?" exclaimed Ford.

"Certainly, I hope so."

"Father," said Ford, "may I say just what I was thinking?"

"Speak it right out."

"Well, I was thinking what a good time Fuz and Joe would be likely to
have trying to get ahead of Dab Kinzer."

Annie looked at her brother and nodded, and there was a bit of a twinkle
in the eyes of the lawyer himself, but he only remarked:

"Well, you must be neighborly. I don't believe the Hart boys know much
about the sea-shore."

"Dab and Frank and I will try and educate them."

Annie thought of the ink and her box of ruined cuffs and collars while
her brother was speaking. Could it be that Ford meant a good deal more
than he was saying? At all events she fully agreed with him on the Dab
Kinzer question. That was one council, and it was of peace or war
according as events and the Hart boys themselves should determine.

At the same hour, however, matters of even greater importance were
coming to a decision around the well-filled breakfast-table in the
Morris mansion. Ham had given a pretty full account of his visit to
Grantley, including his dinner at Mrs. Myers', and all he had learned of
the academy.

"It seems like spending a great deal of money," began Mrs. Kinzer, when
Ham at last paused for breath, but he caught her up at once with, "I
know you've been paying out a great deal, Mother Kinzer, but Dab must go
if I pay--"

"You pay, indeed, for my boy! I'd like to see myself. Now I've found out
what he is, I mean he shall have every advantage, if this Grantley's the
right place."

"Mother," exclaimed Samantha, "it's the very place Mr. Foster is to send
Ford to, and Frank Harley."

"Exactly," said Ham. "Mr. Hart spoke of a Mr. Foster,--his
brother-in-law,--a lawyer."

"Why," said Keziah, "he's living in our old house now! Ford Foster is
Dab's greatest crony."

"Yes, I heard about it last night, but I hadn't put the two together,"
said Ham. "Do you really mean Dab is to go?"

"Of course," said Mrs. Kinzer.

"Well, if that isn't doing it easy. Do you know it's about the nicest
thing since I got here?"

"Except the barn afire," said Dabney, unable to keep still any longer.
"Mother, may I stand on my head a while?"

"You'll need all the head you've got," said Ham. "You wont have much
time to get ready."

"Books enough after he gets there," exclaimed Mrs. Kinzer. "I'll risk
Dabney."

"And they'll make him give up all his slang," added Samantha.

"Yes, Sam, when I come back I'll talk nothing but Greek and Latin. I'm
getting French now from Ford, and Hindoo from Frank Harley. Then I know
English and slang and Long Islandish. Think of one man with seven
first-rate languages."

But Dabney found himself unable to sit still, even at the
breakfast-table. Not that he got up hungry, for he had done his duty by
Miranda's cookery, but the house itself seemed too small to hold him,
with all his new prospects swelling so within him. Perhaps, too, the
rest of the family felt better able to discuss the important subject
before them after Dab had taken himself into the open air.

"It beats dreaming all hollow," said the latter to himself, as he stood,
with his hands in his pockets, half-way down toward the gate between the
two farms. "Now I'll see what can be done about that other matter."

Two plans in one head, and so young a head as that? Yes, and it spoke
very well for Dab's heart, as well as his brains, that plan number two
was not a selfish one. The substance of it came out in the first five
minutes of the talk he had with Ford and Frank, on the other side of the
gate.

"Ford, you know there's twenty dollars left of the money the Frenchman
paid us for the blue-fish."

"Well, what of it? Isn't it yours?"

"One share's mine, the rest yours and Dick's."

"He needs it more'n I do."

"Ford, did you know Dick was real bright?"

"'Cute little chap as I ever saw. Why?"

"Well, he ought to go to school."

"Why don't he go?"

"He does, except in summer. He might go to the academy if they'd take
him and he had money enough."

"What academy?"

"Why, Grantley, of course. I'm going, and so are you and Frank. Why
shouldn't Dick go?"

"You're going? Hurrah for that! Why didn't you say so before?"

"Wasn't sure till this morning. You fellows'll be a long way ahead of
me, but I mean to catch up."

For a few minutes poor Dick was lost sight of in a storm of talk, but
Dab came back to him with:

"Dick's folks are dreadful poor, but we might raise it. Twenty dollars
to begin with--"

"I've ten dollars laid up, and I know mother'll say pass it right in,"
exclaimed Ford.

It was hardly likely Mrs. Foster would express her assent precisely in
that way, but Frank added:

"I think I can promise five."

"I mean to speak to Ham Morris and mother about it," said Dab. "All I
wanted was to fix it about the twenty to start on."

"Frank," shouted Ford, "let's go right in and see our crowd."

Ford was evidently excited, and it was hardly five minutes later when he
wound up his story with:

"Father, may I contribute my ten dollars to the Richard Lee Education
Fund?"

"Of course, but he will need a good deal more than you boys can raise."

"Why, father, the advertisement says half a year for a hundred and
fifty. He can board for less than we can. Perhaps Mrs. Myers would let
him work out a part of it."

"I can spare as much as Ford can," said Annie.

"Do you leave me out entirely?" asked her mother, with a smile that was
even sweeter than usual. As for sharp-eyed lawyer Foster, he had been
hemming and coughing in an odd sort of way for a moment, and he had
said, "I declare," several times, but he now remarked, somewhat more to
the purpose: "I don't believe in giving any man a better education than
he will ever know what to do with, but then, this Dick Lee, and you
boys,--well, see what you can do, but no one must be allowed to
contribute outside of the Foster and Kinzer families and Frank. As for
the rest, hem,--ah, I think I'll say there wont be any difficulty."

"You, father?"

"Why not, Annie? Do you s'pose I'm going to be beaten by a mere country
boy like Dab Kinzer?"

"Father," said Ford, "if you'd seen how Dick behaved, that night, out
there on the ocean, in the 'Swallow!'"

"Just as well, just as well, my son!"

"Hurrah!" shouted Ford, "then it's all right, and Dick Lee'll have a
fair shake in the world."

"A what, my son?" exclaimed his mother.

"I didn't mean to talk slang, mother, I only meant,--well, you know how
dreadfully black he is, but then he can steer a boat tip-top, and he's
splendid for crabs and blue-fish, and Dab says he's a good scholar,
too."

"Dab's a very good boy," said Mrs. Foster, "but your friend Dick will
need an outfit, I imagine. Clothes and almost everything. I must see
Mrs. Kinzer about it."

Meantime Dick Lee's part in the matter had been taken for granted all
around. An hour later, however, Mrs. Kinzer's first reply to her son,
after a calculation on his part which made it almost seem as if Dick
would make money by going to Grantley, was: "What if Mrs. Lee says she
can't spare him?"

Dab's countenance fell. He knew Mrs. Lee, but he had not thought so far
as that.

"Well, Dabney, if we can make the other arrangements, I'll see her about
it."

Ham Morris had been exchanging remarkable winks with Miranda and
Samantha, and now gravely suggested: "May be the academy authorities
will refuse to take him."

"They had a blacker boy than he is there last year, Ford says."

"Now, Dab," exclaimed Ham.

"Well, I know he's pretty black, but it don't come off."

"Mother," said Samantha, "Mrs. Foster and Annie are coming through the
gate."

Dab just waited long enough, after that, to learn the news concerning
the "Richard Lee Education Fund," and Mr. Foster's offer, and then he
was off toward the shore. He knew very well in which direction to go,
for, half-way to the landing, he met Dick coming up the road with a
basket of eels on his arm.

"Dick, I'm going to boarding-school, at an academy."

"Cad'my? Whar?"

"Up in New England. They call it Grantley Academy. Where Ford and Frank
are going."

"Dat spiles it all," exclaimed Dick, ruefully. "Now I's got to fish wid
fellers 'at don't know nuffin."

"No you wont. You're going with us. It's all fixed, money and all."

Dick would never have thought of questioning a statement made by
"Captain Kinzer," but the rueful expression deepened on his face, the
basket of eels dropped heavily on the grass, the tough, black fingers
twisted nervously together for a moment, and then he sat mournfully down
beside the basket.

"It aint no use, Dab."

"No use? Why not?"

"I aint a w'ite boy."

"What of it? Don't you learn well enough over at the school?"

"More dar like me. Wot'd I do in a place whar all de res' was w'ite?"

"Well as anybody."

"Wot'll my mudder say, w'en she gits de news? You isn't a jokin', is
you, Dab Kinzer?"

"Joking? I guess not."

"You's lit on me powerful sudden, 'bout dis. Yonder's Ford an' Frank
a-comin'. Don't tell 'em, not jist yet."

"They know all about it. They helped raise the money."

"Did dey? Well, 'taint no use. All I's good for is eels and crabs and
clams and sech. Har dey come. Oh, my!"

But Ford and Frank brought a fresh gust of enthusiasm with them, and
they had Dick and his eels up from the grass in short order. "We must
see Mrs. Lee right away," said Ford. "It would never do to let Dick tell
her."

[Illustration: "I HASN'T SAID HE MIGHT GO."]

"Guess dat's so," said Dick.

Quite an embassy they made, those four boys, with Dab Kinzer for
spokesman, and Dick half crouching behind him. Mrs. Lee listened with
open mouth while Dab unfolded his plan, but when he had finished she
shut her lips firmly together. They were not very thin and not at all
used to being shut, and in another instant they opened again.

"Sho! De boy! Is dat you, Dick? Dat's wot comes of dressin' on him up.
How's he goin' to git clo'es? Wot's he got to do wid de 'cad'my, anyhow?
Wot am I to do, yer, all alone, arter he's gone, I'd like to know? Who's
goin' to run err'nds an' do de choahs? Wot's de use ob bringin' up a boy
'n' den hab 'im go trapesin' off to de 'cad'my? Wot good 'll it do 'im?"

"I tole yer so, Dab," groaned poor Dick. "It aint no use. I 'most wish I
was a eel."

Dab was on the point of opening a whole broadside of eloquence when Ford
Foster pinched his arm and whispered: "Your mother's coming, and our
Annie's with her."

"Then let's clear out. She's worth a ten-acre lot full of us. Come on,
boys."

If Mrs. Lee was surprised by their very sudden retreat, she need not
have been after she learned the cause of it. She stood in wholesome awe
of Mrs. Kinzer, and a "brush" with the portly widow, re-enforced by the
sweet face of Annie Foster, was a pretty serious matter. Still, she did
not hesitate about beginning the skirmish, for her tongue was already a
bit loosened.

"Wot's dis yer, Mrs. Kinzer, 'bout sendin' away my Dick to a furrin
'cad'my? Isn't he most nigh nuff sp'iled a'ready?"

"Oh, it's all arranged, nicely. Miss Foster and I only came over to see
what we could do about getting his clothes ready. He must have things
warm and nice, for the winters are cold up there."

"I hasn't said he might go,--Dick, put down dem eels,--an' he hasn't
said he'd go,--Dick, take off your hat,--an' his father--"

"Now, Glorianna," interrupted Mrs. Kinzer, calling Dick's mother by her
first name, "I've known you these forty years, and do you s'pose I'm
going to argue about it? Just tell us what Dick'll need, and don't let's
have any nonsense. The money's all provided. How do you know what'll
become of him? He may be governor yet--"

"He mought preach."

That idea had suddenly dawned upon the perplexed mind of Mrs. Lee, and
Dick's fate was settled. She was prouder than ever of her boy, and,
truth to tell, her opposition was only what Mrs. Kinzer had considered
it, a piece of unaccountable "nonsense," to be brushed away by such a
hand as the widow's.



CHAPTER XIX.


That was a great day for the boys, but, before the close of it, Ford
Foster had told his friends the news that Joe Hart and his brother Fuz
had been invited to visit with him.

"Will they come?" asked Dab.

"Certainly. That kind of boy always comes. Nobody wants to keep him from
coming."

"When do you look for them?"

"Right away. Vacation's most gone, you know."

"Wont they be ashamed to meet your sister!"

"Not a bit. They'll try their tricks even after they get here."

"All right. We'll help 'em all we know how. But, boys, I tell you what
we must try for."

"What's that?"

"One grand, good sailing party, in the 'Swallow,' before they get here."

"Hurrah for that! Annie was wishing for one only yesterday."

"We'll have all of your folks and all of ours. The 'Swallow' 's plenty
big enough."

"Mother wouldn't go and father can't, just now. He's trying a case. But
there's Annie and Frank and me--"

"And my mother and Ham and Miranda and our girls. Ham'll go, sure. Then
we must take Dick Lee along. It'd make him sick if we didn't."

"Of course. And aint I glad about him? Could we get ready and go
to-morrow?"

"Guess not so quick as that. We might by the day after, if the weather's
all right."

Exactly. There is always a large sized "if" to be put in where anything
depends on the weather. Mrs. Kinzer took the matter up with enthusiasm,
and so did the girls, Miranda included, and Ford Foster was right about
his own part of the company.

But the weather!

It looked well enough to unpracticed eyes, but Ham Morris shook his head
and went to consult his fishermen friends. Every human barometer among
them warned him to wait a day or so.

"Such warm, nice weather," remonstrated Ford Foster, "and there isn't
any wind to speak of."

"There's too much of it coming," was Ham's response, and there was no
help for it. Not even when the mail brought word from "Aunt Maria" that
her two boys would arrive in a day or so.

"Our last chance is gone, Annie," said Ford, when the news came.

"O, mother, what shall we do?"

"Have your sail, just the same, and invite your cousins."

"But the Kinzers--"

"Why, Annie! Mrs. Kinzer will not think of neglecting them. She's as
kind as kind can be."

"And we are to pay her with Joe and Fuz," said Ford. "Well, I wish Ham
Morris's storm would come along."

He only had to wait till next day for it, and he was quite contented to
be on shore while it lasted. There was no use in laughing at the
prophecies of the fishermen after it began to blow. Still, it was not a
long one, and Ham Morris remarked: "This is only an outside edge of it.
It's a good deal worse at sea. Glad we're not out in it."

Ford Foster thought the worst of it was when the afternoon train came
in, and he had to show a pair of tired, moist and altogether unpleasant
cousins to the room set apart for them. Just after tea a note came over
from Mrs. Kinzer, asking the Hart boys to join the yachting party next
morning.

"The storm may not be over," growled Ford.

"Oh," said Annie, "Mrs. Kinzer adds that the weather will surely be fine
after such a blow, and the bay will be quite safe and smooth."

"Does she know the clerk of the weather," asked Joe Hart.

"Got one of her own," said Ford.

Fuz Hart laughed but said nothing. Both he and his brother felt a little
"strange" as yet, and were almost inclined to try and behave themselves.

When morning came, however, sea and earth and sky seemed to be the
better for what they had just been through. The grass and trees were
greener and the bay seemed bluer, while the few clouds visible in the
sky were very white and clean, as if all the storms had been washed out
of them. Not a single thing went wrong in Mrs. Kinzer's management of
the "setting out" of the party, and that was half the day now to begin
with. Ford had some trouble in getting Joe and Fuz up so very early, but
an intimation that "Ham Morris wouldn't wait five minutes for the Queen
of England, or even me," was sufficient to rouse them.

"Joe," whispered Fuz, after they got on board, "are we to be gone a
week?"

"Why? What's up?"

"Such piles of provisions as they've stowed away in that kennel!"

The bit of a water-tight cabin under the half-deck, at which Fuz
pointed, was pretty well filled, beyond a doubt, but Mrs. Kinzer knew
what she was about. She had provided lunch for most of that party
before, and the effect of the sea-air was also to be taken into account.

"Dab," said Ford Foster, "you've forgotten to unhitch the 'Jenny.' Here
she is, towing astern."

"That's all right. We may need her. She's too heavy to take on board."

A careful fellow was Mr. Hamilton Morris, and he knew very well the
value of a row-boat to a picnic party. As for Joe and Fuz they were
compelled to overcome a strong inclination to cast the boat loose. Such
a joke it would have been, but Ham was in the way as long as he held the
tiller.

The "Swallow" was "steady" enough to inspire even Annie Foster with a
feeling of confidence, but Ford carefully explained to her the
difference between slipping along over the little waves of the
land-locked bay, and plunging into the great billows of the stormy
Atlantic.

"I prefer this," said Annie.

"But I wouldn't have missed the other for anything," replied Ford.
"Would you, Dick?"

Mr. Richard Lee had taken his full share in the work of starting, and
had made himself singularly useful, but if all the rest had not been so
busy they would have noticed his silence. Hardly a word had he uttered,
that anybody could remember, and, now he was forced to say something,
his mouth opened slowly, as if he had never tried to speak before and
was not quite sure he knew how:

"No,-Mr.-Foster,-I-would-not-have-missed-that-trip-for-a-good-deal."

Every word by itself, and as different from Dick's ordinary talk as a
cut stone is from a rough one. Ham Morris opened his eyes wide, and Ford
puckered up his lips in a sort of a whistle, but Annie caught the
meaning of it quicker than they did.

"Dick," she said, "are we to fish to-day?"

"May be,-but-that-depends-on-Mr.-Morris."

Every word slowly and carefully uttered, a good deal like a man counts
over doubtful money, looking sharp for a counterfeit.

"Look here, Dick!" suddenly exclaimed Dab Kinzer, "I give it up. You can
do it. But don't try to keep it up all day. Kill you, sure as anything,
if you do."

"Did I say 'em all right, Cap'n Dab?" anxiously inquired Dick, with a
happy look on his black, merry face.

"Every word," said Dab. "Well for you they were all short. Keep on
practicing."

"I'll jest do dat, shuah!"

Practicing? Yes, that was it, and Dick himself joined heartily in the
peal of laughter with which the success of his first attempt at "white
folk's English" was received by the party. Dab explained that as soon as
Dick found he was really to go to the academy he determined to teach his
tongue new habits, and the whole company heartily approved, even while
they joined Dab in advising him not to try too much at a time.

Plenty of talk and fun all around as the "Swallow" skimmed onward, and
the long, low outlines of the narrow sand-island were rapidly becoming
more distinct.

"Is that a light-house?" asked Annie of Dab.

"Yes, and there's a wrecking station close by."

"Men there all the while? Are there many wrecks on this coast?"

"Ever so many, and there used to be more of them. It was a bad place to
run ashore, in those days. Almost as bad as Jersey."

"Why?"

"Because of the wreckers. The shore's bad enough, and the bar's a mean
place to escape on, but the wreckers used to make it worse."

And Dab launched out into a slightly exaggerated description of the
terrors of the Long Island coast in old times and new, and of the
character of the men who were formerly the first to find out if anything
or anybody had gone ashore.

"What a prize that French steamer would have been!" said Annie, "the one
you took Frank Harley from."

"No, she wouldn't. Why, she wasn't wrecked at all. She only stuck her
nose in the sand and lay still till the tugs pulled her off. That isn't
a wreck. A wreck is where the ship is knocked to pieces and people are
drowned, and all that sort of thing. Then the wreckers have a notion
that everything that comes ashore belongs to them. Why, I've heard even
some of our old fishermen--best kind of men, too--talk of how government
has robbed 'em of their rights."

"By the new system?"

"By having wrecks prevented, and saving the property for the owners."

"Isn't that strange! Did you say they were good men?"

"Some of 'em. Honest as the day is long about everything else. But they
weren't all so. There was old Peter, and he lives on the Island yet.
There's his cabin now. You can just see it in the edge of that great
sand-hill."

"What a queer thing it is!"

"Sometimes the storms drift the sand all over it, and old Peter has to
dig it out again. He's snowed under two or three times every winter."

They were now coasting along the island, at no great distance, and,
although it was not nearly noon, Dab heard Joe Hart say to his brother:

"Never was so hungry in all my life. Glad they did lay in a good stock
of provisions."

"So am I," returned Fuz. "Isn't there any such thing as our getting into
the cabin!"

No, there was not, so long as Mrs. Kinzer was the "stewardess" of that
expedition, and Joe and Fuz were compelled to wait her motions.

(_To be continued._)




THE FOX AND THE TURKEYS; OR, CHARLEY AND THE OLD FOLKS.

By Susan Coolidge.


[Illustration: [A cunning fox perceived some turkeys roosting securely
on the bough of a high tree. Unable to climb, he resolved to get at them
in another way. Night after night he stationed himself beneath the tree,
and there played off all sorts of curious tricks. He jumped, he capered,
he turned somersaults, he walked on his hind legs, he pretended to be
dead, he raised and expanded his tail until, in the moonlight, it looked
like a flame of fire,--in short, he performed every antic conceivable.
The turkeys, who, to sleep in safety, had only to turn their backs and
forget the fox, were so agitated and excited by his pranks that for
whole nights they never closed their eyes; the consequence was that they
lost strength, and one by one dropped from the bough and into the jaws
of Renard, who soon made an end of them.

_Moral_.--It is unwise to concern one's self with the tricks and antics
of mischievous persons.--_La Fontaine's Fables_.]]


It was midsummer at the old Brush Farm. When I say "midsummer," how many
pretty things it means,--woods at their freshest and greenest, meadows
sweet with newly cut hay, cinnamon-roses in the hedges and water-lilies
in the ponds, bees buzzing in and out of the clove-pinks and larkspurs
which edge the beds of cabbages and carrots in the kitchen-garden, a
humming-bird at work in the scarlet trumpets of the honeysuckle on the
porch,--everywhere the sense of fullness and growth, with no shadow as
yet of rankness or decay. August is over-ripe. September's smile is sad,
but midsummer is all rosy hope, the crown and blossom of the year.

Charley Brush lay under an apple-tree, face downward, and absorbed in
"The Red Rover," a book he had read at least ten times before. Stories
about ships and sea-life and freebooters and buccaneers were his
favorite reading, and, unfortunately, what with illustrated papers and
cheap novels, and so-called "Boys' books," plenty of such tales abound
nowadays. I say unfortunately, for beside teaching him nothing, these
books made Charley utterly dissatisfied with his life at home. Hoeing
vegetables, chopping wood, and going to the district school, seemed dull
work indeed to a boy who was longing to stand sword in hand on a
blood-stained deck, in a gory uniform trimmed with skulls and
cross-bones, and order his enemies to be thrown one by one into the sea.
"The shark awaits your car-casses!" spouted the imaginary desperado with
a vicious snap of his teeth; and when Aunt Greg interrupted by asking
him to bring in an armful of kindling, he glared at her like the Red
Rover himself. Poor Aunt Greg! how little she guessed what was passing
in his mind!

"You look real pale to-day," she said. "I was afraid all that mince-pie
for supper would be bad for you. Here, Charley, I'll mix you some
ginger-and-water. That'll settle you, and make all right again."

"Mis-cre-ant!" was what Charley yearned to say, but instead he muttered,
gruffly, "I aint sick, and I don't want no ginger." Very bad grammar, as
you perceive; but grammar seemed such an unnecessary accomplishment for
a would-be buccaneer, that Charley never could be induced to pay the
least attention to it.

That afternoon, under the apple-tree, he made up his mind. A pirate he
must and he would be, by fair means or by foul. He was cunning enough to
know that the very word "pirate" would frighten his grandmother into
fits, so he only asked her leave to go to sea. Going to sea was, to his
mind, a necessary first step toward the noble profession he desired to
enter.

"I want to so bad," he whined. "Please say I may."

Grandmother began to cry. Aunt Hitty was sure he must be out of his
mind, and ran for the Epsom salts. Aunt Greg quoted, "There's no place
like home," and told a story about a boy she once heard of who ran away
to sea and never came back, "foundered or drowndered," she couldn't
remember which. Aunt Prue seized his shoulders and gave him a sound
shake. This was what came of idling over story-books all day long, she
said,--he could just shut up and go and give the pig its supper, and not
let her hear any more trash like that--making them all feel so bad about
nothing.

Charley twisted his shoulder out of her grasp with a scowl, but he took
the pail and went out to the pen. All the time that piggy ate, he was
considering what to do. "I'll tease 'em," he decided, "and tease and
tease, and then they'll let me go."

So he did tease, and plead and expostulate, but it was all in vain.
Grandmother and the aunts could not be reached by any of his entreaties,
and at the end of a week he seemed as far from his desire as ever.

You will wonder, perhaps, that Charley did not run away, as so many boys
do in books, and a few out of them. Somehow he never thought of that. He
was not a hardy, adventurous fellow at all. His desire to go to sea was
a fancy born of foolish reading, and he wanted to have his going made
easy for him.

"I must set to work in another way," he thought at last. "Asking of 'em
aint no use. I must make 'em want to have me go." Then he fell to
thinking how this could be done.

"Aunt Hitty wouldn't hold out long if the others didn't," he thought. "I
could coax her into it as easy as fun. She'll do anything if I kiss and
pet her a bit. Then there's Aunt Greg,--she thinks so much of poetry and
such stuff. I'll hunt up the pieces in the 'Reader' about 'The sea, the
sea, the deep blue sea,' and all that, and learn 'em and say 'em to her,
and I'll tell her about coral groves and palm-trees, and make her think
it's the jimmiest thing going to sail off and visit 'em. Grandmother's
always bothering about my being sick, and afraid of this and afraid of
that; so I'll just _be_ sick--so sick that nothing but a viyage'll cure
me! As for Aunt Prue, 'taint no use trying to impose on _her_. I guess
I'll have to be real hateful and troublesome to Aunt Prue. I'll tease
pussy and slop on the pantry shelves, and track up the floor every time
she mops it, and leave the dipper in the sink, and all the other things
she don't like, and by and by she'll be just glad to see the last of me!
Hi!--that'll fetch 'em all!" He ended his reflections with a chuckle.
Charley wasn't really a bad boy,--not bad through and through, that
is,--but he had a cunning, tricky side to his nature which made him like
to play on the weaknesses of his grandmother and aunts. A sharp boy may
prove more than a match for four unsuspecting old women; and though in
this case they were in the right and he in the wrong, none the less was
he likely to succeed in his crafty plans.

He waited a few days to let opposition subside, and then began his
tricks. Charley's first victim was Aunt Hitty. She was a gentle,
weak-minded person, easy to persuade, and when Charley put his head into
her lap and called her coaxing names, and was sure she was too kind to
disappoint him in the thing he was set upon, her heart softened, and she
began to think that they all had been hard and unkind. "The dear boy
wants to go awful bad," she told Aunt Greg, and to her surprise Aunt
Greg did not fly out and scold as she had expected, but answered, with a
sigh, "I suppose sailing on the ocean _is_ beautiful!" Aunt Greg had
never seen the ocean in her life, but she was naturally romantic; and
Charley, who had been hard at work at the "Reader," had crammed her with
all sorts of poetical quotations and fancies concerning it. Flying fish,
coral islands, pole stars, dolphins, gallant mariners, wet sheets and
flowing seas, figured largely in these extracts, but there was no
mention whatever of storms, sharks, drowning, hard work, or anything
disagreeable. Aunt Greg could not see the charm of "wet sheets," but all
the rest sounded delightful; and gradually a picture formed itself in
her mind of a sea which was always blue and always smooth, and of
Charley standing on the deck of a ship repeating poetry to himself in
the moonlight; and her opposition grew feebler and feebler.

"Charley's got a lot of ideas in his head," she said one day when she
and her sisters were slicing apples for drying. "He aint no common boy,
Charley aint. He'll make a mark yet--see if he don't."

"Dear little fellow!" sighed Aunt Hitty. "_So_ lovin' and affectionate!
He used to be a little worrisome in his ways at times, but he's got all
over that!"

"Oh, has he?" snapped Aunt Prue. "I'd like to know when? He's been more
of a plague the last six weeks than ever in his life before. When he
upset that milk last night I could have cuffed him. It's the third time
since Wednesday. Mark, indeed! The only mark he'll ever make is a
dirt-mark on clean floors. The kitchen looks like Sancho at this moment.
I've washed it up twice as often as ordinary, but as sure as I get it
clean, in he comes stamping about with his muddy boots and tracks it
from end to end. I believe he does it a-purpose."

"O, Prue!" began Aunt Hitty, in a pleading tone, while Aunt Greg broke
in, indignantly:

"A-purpose! Well! Charley's mind is on other things, I can tell you, and
it it's no wonder he sometimes forgets to wipe his feet."

"Other things! Getting off to sea, I suppose you mean?" remarked Aunt
Prue, grimly. "He's pulled the wool over your eyes and Hitty's finely, I
declare. As for me, if he's goin' on to behave as he has done for a
spell back, the sooner he quits the better. I wash _my_ hands of him,"
and Aunt Prue flounced into the buttery just as Grandmother came in at
the other door.

"Charley is it you was talking about?" she asked. "Did you hear him
coughin' last night? I did, and I couldn't sleep a wink for worrying
about it. A real deep cough it was. Do you suppose it the lungs, and
what's good for him to take?"

"He's well enough except for mischief," put in Aunt Prue through the
buttery door.

"Prue never thinks anything ails anybody," said Mrs. Brush, sinking her
voice to a whisper. "I'm really consarned about Charley. He don't eat
hardly anything at dinner. That aint a bit natural for a growin' boy.
And he says he lies awake a great deal of nights. He thinks it's the air
about here makes him feel bad, but I don't know if he's right about it.
I wish we'd a doctor here to say if going off to sea--or
somewhere--would be the best thing for him. I'm clean confused as to
what we'd best do about it, but I'm real uneasy in my mind."

Charley, coming in just then, chuckled to himself as he heard her.

So things went on, and by October Charley had his wish. It was settled
that he should go to sea. Aunt Greg drove over to Wachuset Center and
consulted with old Mr. Greg, her father-in-law, who was the wise man of
the neighborhood.

"Let him go--let him go," was Mr. Greg's advice. "When a chap like that
gets the bit between his teeth, it's no use to keep yanking at the
reins. Let him go for one long cruise, and see how he likes it. Ten to
one he'll come back then and be glad to settle down. He aint the kind of
boy to make a sailor of, I judge. There's Ben Bradley,--my first wife's
cousin,--captain of one of them China traders; ship Charley with him.
I'll write a line, and I guess Ben'll kind of keep an eye on him for the
sake of the connection."

So, late in the fall, Charley went to sea. Grandmother and the aunts
felt dreadfully sad when it came to the parting; but he was full of
satisfaction and triumph, and never shed a tear. The "Helen Weeks," as
Captain Bradley's ship was named, sailed from Boston on the second of
November, and for fifteen months nobody at home heard a word of Charley.

Those were sad days at the old Brush Farm. Grandmother fell ill from
anxiety, and even Aunt Prue looked white and miserable. Aunt Greg and
Aunt Hitty spent their time crying in corners, and "Why did we let him
go?" was the language of all their hearts. But in February, when
everything was at its coldest and iciest, Charley came back,--Charley or
his ghost, for the tall, thin, starved-looking ragged boy set down at
the gate was very unlike the stout, rosy lad of the year before.

He was so weak and forlorn that it was several days before he recovered
enough to explain what had happened to him, and then it was little by
little, and not as I give it, in one connected story.

"I don't ever want to go to sea again," he began. "It aint a bit like
what _we_ thought it was. I don't know why them chaps in the 'Reader'
called it 'blue.' It's green and black and yellow, and all kinds of
colors, but I never see it look blue exceptin' when folks was looking at
it from the land. It's cold, too, and wet and nasty. I wasn't dry once
for the first two months, it seems to me. Ugh! I hate it. Never let to
sleep till you're rested, and such horrid stuff to eat, and sick--my,
how sick I was! Captain Bradley was a fair enough sort of man, but he
fell ill of China fever, and we had to leave him behind in Canton, and
Bill Bunce, the first mate, took his place. After that we had a hard
time enough. I thought it was bad at first, but it wasn't nothing to
that. He was always walloping us boys, and swearing and kicking and
cuffing us about. Then we had a storm, and lost our mainmast, and came
near foundering; and then we were stuck in a calm for three weeks, and
the water aboard ran short. That was the time I had the fever. I'd have
died, I know, if it hadn't been for Tad Brice. He was one of the
sailors, and a real nice man. His boy at home was just as old as I am,
and he sort of took an interest in me from the start. He used to come in
and feed me, and when we were put on allowance, he saved half his water
ration for me; and when I got to crying, and thinking about home and you
all, he'd--" Here Charley choked and was silent. Aunt Hitty, who sat
next, possessed herself of his thin hand and wept silently over it.

"When I went away I meant to be a pirate, you know," went on Charley.

"A pirate!" cried Aunt Hitty and Aunt Greg in awe-struck voices.

"Yes. I didn't know much about what it meant, but it sounded somehow
nice in the books, and I wanted to be one. But when I asked 'em about it
aboard they roared and hooted and made fun, and they all called me
Captain Kidd from that time on. And once, when we were in Shanghai"
(Charley's voice sounded full of horror), "we saw two pirates. Tad Brice
said they was pirates. The folks was taking 'em to jail. They was
_dreadful_, black and ugly, and their eyes were so fierce and bad that
it made me cold to look at 'em. I never wanted to be a pirate any more
after that, but Bunce and the others, they all kept on calling me
Captain Kidd just the same."

"You absurd, ridiculous boy!" began Aunt Prue, but Grandmother hushed
her up.

"Now, Prue, I wont have poor Charley scolded when he's been so sick,"
she said--"He's only a boy, anyhow, and he's going to turn over a new
leaf now; aint you, Charley? and go to school regular, and do his
chores, and be the comfort of his granny's life. He's had enough of
goin' to sea; haven't you, Charley? and he'll stay on the farm now, and
we wont ever talk about this bad time he's had, and just be thankful to
get him back home again."

Charley didn't answer in words, but he turned and gave Grandmother a big
kiss, which she knew meant "yes," and they were all very happy that
night as they sat together around the fire.

So you see that the fox, though he succeeded in his tricks, was not a
particularly happy fox after all. Too much turkey may not be good for a
fox, and too much of his own way is certainly not good for a boy.




[Illustration: OUT FISHING.]




HIDDY-DIDDY!


  Hiddy-Diddy! Hiddy-diddy!--
  Ten small chicks and one old biddy!
  "Cluck!" says Biddy, "cluck, cluck, cluck!"
  "Scratch as I do!--try your luck!"

  [Illustration]

  How the chickens, one and all,
  Crowd around her at her call!
  One chick, missing, peeps to say:
  "Chirp, chirp, chirp!--I've lost my way!"

  Shrill and shriller, comes the sound!
  "Chirp! chirp! chirp!--I shall be drowned!"
  Biddy clucks, and bustles quick,--
  "Where, oh, _where's_ my little chick?"

  Mister Rooster bustles, too,
  Screaming "Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Biddy, I just chanced to look,
  And saw your bantling in the brook!"

  "Gob!" shrieks Turkey, "gob, gob, gobble!
  Mrs. Hen, you're in a hobble!
  Why don't some one stir about,
  And help your little chicken out?"

  "Moo!" roars Sukey, "moo, moo, moo!
  What is there that I can do?"
  "Uff!" grunts Piggy, "uff, uff, uff!
  Say you're sorry, that's enough."

  "Quack!" says Ducky, "quack, quack, quack!
  I have brought your chicken back!"
  "Oh!" says Biddy, "cluck, cluck, cluck!
  Thank you!--_thank you!_ Mrs. Duck!"




THE SQUIRRELS AND THE CHESTNUT-BURR.


[Illustration]

Four squirrels once saw a chestnut-burr growing on a tree. They wanted
the chestnuts in the burr, but were afraid to touch it, because it was
full of sharp points. Just then, along came a flying-squirrel. "I will
tell you what you must do," said he: "wait until the burr opens, and the
chestnuts fall out. The burr always opens when the right time comes." So
they waited, and got the chestnuts.

It is a good rule to wait until things are ready for us.




[Illustration]

JACK-IN-THE-PULPIT.


Vacation's over! School's begun! A splendid holiday time you've had, no
doubt, my dears, and now you feel like setting to work again with
earnest good-will. That's right. But don't try to do to much at first.
Better start easily and keep up the pace, than make a quick run for a
while only to falter and grow weary before you are half-way.


MOQUI PEEKEE.

Word is sent to me of a queer kind of bread called "Peekee," which is
used by the Moqui American Indians. It comes in square loaves that are
made by folding, twice across, several sheets of what looks like very
thin bluish-green crust.

First, the meal is made by women, who grind it into flour between two
stones, and then it is mixed with water until it is a thin blue paste or
batter, when a little cedar-ash is sprinkled into it. The oven is a
smooth-faced stone heated by kindling a fire under it. The batter is
smeared over the hot stone, and is soon baked into a thin sheet, about
two feet long and a foot and a half wide. Several sheets are folded,
while yet warm and soft, to make a loaf, which is then set aside to dry.

This curious bread is very brittle and is eaten by breaking off little
bits with the fingers. People who have never eaten it before soon become
quite fond of it.


POTATO BLOSSOMS AS ORNAMENTS.

"Potato plants used to be grown, a very long time ago, in front yards on
Broadway, New York, for the sake of the flowers, which were much prized
for bouquets and other ornamental purposes. However, the potatoes
themselves,"--I suppose this means the tubers,--"became such favorite
food in a few years, that the plants were promoted backward from the
flower-beds to the kitchen-gardens and open fields. The beauty of the
blossoms was forgotten in the usefulness of their roots."

The moral of this paragram is: If you are merely good-looking, you will
not be apt to get on in life, but will stay about where you are; and if
it should be found out that you can be put to use, you will be planted
in the open fields.

This doesn't seem to read quite right, somehow; but, dear me, what do we
want with a moral all the time? I leave you to find out what it ought to
be in this case, if you think it's worth while. Only, if you _do_ find
out, I wish you would let me know.


SHARP-WITTED ROBINS.

    Detroit, Michigan.

    DEAR JACK-IN-THE-PULPIT: Z.R.B's anecdote, "A Congress of Birds," in
    the July number, reminds me of an incident of which I was an
    eye-witness:

    A cherry-tree grew near the house, and was yearly full of luscious
    cherries; but the robins scarcely allowed us to have one that did
    not have their monogram picked in it. One year, however, my brother
    determined to outwit the birds, and hung a large stuffed eagle from
    one of the boughs. The birds assembled on a neighboring tree and
    eyed the eagle sharply, while a grand consultation was held.
    Finally, a courageous robin darted from the tree, swooped directly
    under the eagle, and flew triumphantly back to tell the rest there
    was nothing to be feared. At once the whole flock of robins flew to
    the cherry-tree, and our hopes of a cherry-pie were doomed to
    disappointment for that year.

    H.P.B.


A VERY DEAD LANGUAGE.

I once heard of a green-colored South American parrot who was more than
one hundred years old. This aged fellow could speak in a real language
which was known to have been used by a tribe of South American Indians
who, it is supposed, petted and taught him when he was young. One by one
the Indians died, until there was no one left who could understand a
word of their language. The poor old bird tried hard to keep cheerful,
but there were sorry times when he would mope by himself and say over
some of the words of the language that had been spoken by his earliest
and dearest human friends.

That was a very dead language, indeed, my dears; so dead that it is no
wonder it made the old green parrot blue to speak it now and then.
However, by this time it is past all power to worry anybody else, let us
hope.


A PLANT THAT WALKS UPSIDE DOWN.

Shrubs, trees, Jack-in-the-Pulpits, and all such plants, grow with their
roots down in the ground; but I've lately heard that a man called a
philosopher, once wrote of a plant that grows and walks with the roots
upward!

Lord Francis Bacon is the man's name, and the plant he meant is Man.
Only he wrote in Latin, I believe, and so, instead of calling Man "a
plant upside down," he called him "planta inversa." He explained these
words by saying that the brain in man, whence the nerves start, to
spread like a net-work all through the body, corresponds to the roots in
a plant.

If this is so, my dears, you are a kind of walking plants, only you are
obliged to walk top-side down. This seems curious, but it is pleasant to
think you are not so very different from a Jack-in-the-Pulpit after all.


THE SMALLEST INSECT KNOWN.

    The Red Schoolhouse.

    MY DEAR JACK-IN-THE-PULPIT: No doubt, you have heard of the
    "leaf-cutter" bees, who line their nests with small round pieces of
    leaves, which they themselves cut and then fit together so exactly,
    without gum, that they hold their stores of honey and do not leak a
    bit. Well, a sharp-eyed observer has found, on one of these bees, an
    insect whose body is no longer than the width of the dot of this "i"
    (1-90th of an inch), and which is believed to be the smallest insect
    known. It is called _Pteratomus_, a word which means "winged atom,"
    and it lives entirely upon the body of the bee. It has beautiful
    hairy wings, and long feelers, and its legs are rather like those of
    a mosquito, though, of course, very much smaller. Its feet are so
    small that they can only just be seen when magnified to four hundred
    times their natural size! Now, for a full-grown insect, as it is, I
    think the _Pteratomus_ is very small.--Sincerely yours,

    THE LITTLE SCHOOLMA'AM.


[Illustration: A WATER-SPOUT.]


A WATER-SPOUT.

Did any of you ever hear of water-spouts at sea? I don't know much about
them myself, but the St. Nicholas artist will draw a picture of one for
you, and the editors will kindly put it in. According to travelers, the
water seems to come down from the clouds, or go up from the sea,--I
don't know which,--and drives along, through the storm, in a great
watery column. I have heard of whirlwinds, and I think this might be
called a "whirl-water."


THE USES OF HAIR ON PLANTS.

M.E.K. writes, in answer to my question in July, that her "Botany" book
says, "Hair on plants seems to afford them security against changes of
weather, and plants with hair can stand more heat than bare ones." A.W.
Ferris says:

    "If a plant that needs much moisture is dug up from its native wet
    home and planted in a dry spot, hairs will sprout on it and try to
    get from the air the moisture that can no longer be drawn from the
    earth. But if you put back this plant in its old home, it will lose
    its hair--becoming bald. Sometimes, plant hairs are connected with
    glands of poisonous liquid, as with the nettle, whose hairs we say
    'sting,' because of the pain the poison gives when the skin is
    pricked by them."

Frances and Margaret Bagley, also, write on this subject, and I'm much
obliged to all four. Besides these letters, I've had word that
plant-hair is put to the following uses: On some plants it catches
insects and helps to eat them; in others, the hair sends out a kind of
juice which keeps away insects that might harm the plant; on the
mulleins, the stiff hairs are supposed to prevent cattle from browsing
on them; and on yet others, the hairs suck in gases and liquids as part
of the food of the plants. And there may be other uses for these hairs
that I haven't heard of yet.


DARK SUNS.

Here's something strange,--so strange that, may be, you 'd better
inquire further into it. I give you the paragram just as it comes to me:

"The bright star Sirius, itself a vast flaming sun, has a companion
which is also a sun,--nearly seven times as large as our own,--but which
is dark, and gives no light at all. This dark sun was seen through a
very powerful telescope in 1862, and it is thought that there are a
great many like it, although no others have been found."




THE LETTER-BOX.


    _To the little girl who asks if Bryant wrote any poem that would
    interest "us children" and to all young readers of_ ST. NICHOLAS:

Yes, indeed. You will find in the collected works of this beloved
American writer many songs and poems that you can understand with ease
and read with delight. A good, pure-hearted man, like William Cullen
Bryant; a man so honest, so simple and earnest, so truly great, that
with a deep knowledge of the world about him he worshiped God, honored
his fellow-man, and loved nature as a child loves its mother--such a man
could not be far removed from young sympathies. He could not be a poet
without singing, sometimes, just the song that little folks would love
to hear.

And children, themselves, were dear to him. More than once in the course
of an acquaintance that dates back to our own early youth, we have seen
his eyes light with pleasure at some incident of boy and girl life.
Often his kindly interest and hearty words about St. Nicholas have given
us better hope and courage to try to make the magazine just what it
should be. "Good!" from his quiet lips was well worth striving for. His
standard in everything was high. Hear "The Old Man's Counsel," which,
through his own verse, he once gave to his own heart.

   "Wisely, my son, while yet thy days are long,
    And this fair change of seasons passes slow,
    Gather and treasure up the good they yield--
    All that they teach of virtue, of pure thoughts
    And kind affections, reverence for thy God
    And for thy brethren; so when thou shalt come
    Into these barren years, thou mayst not bring
    A mind unfurnished and a withered heart."

But Bryant was not always solemn in his teaching. If you like playful,
sprightly verses that yet are full of poetry, read his "Robert of
Lincoln," where

   "Merrily swinging on brier and weed,
      Near to the nest of his little dame,
    Over the mountain-side or mead,
      Robert of Lincoln is telling his name:
        Bob-o'-link, bob-o'-link,
        Spink, spank, spink;
    Snug and safe is that nest of ours,
    Hidden among the summer flowers.
        Chee, chee, chee."

And while the poet is telling you of these singers of the air, read "The
Return of The Birds," written in the early spring of 1864, when, as you
know, the country was in great trouble, and the birds saw many a sorry
sight. If you like a beautiful fairy-tale in verse, all about children
and the elves or sprites that children love, read his "Little People of
The Snow." There also is the pretty legend of "The White-footed Deer";
or if you bigger boys and girls wish something more weird and exciting,
read his tragic story of "The Strange Lady." Then, on some lovely autumn
day, when "the melancholy days are come," and the procession of flowers
has nearly passed by, read his verses "To the Fringed Gentian." There
are other poems in the collection quite as easy to understand as these.
Some of the most admired indeed, that would seem "hard" to many a tall
youngster at the head of the school-class, were written in the poet's
own boyhood. His most famous poem, "Thanatopsis," was composed when he
was but eighteen years of age. When you, too, are eighteen you will more
than enjoy it, if you do not do so already. But you will like a song of
his youth,--lines "To a Waterfowl,"--and the beautiful poem entitled
"June," which has been very much quoted of late because of the
fulfillment of his wish that when he should come to lie at rest within
the ground, he might be laid there

                    "in flowery June,
    When brooks send up a cheerful tune,
      And groves a joyous sound."

Another beautiful poem, called "Waiting by the Gate," will be quite
clear to many of you; and one and all can understand "An Invitation to
the Country," addressed to Julia, the poet's devoted daughter, the joy
of his old age, who brightened his declining years, and to the last was
the faithful companion of his home.

You remember the story of his boyhood days that Mr. Bryant told you in
these pages nearly two years ago? Good as that story is, there is a
picture in his lovely home at Roslyn that could tell you even better
things. It is the portrait of his beautiful young mother, which for
years has shone upon him from the walls of his bedroom with such a
strong, sweet, loving look in her face that it makes one feel sure that
he was reared in a happy home, that his noble, useful manhood sprang
from a sunny, well-directed boyhood. Long ago the good mother passed
from earth, and now the gate through which she passed has opened for him
in his serene old age, the gate of which he wrote:

   "And some approach the threshold whose looks are blank with fear,
    And some whose temples brighten with joy in drawing near,
    As if they saw dear faces, and caught the gracious eye
    Of Him, the Sinless Teacher, who came for us to die.

   "I mark the joy, the terror; yet these, within my heart,
    Can neither wake the dread nor the longing to depart;
    And, in the sunshine streaming on quiet wood and lea,
    I stand and calmly wait till the hinges turn for me."

       *       *       *       *       *

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: One of your little readers has found the word
    "mutch" in one of my poems, and inquires its meaning, and I was
    rather surprised, on looking into the dictionaries, to discover that
    it was not there. I have heard it used from childhood,--applied to
    anything tied around the head in kerchief fashion. The word is in
    use in old legends, and possibly comes from the French mouchoir,
    "handkerchief;" but some better linguist than myself must say
    whether this suggestion is correct. To show, how the word is used, I
    can refer my questioner to the little story of "Gertrude's Bird," or
    the woodpecker, that is said to "fly about with a red mutch on her
    head." The legend is in Dasent's "Popular Tales from the Norse."

    And I may say here that I am almost glad I made that mistake about
    the white-throated sparrow, since receiving a note from a lady who
    writes from among the Berkshire hills, where the sweet call of this
    bird is constantly repeated. It is very pleasant to know that a
    little girl out in that beautiful region honors me so much as to
    recite my verse when she hears the fresh note of this charming
    songster, as this lady tells me her little daughter does.

    Surely the songs of our wild birds are far better than any songs
    that can be made about them; but if these serve to remind us how
    delightful the winged singers of the deep forests and lonely
    mountain-sides are, they are perhaps worth while.--Truly your
    friend,

    LUCY LARCOM.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Arlington Hotel, Cobourg, Canada, July 10, 1878.

    MY DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: Do you remember the little boy who traveled
    with you on the train last month from Meadville, Pa., to Jamestown,
    N.Y., when you were returning from California, and who promised to
    write you all about his visit to Niagara Falls? I have not forgotten
    my promise, but we have only just settled down for the rest of the
    summer at Cobourg, Canada. Well, we reached Niagara that night and
    staid there two or three days, and I enjoyed it so much. The fall on
    the American side is much smaller than the Canadian, and I
    remembered what you told me about part of the rock having fallen
    away, so that now, instead of being shaped like a horseshoe, it is
    like a Y. The old table rock has fallen away too. We drove every day
    over Goat Island, the new Park, around all the beautiful drives, and
    across the bridges. The best view is on the Canadian side, just
    after you cross the bridge, and then you have a grand view of all
    the falls at once. We drove out to Lundy's Lane, and a man came out
    and invited us to go up Scott's Tower and see the battle-field. Papa
    and mamma had been up some years ago, so said they did not care to
    go again, as the stairs were hard to climb.

    I said I would go, so the man took me up and showed me the
    battle-field and the lakes through an opera-glass. When I got into
    the carriage I thanked him for his kindness, and you may imagine my
    surprise when he asked me for fifty cents: of course I had to give
    it to him, but it was all I had. Papa and mamma laughed at me all
    the way home, but papa gave me the half dollar back afterward. We
    spent a week at St. Catherine's Wells, visited Toronto, Belleville,
    Napanee and Kingston, and went over on a lake steamer to spend the
    Fourth of July at Oswego, such a pretty town in New York on Lake
    Ontario. Cobourg is a pretty little town, too, right on the lake,
    and the Arlington Hotel, where we are staying, is very nice, with
    nice shade-trees and lawns. Do you know, dear St. Nicholas, I always
    thought of you as an old gray-bearded man, like the pictures of
    Santa Claus; but now that I know you and have talked to you, I shall
    enjoy St. Nicholas more than ever.--Your friend and constant reader,

    CALVERT WILSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

    New York.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I thought I would tell you about some people I
    heard of who like to talk to each other, and everything they say
    begins with the same letter. How queer it must sound. I send you a
    sentence: Sarah said she saw Susy sewing small shoes swiftly. I wish
    some of your scholars would try it, and see who could send you a
    sentence with the words beginning with Z.--I remain, your loving

    MAUD.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Albany, N.Y.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: Perhaps some of your other boys, who, like
    myself, wish to grow big and strong, would like to hear about the
    largest human being ever known,--Goliath of Gath,--a person almost
    large enough to need introduction by installments, but he is so well
    known that the ceremony is needless.

    As nearly as I can make out, he was between ten and eleven feet
    high. When he went to battle he wore a coat-of-mail weighing one
    hundred and fifty-six pounds,--as heavy as a good-sized man; and the
    rest of his armor amounted to at least one hundred and fifteen
    pounds more. The head of his spear weighed eighteen pounds,--as
    heavy as six three-pound cans of preserved fruit,--and this he
    carried at the end of a long and heavy shaft!

    Think what might happen if a man equally big and strong should live
    among us now, and insist on taking part in our games and sports! If
    he joined a boat-club, a curious six-oared crew could be made up,
    with him at one side and five other men opposite. And just imagine
    him "booming along" on a velocipede! If he joined the champion Nine,
    and hit a ball, where would that ball go to? If he called for a
    "shoulder-high" ball, wouldn't the catcher have to climb a
    stepladder to catch behind the giant? And if he threw a ball to a
    baseman, wouldn't he be apt to throw it clean through him?

    Probably no one can answer these questions, but they are
    interesting, all the same, to yours sincerely,

    R.V.D.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Lancaster, Pa.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: Can you please tell me whether there are
    fire-flies in England or not? We have had several discussions, and I
    would like so much to know.--Yours truly,

    AMY.

According to all accounts within our reach there are in England no
fire-flies like those of the United States. But there are glow-worms
there, and, sometimes, the male glow-worm (which has wings), has been
called a "fire-fly." It belongs to a branch (genus) of the family
_Lampyridae_, which is also the family of its fire-fly cousins, but it is
not shaped quite like them, and bears a different scientific name.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Philadelphia, Pa.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I have seen so many little stories written by
    girls of my age, that I thought I would write also--about iron. It
    is a very useful metal, without which we would be very much at a
    loss. Without iron, we could not cook very well; we could not build
    such houses as we do, because the nails are made of iron, and some
    of the tools; nor could we have gas, for the gas is conveyed through
    the different parts of the houses and city by iron pipes. Nor could
    we have steam-boats, for the machinery which makes them move is made
    of iron. The buckets which we have to carry water in have iron
    hoops. The doors have iron locks. The ink with which we write has
    iron in it. Last, but not least, we have iron in our blood, enough
    to make a ten-penny nail.

    I will tell you of a trip we took to the lead mines. We were
    spending the summer of 1877 in Wythville, Virginia, and there became
    acquainted with a family boarding in the same hotel as ourselves.
    One day they invited us to go with them to see the mines; we had a
    very long but pleasant ride, and ate our lunch on the grass in the
    woods, then went on, and at last arrived at the mines. The man who
    was outside told us that he was "going to harness the ladies'
    sleeping car;" the mouth of the cave was so low that a man of
    ordinary height could hardly stand upright in it: when we started
    they hitched two carts which were used to carry the ore out of the
    mine, and put a little donkey to it; the man called the donkey
    Jenny; we had two or three tallow candles which would not stay
    lighted; as we advanced further, the water began to leak from the
    rocks, and the car ran off track; but when we were inside the mine,
    we were more than rewarded for what we had suffered. The men were
    working in groups, each group having a lantern, and the lead itself
    shined; a few men went up a pair of stairs to nearly the top of the
    mine; but all these beauties could not induce me stay a minute
    longer than I was obliged, and I can assure you we were all very
    thankful when we arrived at the hotel, to find a nice supper and
    warm beds waiting for us.--Your little friend,

    JOYCE.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Junction City, Kansas.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I like to read you very much, especially "Under
    the Lilacs" and "Dab Kinzer." I live in Junction City, and have a
    very pleasant home. We have a great many wild flowers growing on the
    prairies. One of them is called the soap plant. Our teacher says its
    name is "Yucca." It has long slim leaves with sharp edges, and the
    flower grows on all sides of the stalk, which sometimes is four feet
    high: the flowers are white. Then we have a sensitive rose. The rose
    looks like a round purple silk tassel. We have lots more of odd
    flowers, which I will tell you about some other time.--Yours truly,

    MARY KEYS.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Bunker Hill.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I read an article lately against nicknames and
    spelling names with "ie," but I don't agree with it. I think when
    people are grown up their real names look better, but at home, among
    one's own friends, a pet name is pretty. I don't like to see a
    nickname in a marriage or death notice, but I do like it for young
    folks and in the family. They say it is a French fashion to spell
    names "ie." Whether it is true or not I like it, for all wise people
    say against it. I know I am only a little girl, and my opinion may
    not be worth much, but I mean to stand up for it, whatever they say.
    I suppose every one has a right to her own opinion, and if others
    don't agree with me, they needn't; but I don't like them to call me
    "silly" because I don't think as they do. I am willing they should
    have their own opinions, but I want the same privilege,--isn't that
    fair? I don't like such nicknames as "Tom" and "Bob," or "Mollie"
    and "Sallie," but like such as "Charlie" or "Hattie," and I think
    they look prettier spelt so than they do spelt "Charley" or "Hatty."
    If other people like them so, I am willing; but I want the right to
    follow my own choice in the matter, whether others like it or not. I
    think people have a right to spell their own names as they
    please.--Your friend,

    ALLIE BERTRAM.

    P.S.--My parents think my name is too pretty to be used so often as
    to get common, and so they call me "Allie," and I like it. I don't
    want any one but my friends who love me, and whom I love, to call me
    "Alma."

       *       *       *       *       *

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: May I tell you about a miniature fountain my
    sister and myself made long ago? It was lovely when finished, and
    fully repaid us for our labor.

    We first chose a board, about four feet long, and two feet wide, on
    the sides of which we nailed laths, to hold the earth we laid upon
    it, after having bored two holes, one near the middle and the other
    close in the corner. We then placed the board on a box, and set a
    barrel near it on blocks that stood about a foot higher than the
    board.

    We now cut a gourd in two, and making holes through the centers,
    fitted them over those in the board, the large one for the
    fountain-basin, the small one for a little spring in the corner.

    The next thing was to connect this with the barrel by pipes. For
    this we used reeds, placing a small upright piece in the center of
    the middle basin, and joining to this a larger reed which ran
    beneath the board, and was let into the barrel near the bottom. The
    spring was finished in the same manner, with this exception, that
    there was no upright piece in the middle. We now searched the woods
    for moss, bits of twigs, and even some tiny pine and cedar trees,
    which we planted with other things in the earth banked upon the
    board. We arranged a small rockery with vines trailing over it; we
    made paths covered with sand; and laid out tiny dells, and hills and
    plains. We lined the fountain-basin with shells and the "spring"
    with moss, and made little water-courses for the overflow; and,
    after it was all completed, we filled the barrel with water; and,
    lo! we had the prettiest little garden imaginable, with a fountain
    spurting and plashing in the center, and a pretty little mossy
    spring in the corner.

    LILLIE F. FALES.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Sitapur, Oude, India.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: The people here live in little mud huts clustered
    together in rude villages. They worship grotesque idols, wear very
    odd clothing, and eat strange food. Carpenters, and tailors, and
    shoe-makers, use their toes almost as much and as well as they use
    their fingers, and men do the sewing and a great deal of the
    cooking. Little girls very, very seldom go to school, and are
    betrothed when they are babies. Little boys do not play ball or such
    games, but they are very fond of flying the kite.

    There are monkeys here by hundreds. They live in groves and eat
    fruits. These are not monkeys which hang up by their tails at night
    to go to sleep,--they live in the mountains,--but great big fellows
    like plump dogs, only their fore-legs are short and their "feet" are
    hands.

    The other day I saw a fight between some monkeys and about a hundred
    crows. The monkeys wounded one poor crow, and it hopped about upon
    the ground unable to fly. Then the crows settled around it and tried
    to carry it off; but they could not. The monkeys charged down upon
    them, and then the crows charged the monkeys. It was an exciting
    time. Seeing the crows were getting the worst of the battle I came
    to their rescue, but the monkeys charged upon me, and I had to run.
    At last, I carried off the poor crow, hoping to cure it, but it died
    the same day. The other crows followed me home, and made a most
    dismal noise, as if they could not trust me.

    Here the squirrels are quite small and not at all wild. I saw a
    little boy, the other day, walking along with a saucy little
    squirrel perched upon his shoulder.

    In the schools in the villages here, the boys sit upon the ground,
    write upon wooden slates, and study aloud. They have wonderful
    memories and commit everything, though they do not understand very
    much of it. It is much better to understand every lesson as we go
    along, isn't it?

    Nearly all the little boys in India wear only a long coat which
    comes down to their knees. It is so very warm here for most of the
    year that the very little folks go without any clothing at all.

    There are 60,000 soldiers in India, sent from England. One of the
    regiments is in Sitapur, where I live, and they have a brass band
    which makes first-rate music. They also have bagpipes.

    In India there are persons from almost every nation--Hindus,
    Arabians, Chinese, Englishmen, Scotchmen, Irishmen, Frenchmen,
    Americans. There are twenty-three languages native to India. A great
    many Indians speak English, which is taught in all the schools, as
    Greek or Latin or French is taught at home.

    But, although this is a great country, there is no place like
    America, especially to Americans. Three cheers for the boys and
    girls of America!

    J.E.S.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Nauvoo, Ill.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: Here is something about my sister Lu and a
    strange pet she had: Her childhood was spent in a wild, new country.
    I cannot remember that she was ever amused with dolls and
    baby-houses. She made amends, however, by surrounding herself with
    kittens, dogs, fawns, ponies, squirrels, opossums, 'coons, and
    various birds, which, in turn, she petted and loved.

    She lived in the Red River country of Louisiana. The climate there
    is so warm that out-door play may be had at any season.

    The summer she was thirteen, with an older brother and other
    friends, she went fishing on the lake, whose waters were dark and
    still, studded here and there with cypress-trees in close ranks.
    Heavy timber filled the valley surrounding the lake.

    After catching a full supply of fish, some of which were cooked on
    the spot, brother Ed., in wandering about, captured a young
    alligator, and led it along to where sister Lu was seated, saying:
    "I've brought you a new pet, Lu." She adopted the little monster at
    once, and it was carried home, and turned loose in the creek below
    the house.

    In a few days the alligator was quite at home. It would eat anything
    which was brought to it, and soon learned to come to a call, seeming
    more delighted with notice than with what there was to eat. It
    whined and barked like a dog, and wagged its big tail when pleased.
    It enjoyed being patted on the head, and would caper around, the
    most awkward thing that ever attempted a frolic.

    In a few months, the pet became so large and familiar as to be a
    nuisance. He would track up sister Lu through the field and about
    the garden, showing his scent to be true and keen. Often when Lu was
    seated, perhaps, at her tatting, he would come to her feet and lie
    as still as if carved out of stone, waiting for a little notice. He
    soon grew to like eating the young goslings and chickens, and began
    to climb the fence, and look longingly at the young pigs. At last
    the scaly, good-natured creature disappeared. He probably made his
    way to a neighboring bayou, and was never seen again by any little
    girl's eyes.

    But Lu has never forgotten him, although probably he remembers
    nothing now of the good times of his youth.--Yours truly,

    G.M.K.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WITCHERY OF ARCHERY. By Maurice Thompson. Published by Charles
Scribner's Sons.

Archery has become so popular, of late, that this book will be of
interest to all boys and girls, as well as grown people, who practice
shooting with bows and arrows. Mr. Thompson, the author, wrote the
articles on Archery in Scribner's Monthly, which have excited such an
interest in bow-shooting, and he probably knows more about the matter
than any one else in the country.

There is much in the book about the various pleasures and advantages of
archery, which are very many; but there are also a great many plain and
practical directions to those who are unaccustomed to the use of a bow
and arrows. The author tells the young archer just what to do and how to
do it, and, as no one should use a bow who does not know how to use it
properly, such directions are very valuable, and should be carefully
read and followed.




THE RIDDLE-BOX.


CLASSICAL DOUBLE ACROSTIC.

The initials and finals, read downward, name two Latin poets.

1. To affirm. 2. A male character in Shakspeare. 3. To cry aloud. 4. One
of the United States. 5. An order of architecture. 6. Small.

VERTI.


NAMES OF AUTHORS ENIGMATICALLY EXPRESSED.

1. An Italian river. 2. A prefix, and an enemy. 3. A berry, and a spine.
4. A machine, and a small house. 5. The cat'll eat it. 6. What doves do,
and an expression of contentment. 7. Bright things that fly upward. 8.
What should be done with a sister in the sulks. 9. What should be done
to one's mother. 10. Half of a New England city, and what is useless
when dry.

RUSTICUS.


ENIGMA.

  My first is in boy, but not in lad;
  My second in merry, but not in sad.
  My third is in stripe, but not in streak;
  My fourth is in proud, but not in meek.
  My fifth is in little and also in tall;
  My sixth in none, but not in all.
  My whole a trusty guide is found
  For animals men ride around.

JANIE M.B.


WHAT IS IT?

Name the thing described in the following paragraph:

Kingdom: Animal, vegetable, and mineral. Conducive to travel; dreaded by
all with whom it comes in contact; an article of personal adornment;
when misplaced, causes terrible disasters; false; beaten, hardened, and
fire-tested; of various colors; preferred when green and flexible;
constantly changed, and changing others; its use enjoined by Scripture.

M.S.R.


CHARADE.

  Darker and darker still, the slow hours creeping,
    Bring to my _first_ the inexorable gloom;
  Silent and soft, the tender skies are weeping
    For all the beauty they no more illume.

  Stay not. O wand'rer, by the hurrying river,
    Nor in the whispering wood, nor where above
  Rises the perilous crag. My _second_ ever,
    With added final, welcomes all who rove.

  Wildly my _third_ over the hill is flying,
    Over the wide moor, and the wider sea,
  Moaning as one whose latest hope, in dying,
    Leaves an eternity of agony.

  Listen! oh, listen! to my _whole_, while filling
    My shadowy _first_ with ecstasy divine!
  Listen! oh, listen! would ye not be willing
    Ever in gloom to dwell, and not repine,--
  Ever to joy in such melodious gladness,--
  Ever to sorrow in such rapturous sadness?

L.S.


INCOMPLETE SENTENCES.

In each of the following sentences, fill up the blanks with suitable
words having the same sound but spelled differently and having different
meanings.

1. It is but ---- to pay your ---- to the conductor. 2. When the ----
was over, he did ---- to ---- to his father. 3. The ---- was ---- to do
her work well. 4. She ---- that the ---- of South America are
exceedingly tall. 5. The enraged farmer ---- his neighbor's cow for
eating his ----. 6. Don't ---- if the ---- should hit you. 7. The ----
of a knave is not always as ---- as his character. 8. He ---- would ----
but is awed into sincerity before this sacred ----.

GRACE G.C.


PICTORIAL ANAGRAM PUZZLE.

[Illustration]

The answer--a line from Young's "Night Thoughts"--contains six words.

Each numeral beneath the pictures represents a letter in that word of
the line which is indicated by the numeral--1 denoting that the letter
it designates belongs to the first word of the line, 4 to the fourth
word, and so on.

Find a word, letters, or a letter, descriptive of each picture, and
containing as many letters as there are numerals beneath the picture
itself. This is the first process. Then write down, some distance apart,
the figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, to correspond with the words of the
answer. Group beneath figure 1 all the letters designated by the numeral
1 in the numbering beneath the pictures. You will thus have in a group
all the letters that spell the first word of the line, and these
letters, when set in the right order, will spell the word itself. Follow
the same process of grouping and arranging, in making the remaining five
words of the answer. Of course, the re-arrangement of the letters need
not be begun until all of them have been set apart in their proper
groups.

S.R.


THREE DIAMONDS.

I.--1. A consonant. 2. A kind of carriage. 3. A well-known river of
Italy. 4. A precious stone. 5. In circumnavigator.

II.--1. In inconspicuous. 2. A Turkish name. 3. A spice. 4. A climbing
plant. 5. In herbalist.

III.--1. In iniquity. 2. A girl's name. 3. A country in Asia. 4. Purpose.
5. In Niagara.

ALLIE.


RIDDLE.

  A head have I, though never do I think;
  A mouth as well, but with it never drink.
  A body, too, is mine, of giant growth and strength,
  Combining with its force majestic length.
  But, as to feet, of them I have not one,
  Though I am never still, but always run.
  Ne'er was I known to leave my lowly bed,
  Or ope my mouth so that I might be fed.

E.S.S.


POSITIVES AND COMPARATIVES.

The positive is found from the first definition given, and the
comparative is made by adding the sound "er" to the positive.

1. My positive is level, and my comparative is what one's true friends
never do. 2. My positive is an article of food, and my comparative is a
tool. 3. My positive is coarse, and my comparative is a trade. 4. My
positive is a youth, and my comparative is an instrument for climbing.
5. My positive is a preposition, and my comparative is to esteem. 6. My
positive is a part of the body, and my comparative is wrath. 7. My
positive is an American poet, and my comparative is part of the body. 8.
My positive is an article of food, and my comparative is something used
in a part of Asia. 9. My positive is a public place, and my comparative
is a sufferer.

G.S.


HIDDEN NAMES.

Find a girl's or a boy's name hidden in each of the following sentences.

1. Arthur likes my apples. 2. Herbert expected letters every night. 3.
Alice rode to her uncle Robert's. 4. Mr. Allen bought eight lambs. 5.
Hattie Arnold reached Rochester yesterday. 6. Even Theodore has eaten
little. 7. Every rainy night Eva sews trimming. 8. Ellen's dog is
terribly hurt. 9. Florence rides every day. 10. Softly the evening light
lingers around. 11. Even dull wits improve, nowadays. 12. Generally,
raisins are capital eating. 13. Fido ran after Ned's kite.

C.K.


EASY CROSS-WORD ENIGMA.

  My first is in edict, but not in law;
  My second's in chilly, but not in raw.
  My third is in ice, but not in snow;
  My fourth is in cut, but not in mow.
  My fifth is in mild, but not in bland;
  My sixth is in country, not in land.
  My seventh is in silent, not in still;
  My eighth is in slaughter, but not in kill.
  My ninth is in learn, but not in teach;
  My tenth is in sandy, but not in beach.
  My whole is the name of a useful book,
  As soon you'll see, if you'll closely look.

W.B.H.


DOUBLE WORD-SQUARE.

Across: 1. Departed. 2. Declare. 3. Look askance. 4. Terminates.
Down: 1. High wind. 2. Part of a stove. 3. Want. 4. Mistakes.

H.H.D.


REBUS.

A two-line quotation from a poem by Thomas Gray.

[Illustration]


CENTRAL SYNCOPATIONS.

1. Syncopate an orifice, and leave a troublesome insect. 2. Syncopate to
cut, and get a natural underground chamber. 3. Syncopate a wise saying,
and get to injure. 4. Syncopate a small house, and leave a fugitive
named in the Bible. 5. Syncopate a crown of a person of rank, and leave
a musical instrument.

A.B.


DOUBLE ACROSTIC.

The initials form the name of a European sovereign. The finals form the
name of a great statesman.

1. Striking. 2. A vowel repeated. 3. A body of soldiers. 4. A lofty
building. 5. A musical drama. 6. Scarce. 7. A pastoral poem. 8. The
surname of a celebrated Italian poet.

DYCLE




ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN AUGUST NUMBER.


DOUBLE ACROSTIC.--Primrose, 1. PeaR. 2. RomeO. 3. IsthmuS. 4. MacE.

NUMERICAL ENIGMA.--All owing: allowing.

PICTORIAL TRANSPOSITION PUZZLES.--1. Ten mugs; nutmegs. 3. Ten tea-pots;
potentates.

DIAMOND PUZZLE.--1. M. 2. JAy. 3. MaCaw. 4. YAk. 5. W.

SQUARE-WORD.--1. Crane. 2. Raven. 3. Avert. 4. Nerve. 5. Enter.

SHAKSPEAREAN REBUS.--"Hamlet," Act III., Scene i.

   "Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;
    And thus the native hue of resolution
    Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought."

GEOGRAPHICAL DOUBLE ACROSTIC.--1. ChilI. 2. HellesponT. 3. IndiA. 4.
NepauL. 5. AlleghanY.

METAGRAM.--Dip, fip, lip, hip, rip, nip, pip, sip, tip.

VERY EASY HIDDEN FURNITURE.--1. Table. 2. Sofa. 3. Chair. 4. Stool. 5.
What-not. 6. Crib. 7. Cot 8. Hat-rack 9. Desk.

DOUBLE CROSS-WORD ENIGMA.--Holmes, Lowell.

TRANSPOSITIONS.--1. Warned, warden, wander. 2. Red nag, gander, ranged,
garden, danger. 3. No elms, Lemnos, lemons, melons, solemn. 4. Red opal,
pale rod, real pod, leopard.

PROVERB REBUS.--"One swallow does not make a summer."

CHARADE.--Pondicherry; pond, I, cherry.

HOUR-GLASS PUZZLE.--Centrals, Arrow, 1. CHAnt 2. ORe. 3. R. 4. COg. 5.
BoWer.

CONTRACTIONS.--1. Brown, brow. 2. Plane, plan. 3. Lathe, lath. 4. Heath,
heat. 5. Hazel, haze. 6. Plume, plum. 7. Crown, crow. 8. Lunge, lung. 9.
Forty, fort.

WORD-SYNCOPATIONS.--1. Leveret; ever, let. 2. Slashing; ash, sling. 3.
Slashings; lash, sings. 4. Carpenter; pea, carter. 5. Carpets; pet,
cars.


ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN THE JULY NUMBER were received, before July 18,
from Bessie Hard, C.C. Bourne; Mamie H.S., and Louise G.H.; Cari Hinkle,
O.C. Turner, "Prebo," "La Gazza Ladra," "Cosy Club," Bertha E.
Keferstein, Nellie M. Slade, "Duchess May" R.H.R.; Alice MacNary and
Elliot MacNary; "Kelloke and Cary and Rose," Fred W.M., E. Farnham Todd,
"Winnie," "Stock-Broker and Doctor," "Dottie and Daisie;" May and
Charlie Pray; Laurie T. Sanders, May Chester, "Hyacinth," H.P.B.;
Frances and Margaret Bagley; W.H. McGee, Charlie Kellogg, Nellie
Kellogg, T.W.H., A.G.D., Nessie E. Stevens, "Romeo and Juliet" Bella W.
Brown, May Duffan, "St. Nicholas Club," H.B. Ayers; "Orada and Ibylsa;"
William W. Bellinger, Lillian Willams E.J.F., A.C.S., George D.
Mitchell, Arthur Boehm, Bessie Taylor, J.B.H., George C. Wedderburn,
William T. Gray, John V.L. Pierson, Henry Kummel, Virginia Simpson;
F.M.J., Jr.; Kitty Curtis, Mildred Meredith, Louisa F. Riedel; "Bessie
and Tic;" X.Y.Z., Sarah Duffield, Dycie Warden, Nettie A. Ives,
"Violet," R.T. French, Josie Hamilton, Alice M. Mason, Ellen Smith,
Liffie D. Hacker, Mamie Packer, Jennie A. Carr, Willie Sellie, Arnold
Guyot Cameron, Grant Squires, Georgine C. Schnitzspahn, T.H. Loomis,
Rachel Hutchins, Mary G. Arnold, M.W. Collet, Laura Maude Benton, Willie
Robinson, Fanny J. Schonacker; May and Louis Ogdea; Arthur Stowe, Nellie
C. Graham, Mattie Olmsted, W.A. Wheeler, Maggie T. Gemmill, Rufus B.
Clark, Lewis G. Davis, Clare G. Hess; Ella and Kittie Blanke; Nellie
Quayle, Gertrude Weasondonk, Clara F. Allen, Addie S. Church, "My
Maryland," Nellie L. Ninde, F. Popenhausen, A.B.C., "Hard and Tough,"
Nellie Emerson, L.B. Bancroft, M.P., Wm. C. Ferguson, Alice Lanigan,
Florence Van Rensselaer, Anna E. Mathewson, Josie Morris Brown, Charles
N. Cogswell, "Fritters," "Bertha and Daisy," "Beech-Nut," Stephen
Waterman, E.M. Biddle, Jr., "So So and his Cousin," Georgie B., Chas.
Alfred Christian, George J. Fiske, Esther L. Fiske; Frank Allen and May;
"Lena Kate," Milly E. Adams, Eddie Vultee, Willie B. Deas, F.D.,
"Fannie," Grace E. Fuller, C. Speiden, M. Speiden, Austen M. Poole, Ada
L. Goodwin, Fred Huckel, Estelle Jennings; William Guillet, of Canada;
"Brutus and Cassius," Kate Sampson, Edwin C. Garngues, "Bessie and her
Cousin," "A.B. and C.D.," Bessie Barnes, and Charles H. Stout.

"Fanny Pop" and Ernest B. Cooper answered correctly all the puzzles in
the July number.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of St. Nicholas Magazine for Boys and
Girls, Vol. 5, September 1878, No. 11, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ST. NICHOLAS MAGAZINE ***

***** This file should be named 17409.txt or 17409.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/4/0/17409/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, LM Bornath, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
