The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Olden Time Series, Vol. 3: New-England
Sunday, by Henry M. Brooks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Olden Time Series, Vol. 3: New-England Sunday
       Gleanings Chiefly From Old Newspapers Of Boston And Salem, Massachusetts

Author: Henry M. Brooks

Release Date: January 9, 2006 [EBook #17483]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLDEN TIME SERIES ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










_THE OLDEN-TIME SERIES._

16mo. Per vol., 50 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

There appears to be, from year to year, a growing popular taste for quaint
and curious reminiscences of "Ye Olden Time," and to meet this, Mr. Henry
M. Brooks has prepared a series of interesting handbooks. The materials
have been gleaned chiefly from old newspapers of Boston and Salem, sources
not easily accessible, and while not professing to be history, the volumes
contain much material for history, so combined and presented as to be both
amusing and instructive. The titles of some of the volumes indicate their
scope and their promise of entertainment:--

    CURIOSITIES OF THE OLD LOTTERY.
    DAYS OF THE SPINNING-WHEEL.
    SOME STRANGE AND CURIOUS PUNISHMENTS.
    QUAINT AND CURIOUS ADVERTISEMENTS.
    LITERARY CURIOSITIES.
    NEW-ENGLAND SUNDAY, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It has been the good fortune of the writer to be allowed a peep at the
manuscript for this series, and he can assure the lovers of the historical
and the quaint in literature that something both valuable and pleasant is
in store for them. In the specialties treated of in these books Mr. Brooks
has been for many years a careful collector and student, and it is
gratifying to learn that the material is to be committed to book
form."--_Salem Gazette_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_For sale by all Booksellers. Sent, post-paid, upon receipt of price.
Catalogues of our books mailed free._


TICKNOR & CO., BOSTON.




THE OLDEN TIME SERIES

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW ENGLAND SUNDAY

"_Sunday is the golden clasp that binds together the volume of the
week._"--LONGFELLOW.

"_What greater calamity can fall upon a nation than the loss of worship?
Then all things go to decay._"--EMERSON.

    "_There are some moody fellows, not a few,
    Who, turn'd by Nature with a gloomy bias,
    Renounce black devils to adopt the blue,
    And think when they are dismal they are pious._"
                                               HOOD.

    "_Sundays observe; think when the bells do chime
    'Tis angel's music._"
                                             HERBERT.




THE OLDEN TIME SERIES.

GLEANINGS CHIEFLY FROM OLD NEWSPAPERS OF BOSTON AND SALEM, MASSACHUSETTS

SELECTED AND ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF COMMENTS

BY

HENRY M. BROOKS

       *       *       *       *       *

New-England Sunday


"Old and new make the warp and woof of every moment. There is no thread
that is not a twist of these two strands. By necessity, by proclivity, and
by delight, we all quote."--EMERSON

[Illustration: T AND CO]

BOSTON

TICKNOR AND COMPANY

1886




_Copyright, 1886,_

BY TICKNOR AND COMPANY.

       *       *       *       *       *

_All rights reserved._


=University Press:=

JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.




    INDEX OF NAMES.


                                PAGE

    AGASSIZ, PROFESSOR L.         15
    Andrew, Charles A.            43
    Atkinson, Edward              15

    BARNARD, THOMAS, D.D.         21
    Beecher, Rev. H.W.             6
    Bentley, William, D.D.    10, 11
    Blanchard, Benjamin       20, 21
    Bolles, Lucius, D.D.          21
    Bonaparte, Napoleon           20
    Brisset, Citizen              49
    Burns, Robert                 21

    CABOT, JOS. S.                20
    Chase, Philip                 46
    Churchill, Mr.                35
    Cleveland, George     43, 46, 48
    Coggin, Jacob                 32
    Crowninshield, John           43
    Culver, Mr.                   33

    EMERSON, R.W.                 58
    Endicott, Governor John       33
    Endicott, Samuel              20

    FELT, REV. JOS. B.      8, 9, 18
    Freeman, Nehemiah             22
    Frothingham, Nathaniel    46, 48

    GLOVER, MR.               34, 35
    Guppy, Reuben                 18

    HODGES, CAPTAIN BENJAMIN      11
    Hopkins, Daniel, D.D.      9, 21
    Hopps, John Page              62

    INGERSON, NATHANIEL           40

    JACOBS, JOHN                  32
    Jefferson, Thomas             13
    Johnson, Richard M.   47, 49, 50

    KING CHARLES I.               37
    King George II.               38
    King George III.              38
    King James I.                 37
    Kittredge, Dr. Benjamin   43, 46

    LANE, DAVID                   32
    Le Favre, Mr.                 10
    Le Sage                       40
    Lord, William                 18

    MCCLURE, MR.              34, 36
    Mitchell, Judge           34, 36

    NEAL, DAVID A.                43

    OSGOOD, BENJAMIN              32

    PAINE, THOMAS             49, 56
    Parker, Mr.                   10
    Peele, Willard            46, 48
    Peters, Hugh                   9
    Phillips, Stephen C.      43, 46
    Pickman, Dudley L.        46, 48
    Pingree, David                43
    Preston, Mr.                  65
    Prince, Rev. John, LL.D.      21
    Putnam, Perley        43, 46, 48

    SALTONSTALL, LEVERETT         43
    Smith, Jonathan               15
    Smith, Susan                  15
    Spurgeon, Rev, C.H.            6
    Stearns, Charles              21
    Story, Franklin H.            43
    Swan, Mr.                     10

    TALMAGE, REV. DR.              6
    Treadwell, John W.            43
    Trumbull, Jonathan            15
    Tucker, Gideon            46, 48

    VOSE, MR.                     34

    W----, REV. MR.               41
    Washington, George             1
    Waters, Joseph G.             43
    Waters, Stanley               10
    West, Nathaniel, Jr.          43
    White, Stephen                46
    Whiting, Samuel               32
    Wright, Fanny                 56




[Illustration]

NEW-ENGLAND SUNDAY.


SEEING in an old paper that General Washington was stopped by a
"tythingman" in Connecticut in 1789 for the "crime" of riding on Sunday, we
were naturally led to think about the "Sabbath question," as it is
sometimes called. We find the account referred to in the "Columbian
Centinel" for December, 1789.

     THE _PRESIDENT_ AND THE _TYTHINGMAN_.

     The President, on his return to New-York from his late tour,
     through Connecticut, having missed his way on Saturday, was
     obliged to ride a few miles on Sunday morning, in order to gain
     the town, at which he had previously proposed to have attended
     divine service.--Before he arrived, however, he was met by a
     Tythingman, who commanding him to stop, demanded the occasion of
     his riding; and it was not until the President had informed him
     of every circumstance, and promised to go no further than the
     town intended, that the Tythingman would permit him to proceed on
     his journey.

       *       *       *       *       *

This Sunday question has been so often discussed of late years, and the
opinions expressed on the same are so diverse, that it may be well to print
a few selections on the subject from some of the old newspapers, that those
who are interested may see, as a matter of curiosity, if for no other
reason, what views have been entertained within the past century, more
especially in New England, in reference to Sunday.

In a Salem paper of 1775 the following notice appeared:--

     WHEREAS the sober and thoughtful People of this Town are much
     displeased by the great Noise and Disturbance made in the
     Streets, on Saturday and Sabbath Day Evenings. It is earnestly
     desired that all Heads of Families would keep their Children and
     Servants at Home, on those Evenings, and thereby greatly
     contribute to the Quiet of the Town and Peace of the Inhabitants.

The appearance of Essex Street in Salem at the present time on Saturday
evening would seem to indicate that "heads of families" do not now "keep
their children and servants at home."

       *       *       *       *       *

From a communication in the "Massachusetts Centinel," April 30, 1788,
"riding on the Sunday" is held to be a "flagrant crime."

                             _For the_ CENTINEL.

     AS the devoting one day in seven to religious purposes is a
     bounden duty we owe to God our creator, and a most reasonable law
     of our Commonwealth--to see people riding on the Sunday in
     pursuit of their worldly affairs, is so disgusting to the man of
     true principle, that the neglect of our executive authority of so
     flagrant a crime, is to be lamented. The common practice of a Mr.
     C----fl----n of H-pk----n is notorious on this account. Would not
     wish to traduce the character of any man, but would only query,
     whether such conduct is not highly reprehensible, and deserving
     the cognizance of the magistrate.

                                                              SUFFOLK.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is not at all strange from the point of view from which Sunday was
then regarded. Indeed many people feel about the same now. They would have
the old laws enforced in regard to riding and neglect of public worship.
They have fears that the day may degenerate into a European Sunday, with
prayers in the morning and amusements in the afternoon and evening.

The changes in the past fifty years in reference to Sunday have indeed been
very great, but we think they arise chiefly from a reaction from the too
strict Puritanism of the past. While we would not have the day too strictly
kept, we yet have no sympathy with that class of minds who think there
should be no "day of rest" or no time set apart for religious exercises or
church services, but would have all days exactly alike.

       *       *       *       *       *

According to the "Salem Mercury" of Aug. 12, 1788, the ministers of
Connecticut, in convention, publish an address on the "increasing
negligence of the Publick Worship of God," etc.

                             SALEM, AUGUST 12.

     The Ministers of the State of Connecticut, convened in General
     Association, have published a serious, sensible, plain Address to
     the People of the Churches and Societies under their pastoral
     care, on the subject of the increasing negligence of the Publick
     Worship of God; which they consider as one of the most painful
     and alarming, among the various instances of declension and
     immorality, which at the present time threaten the very existence
     of religion in this country.--"In what manner," says the Address,
     "does this evil affect the political interests, the essential
     wellbeing, of the community? All the branches of morality are
     indissolubly connected. From one breach of moral obligation to a
     second, to a third, and to all, the transition is easy, necessary
     and rapid. From negligence of the duties we owe to God, the
     passage is short to contempt for those we owe to men. The
     Sabbath, in the judgment of reason and of revelation, is the
     great hinge on which all these duties are turned. When the
     ordinances of this holy day are forsaken and forgotten, the whole
     system of moral obligation must of course be also forgotten; the
     great, substantial and permanent good, of which religion is the
     only source, is effectually destroyed; the political peace and
     welfare of a community, the salvation of the human soul, the
     infinitely benevolent designs of redeeming love, the institution
     of the means of grace, and the obedience and sufferings of the
     Son of God, are frustrated and set at nought. Thus, by one
     effectual blow of sin, and the friends of sin, are all the great
     and valuable interests of mankind overthrown."

       *       *       *       *       *

Although our remarks are confined to America, we may mention that it has
been stated by some of our own countrymen who have visited London that
Sunday is generally as well observed there as in New England; yet we find
in the "Salem Gazette" of Nov. 23, 1785, that the attendance on public
worship in London was then rather small as compared with what might have
been seen in Boston at the same date. But that was before the days of the
"sensation" preachers, as they are called,--Spurgeon, Beecher, Talmage, and
men of that stamp, who now draw crowds of people, many of whom are not
always the most religious in the community, but who love excitement rather
than quiet contemplation.

                                     LONDON,

     _Sept._ 13. Sunday being a day of rest, 739 horses were yesterday
     engaged on _parties of pleasure_.

     In fifty churches, eastward of Temple-bar, the congregations
     amounted, on an average, to _seven_ for each church in the
     morning, and _five_ in the afternoon. This shews the state of the
     Christian religion in the metropolis to be far better than could
     be expected!

                                                                 1785.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following extract from the "Belfast Patriot" of 1825 shows how the
"Lord's day" was regarded in 1776 in the "District of Maine."

     FIFTY YEARS AGO. At a town meeting, held on the common, on the
     south end of lot No. 26, probably where the meeting house now
     stands, on the east side of the river, in Belfast, Oct. 10th,
     1776, the town then having been incorporated two years--among
     other things "to see if there can be any plan laid to stop the
     Inhabitants from visiting on Sunday." "Voted, That if any person
     makes unnecessary vizits on the Sabeth they shall be Lookt on
     with Contempt untill they make acknowledgement to the Public."

       *       *       *       *       *

Houses of worship were formerly "as cold as a barn."

Notwithstanding all the comforts and conveniences of modern places of
worship, to say nothing about the more interesting preaching and other
exercises, some people consider it a hardship to be obliged to attend even
one service on Sunday. How was it in "old times"? Our ancestors were
obliged to conform to the prevalent custom of going to meeting whether they
liked it or not. The law did not then excuse any one from attendance at
public worship, except for sickness. Not to be a "meeting-goer" in those
days was to range one's self with thieves and robbers and other outlaws. No
matter if the meeting-house was cold, and there was danger of consumption;
it was apparently "more pleasing to the Lord" that a man should get sick
attending services in "his house" than by staying away preserve his health.
Mr. Felt, in his "Annals of Salem," says: "For a long period the people of
our country did not consider that a comfortable degree of warmth while at
public worship contributed much to a profitable hearing of the gospel. The
first stove we have heard of in Massachusetts for a meeting-house was put
up by the First congregation of Boston in 1773. In Salem the Friends'
Society had two plate-stoves brought from Philadelphia in 1793. The North
Church had one in 1809; the South had a brick Russian stove in 1812. About
the same date the First Church had a stove and the Tabernacle had one also.
The objections that [to heat churches] was contrary to the custom of their
hardy fathers and mothers, [and that it] was an indication of extravagance
and degeneracy, had ceased to be advanced. Not a few remember the general
knocking of feet on cold days and near the close of long sermons. On such
occasions the Rev. Dr. Hopkins used to say, now and then: 'My hearers, have
a little patience, and I will soon close.'"

Mr. Felt says that Hugh Peters (one of the ministers of the First Church)
was represented by an English painter as in a pulpit with a large assembly
before him, turning an hour-glass and using these words: "I know you are
good fellows, stay and take another glass."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Lord's Day in Connecticut in 1788.

                                 ANECDOTE.

     A Gentleman in the State of Connecticut, regularly attended
     publick worship on the Lord's day with all his family: On the
     Sunday evening he always catechised his children and servants on
     the principles of religion, and what they heard the minister
     deliver from the pulpit. He had a negro man who never could
     remember a note of the sermon, though otherwise smart. At last
     his master peremptorily told him he would on Monday morning tie
     him up and flog him. Next Sunday evening, when interrogated, he
     had forgotten all: On Monday morning his master executes his
     threat so far, as to tie him up. The fellow then cried out, O
     master spare me, for I remember something the minister said. What
     is it? said the master. The fellow replied, "_This much may
     suffice at this time._" His master was so pleased with his wit
     that he forgave him.

                                        _Salem Mercury_, August 12.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the Rev. Dr. Bentley's notes, edited by Stanley Waters, printed in the
"Salem Gazette," we learn that even in old times people occasionally
absented themselves from public worship on the Lord's Day.

Under date of 1791 we read,--

     Jan. 23. No singing through the whole day--not even an attempt.
     Mr. Le Favre Swan & Parker promised their assistance, but by
     drawing a prize of L300 in the Lottery they have been detained
     from Public Worship.

And in 1792,--

     Mch. 11. Sunday. The Ship Grand Turk burdened 550 Tons sailed
     this day for India, Capt. B. Hodges.

     The previous invitations given to the principal Gentlemen of the
     Town & the fame of a ship built in the Town & furnished with
     Sails from our own manufactories urged a curiosity so strong that
     few people were left in our houses of worship. Weather fine.

Thus we see that pecuniary success and pleasant weather were as influential
in 1792 as they are in 1886 in diverting individuals from their ordinary
religious privileges.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following extracts from the "Salem Impartial Register" of July 27,
1801, will perhaps have interest when considered in connection with some
circumstances which have taken place in Salem within a year or two:--

             _THE CONNECTICUT SABBATH._

    IN ancient days, 't was God's most sacred will,
    To give his law on Sinai's lofty hill,
    Whose top terrific issued clouds of smoke,
    And thus, amidst the flames, th' Eternal spoke;
    Six days, said he, (and loud the same express'd)
    Shall men still labor, and on the seventh rest:
    But here alas! like yon great pious town,[A]
    They break his law, and thus prefer their own:
      "And let it be enacted further still,
    That all our people strict observe our will:
    Five days and half shall men and women too
    Attend their business, and their mirth pursue.
    But after that, no man without a fine,
    Shall walk the streets, or at a tavern dine.
    One day and half 'tis requisite to rest,
    From toilsome labor, and a tempting feast.
    Henceforth let none, on peril of their lives,
    Attempt a journey, or embrace their wives:
    No Barber, foreign or domestic bred,
    Shall e'er presume to dress a lady's head.
    No shop shall spare (half the preceding day),
    A yard of Ribband, or an ounce of Tea.
    Five days and half th' inhabitants may ride
    All round the town, and villages beside;
    But, in their travels, should they miss the road,
    'Tis our command they lodge that night abroad."
      From hence 'tis plainly seen how chang'd indeed,
    That sacred law which GOD himself decreed!
    In this one act they think to merit heav'n,
    By taking half a day from six to add to seven.

     [A] _Boston--where a similar law was formerly enforced with rigour._

     _"One Man esteemeth one day above another; another esteemeth
     every day ALIKE. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
     mind."_ Romans xiv. 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The _old_ custom of opening Barbers' Shops in this Town on Sunday
     ceased yesterday, in consequence of the determination of the
     Grand Jury to make presentment of all such violations of the
     Sabbath. Cautions have also been given to the Horse Letters,
     against loaning any Horses or Carriages on Sunday; and there
     appears to be a very serious and wise determination in the
     "_Gentlemen_ of the Grand Jury" to put a stop to those shameful
     practices, which have for twenty years disgraced the most sober
     and quiet Town in Massachusetts! _Laus Deo!_ There will be no
     more horses killed now of a Sunday in going to Boston, either by
     _lack of bating_, or by _hard driving_! It is whispered, that the
     public are indebted, for this salutary reform, to the covert
     exertions of a _ci-devant_ PREACHER, who lacking the ability to
     _lead_ his _wakeful_ flock formerly, is now determined to _drive_
     all within his Circuit, into the pale of obedience, and thereby
     make up for former Sins of Omission. The Federalists predicted
     the loss of Religion, should Jefferson be President. We certainly
     have a good _Sample_ (thus early under his administration) that
     its state will be improved.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although doubts have often been expressed as to the authenticity of certain
Connecticut "Blue Laws," it is probable that many laws which have
sometimes been referred to as such were in the early days of the colony
actually in force,--as the following, which we find in an old paper. They
are certainly not much stronger than laws of the time in Massachusetts.

     No one shall be a freeman, or give a vote, unless he be
     converted, and a member in full communion, of one of the Churches
     allowed in this dominion.

     No one shall travel, cook victuals, make beds, sweep house, cut
     hair, or shave, on the Sabbath day.

     No woman shall kiss her child on the Sabbath, or fasting-day.

     No one shall run on the Sabbath day, or walk in his garden, or
     elsewhere, except reverently to and from meeting.

     No one shall read common prayer books, keep Christmas, or set
     days, make minced pies, dance, play cards, or play on any
     instrument of music, except the Drum, Trumpet, or Jewsharp.

     No food or lodging shall be offered to a Quaker, Adamite, or
     other heretic.

     If any person turns Quaker, he shall be banished, and not
     suffered to return but on pain of death.

     No Roman Catholic priest shall abide in the dominion; he shall be
     banished, and suffer death on his return.

Some years ago, a law-book which had belonged to Jonathan Trumbull,
containing the early statutes of Connecticut, was in the possession of a
Boston gentleman,[1] who informs us that at the end of the volume, in
manuscript, were found reports of "Brother Jonathan's" adjudications of
small cases which he tried as "justice of the peace." Among them was one
where "His Majesty's tythingman" entered a complaint against Jona and Susan
Smith for a "profanation of the Sabbath;" namely, "That on the ---- day of
---- during Divine Service on the Lord's Day _they did smile_." The
culprits were adjudged to be guilty of the offence, and severally fined
"five shillings and costs." This book was shown to the late Professor
Agassiz, who examined it with great interest and then made the following
remark: "I find here evidence of the difference between the Calvinism of
Switzerland and the Calvinism of America. I was brought up in that faith. I
went to meeting in the morning, I danced with the parson's daughter on the
green in the afternoon, and I played whist with the parson in the evening."

[1] Edward Atkinson, Esq.

The legislature of Massachusetts in the year 1760 passed the following
laws in relation to Sunday and to the proper observance of Saturday
evening:--

     "Whereas it is the Duty of all Persons, upon the Lord's-Day
     carefully to apply themselves publickly and privately to Religion
     and Piety, the Prophanation of the Lord's-Day is highly offensive
     to Almighty God; of evil Example and tends to the Grief and
     Disturbance of all pious and religiously disposed persons.

     Therefore that the Prophanation of the said Day may be fully
     prevented: Be it further enacted, That no Person whatsoever shall
     keep open their Shops &c. &c.--do or exercise any Labour nor any
     Sport, Game Play or Recreation on the Lord's Day or any part
     thereof &c. &c. under penalties of not exceeding twenty shillings
     for every offence."

Travelling was also prohibited, and it was enacted,--

     "That if any Person or Persons shall be recreating, disporting or
     unnecessarily walking or loitering, or if any Persons shall
     unnecessarily assemble themselves in any of the Streets, Lanes,
     Wharves, High-Ways, Commons, Fields, Pastures or Orchards of any
     Town or Place within this Province upon the Lord's Day, or any
     Part thereof, every Person so offending shall forfeit and pay
     the sum of five shillings and upon a second Conviction bound for
     good behaviour,... If any Persons being able of Body and not
     otherwise necessarily prevented shall for the space of one Month
     together absent themselves from the Publick Worship of God on the
     Lord's Day, they shall forfeit and pay the sum of ten shillings.

     "And whereas many Persons are of opinion that the Sabbath or Time
     of religious Rest, begins on Saturday evening, therefore to
     prevent all unnecessary Disturbance of Persons of such Opinion,
     as well as to encourage in all others a due and seasonable
     Preparation for the religious Duties of the Lord's Day: Be it
     further enacted, That no Person shall keep open any Shop,
     Ware-House or Work-House or hawk or sell any Provisions or Wares
     in Streets or Lanes of any Town or District, or be present at any
     Concert of Musick, Dancing or other Publick Diversion on the
     Evening next preceding the Lord's-Day, on Pain of forfeiting ten
     Shillings for each Offence, &c."

Wardens were to be appointed in all the towns and districts to see that
these laws were duly enforced. All existing laws on the Sabbath were at
that time repealed, but some of the laws then passed are still in force.

The following is from Felt's "Annals of Salem:"--

                                   1676.

     April 20th. "Ordered by ye Selectmen yt the three Constables doe
     attend att ye three great doores of ye meeting house every Lord's
     day att ye end of sermon, boath forenoone and afternoone and to
     keep ye doors fast and suffer none to goe out before ye whole
     exercise bee ended, unless itt be such as they conceive have
     necessary occasion and to take notice of any such as shall
     presume to goe forth as above said and present their names as ye
     law directs. Ordered that all ye boys of ye towne are and shall
     bee appointed to sitt upon ye three paire of staires in ye
     meeting house on the Lord's day and Wm. Lord is appointed to look
     to the boyes yt sitt upon ye pulpit staires and for ye other
     staires Reuben Guppy is to look to and order soe many of ye boyes
     as may be convenient and if any are unruly to present their names
     as ye law directs."

     On Sundays, P.M. when sermon is ended, the people in the
     galleries come down and march two abreast up one ile and down
     another until they come before the desk, for _pulpit they have
     none_. Before the desk is a long pue where the Elders and Deacons
     sit, one of them with a money box in his hand, into which the
     people as they pass, put their offerings, some _1s._, some _2s._
     or a half crown, or _5s._, according to their ability and good
     will, after this they conclude with a psalm.

While in 1814 in some parts of Massachusetts and New Hampshire the
tithingmen felt obliged to issue an address of warning to the public, in
Boston in 1815 Sunday seems to have been well observed. We copy two notices
from the "Salem Gazette."

                            _To the Public._

     AS the profanation of the Lord's Day is inconsistent with the
     welfare of society and a gross violation of the laws of the
     State; therefore we the undersigned, being appointed Tithingmen,
     give notice to the public, that we are under oath, and it has
     become our indispensable duty to prosecute all, who wilfully
     violate the laws with respect to the Lord's Day.

     And we hereby request all persons, to abstain on the Lord's Day
     from travelling, from worldly business and amusement, and thus
     relieve us from the painful necessity of prosecuting for a
     violation of the laws of the State.

     [_Signed by the Tithingmen of Concord, N.H. Salem, N.H. Bradford,
     Ms. Andover, Reading, Tewksbury, Beverly, Manchester, Hamilton,
     Ipswich, and Wilmington._]

                                                        Aug. 6, 1814.

       *       *       *       *       *

     BOSTON JUNE 1.--At the meeting on Monday last, the town of Boston
     evinced its good sense by voting to postpone the choice of
     _Tythingmen_ till the first Monday of March next. We venture to
     assert, that in no district in the universe, of the extent and
     population of Massachusetts, is the Sabbath more decently and
     _sincerely_ observed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Law against keeping barber's shops open on Sunday morning in Salem in
1804:--

              SUNDAY LAW IN SALEM--BARBERS' SHOPS 80 YEARS AGO.


     Correspondence of the Salem Gazette.

                                                       BOSTON, Aug. 5.

     About 1804 your Selectmen ordered that after a given date no
     barber's shop should be kept open on Sunday morning. There was no
     appeal from their mandate. The fatal last Sunday arrived; the
     customers of the esteemed Benj. Blanchard, whose shop was at the
     upper part of Essex street, opposite the Endicott and Cabot
     mansions, came as usual to have their hair tied; it was the epoch
     of queues, and it was necessary to their aspect in church that
     their back hair should be artistically bound with ribbon and
     their heads nicely pomatumed, even though, like Bonaparte, they
     shaved their own beards. This last Sunday it was observable that
     each gentleman, in his turn, after being barbered, instead of
     hurrying off as usual, resumed his seat. As the second bell began
     to ring, the last customer was accomplished, and the whole
     company rose from their chairs, filed out into Essex street,
     formed a line in front of Mr. Blanchard's shop, and gave three
     rousing cheers; then, like Burns's "Twa Dogs, each took off his
     several way," some to Dr. Barnard's North Church, some to Dr.
     Hopkins's, Dr. Bolles's, or Dr. Prince's First Church.

                                       _Salem Gazette_, August, 1885.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Middlesex Sabbath Association meet in November, 1815, but find nothing
to do. No Sabbath-breakers reported, probably.


                            SABBATH ASSOCIATION.

     WHEREAS the Association in the county of Middlesex, for aiding in
     carrying into effect the Laws of this Commonwealth against the
     violation of the Sabbath, met at Concord in November last,--and
     finding nothing which required further proceedings at that time,
     thought fit to adjourn. This is to give notice, that the meeting
     of said Association stands adjourned, to meet at Concord, at the
     former place of meeting, in Hamilton's Hotel, on the first
     WEDNESDAY in February next, at ten o'clock A.M.

     A general attendance is requested.

                                        CHARLES STEARNS, _Per Order_.

     _Lincoln, January_ 11, 1816.

                                                _Columbian Centinel_.

The following notice from the "Columbian Centinel" shows that rapid
driving on the Lord's Day was forbidden in Boston as lately as 1817:--

                                POLICE OFFICE.

                                             _Boston, July_ 12, 1817.

     COMPLAINTS having been made at this office of dangers and
     disturbances arising from the rapidity with which carriages are
     driven on the Lord's Day, special persons have been selected to
     take notice of this indecorous conduct, that the law on the
     subject may be rigidly enforced. It is forbidden to drive, during
     Divine Service, or while the inhabitants are going to or
     returning from their several houses of public worship, any
     carriage at a greater rate than a walk or moderate foot pace; and
     masters and mistresses are responsible, if the servants are
     unable to pay the penalty incurred by them in this offence.

                                      NEH. FREEMAN, _Superintendent._

       *       *       *       *       *

Making hay on Sunday is here condemned in some very choice lines.

     --> There is much more PIETY than POETRY in the following
     stanzas:--And though the employment condemned, cannot occur for a
     season at least, the MORAL inculcated we trust, will have a
     tendency to prevent other breaches of Holy Time.

                      _THE PIOUS FARMER._

    SHOULD it rain all the week and the Sundays prove fine,
    Though others make hay, yet I'll not work at mine;
    For, I don't think, for my part, such sun-shine was given,
    Us mortals to lure from the path-way to heaven.

    Some to work on the Sabbath will make a pretence,
    That taxes are high, and they can't pay their rents;
    But my rents and my taxes I'll still hope to pay,
    Though on sun-shiny Sundays I do not make hay.

    For this shall my heart never call me a sinner,
    While I still hope in God I shall ne'er want my dinner;
    To lay up a store, I'd try every fair way,
    But on Sundays, though sun shines, I will not make hay.

    Some plead in excuse, that, not waiting for Monday,
    Great battles are won, though they're fought on a Sunday!
    At famed Waterloo too,--there's none greater than it,
    But then, 'tis well known, the lost Tyrant began it.

    'Tis a custom with me to spend godly that day;
    But while French go to war, and the English make hay,
    Though the season proves wet, and hay gets in but slowly,
    Yet I would not do other than keep the day holy.

    Far, far be from me, to ape those saving Elves,
    Who rob God of his due, to grow richer themselves;
    But be mine the pursuit, which all good men approve,
    To strive to be rich in the Regions above.

    If it rain all the Week, then on God I'll recline,
    And not work on Sunday, although the sun shine:
    In this Faith deeply rooted, no ills I forbode,
    That a man's seldom poorer for serving his God.

                              _Columbian Centinel_, Nov. 27, 1816.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the "Essex Register," Salem, May 18, 1822, we learn that there had
been trouble caused by ill-bred young men congregating at the public
corners on Sunday evening, and also that some females had behaved badly at
that time.

     One of those ill bred and riotous fellows, who have become
     notorious for their bad conduct of late, at the corners of our
     streets, was arrested by one of our most vigilant constables, at
     the corner of North and Essex streets, on Sunday evening last,
     carried before a magistrate, committed to prison, and bound over
     for his future good conduct. Our municipal authorities, and all
     others concerned in bringing this person to punishment, deserve
     the thanks of their fellow-citizens. The town of Salem, once so
     distinguished for the purity of its manners and the good order of
     its society, has been disgraced of late, by outrages upon the
     peace and quiet of the community, committed by noisy assemblages
     of young men at the public corners--and even _females_ have been
     seen to exhibit a demeanor in the streets disreputable to the
     town, and disgraceful in the highest degree to themselves. This
     conduct should receive not only the discountenance, but the
     decided reprehension of the respectable part of the community.
     Every citizen is interested, and is moreover bound to manifest
     his interest by his acts, in bringing every offender to prompt
     and condign punishment. The stake which every one has in the good
     order of the community, is great--it behoves, then, every one to
     exert himself to re-establish and preserve it.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1819 in New York there were loud complaints of the violation of the
Sabbath, as we see by an account taken from the "Salem Gazette."

                                               NEW-YORK, JULY 14.

                    _VIOLATION OF THE SABBATH._


     A few weeks since, a meeting of the citizens was called, to
     devise some efficient means to suppress the violation of the
     Sabbath. A committee was appointed to report a plan for that
     purpose. I wish to inquire what that committee have done, and
     when another meeting is to be called to receive their
     report.--The evil still remains, and is certainly accumulating
     under the most aggravated forms.--Our churches are nearly
     deserted on the Sabbath, while every place of amusement and
     pleasurable retreat is thronged. Good authority states the
     numbers that frequent Brooklyn every Sabbath, at from ten to
     twenty thousand, and a proportionable number may be computed to
     visit every other island and place of resort in the vicinity. We
     have forty-five churches, and a population of one hundred and
     twenty thousand; admitting one thousand to attend each church, it
     follows that seventy-five thousand violate that command of the
     Apostle which requires Christians "not to forsake the assembling
     of themselves together." Let the citizens organize societies to
     suppress the violation of the Sabbath and all other vice and
     immorality.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Sabbath-breakers" had multiplied to such an extent in 1815 that
conventions were held in many of the counties in Massachusetts to see what
could be done in reference to the evil. We have a report of the Essex
convention at Topsfield, Oct. 4, 1815. The Committee say, among other
things,--

     Although most men, even if they have no regard for the Divine
     Being or the welfare of society, when they know that
     Sabbath-breaking is offensive to the great body of the community,
     will, from regard to themselves, refrain from it, yet there are
     some abandoned individuals, who are so lost to all proper regard
     even for themselves, as well as their Maker, and their
     fellow-men, that in violation of laws, human and Divine, and in
     direct opposition to the wishes of the community, they still
     continue to travel and labour upon the Sabbath.

     Such persons ought _surely_ to be prosecuted, and made to feel
     that they cannot violate the laws of the Commonwealth, and
     profane the Sabbath with impunity.

     If their conduct is suffered to continue, others will be
     emboldened to follow their example; the evil will again increase,
     and eventually become as great as before.

     But if they find that they cannot profane the Sabbath without
     being subjected to the trouble, shame and expense of a penal
     prosecution, this enormous evil, which has so long been
     undermining the best interests of the community, and drawing
     down upon us Divine judgments, will be prevented. For past
     experience has fully demonstrated, that wherever the laws are
     prudently, and at the same time promptly and faithfully executed,
     the evil will cease.

And among the Resolves passed by the Convention we find these,--

     III. Resolved, that we earnestly recommend to Tythingmen, Civil
     Officers and the friends of the Sabbath in every town, to
     prosecute, or cause to be prosecuted, without distinction and
     without delay, all, who are travelling without sufficient reason,
     or in any way wilfully violating the laws respecting the Lord's
     Day.

     V. Resolved, that we recommend to all the friends of order, to
     circulate as extensively as possible, such tracts and pamphlets
     as are calculated to promote the due observance of the Lord's
     Day.

     Voted, that the Clerk be requested to send a copy of the doings
     of the Convention, to the Editors of the public papers in Boston,
     Salem, Newburyport and Haverhill, and that they be requested to
     publish the same in their respective papers.


A full account of this convention can be found in the "Salem Gazette," Oct.
31, 1815. It does not appear that there was any disturbance of public
worship to complain of, only many people neglected to attend the meetings,
or walked or rode for pleasure on the Lord's Day.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the same month and year the "Worcester AEgis" gave expression to opinions
on the question of "Sabbath-breaking" which we think accord more with
modern ideas than do those of the Essex convention. The views of the "AEgis"
probably represented the average liberal sentiment of that day.

                                                 _WORCESTER, OCT. 25._

                         _BREACH OF THE SABBATH._

     At the late session of the S.J. Court at Northampton it was
     decided that a justice of the peace could not issue a warrant for
     a breach of the Sunday laws against an offender that is not an
     inhabitant of the county where the offence is committed, but that
     he must be prosecuted only before a grand jury; and that justices
     of the peace could not issue warrants, nor sheriffs serve them,
     on the Lord's day, for any breaches of those laws. Damages were
     awarded against a justice, a tythingman, and a sheriff, upon the
     latter principle.

     Upon this decision we congratulate the public. It has taken a
     formidable weapon from the hands of those petty tyrants, who are
     labouring to revive the reign of religious persecution. We trust
     we shall no longer see the Sabbath trespassed upon by these
     _official harpies_, who, instead of spending the day as they
     ought, in worshiping God, confessing their own manifold sins, and
     praying that they may be endued with a more christian temper, are
     riding or walking the highway, "seeking whom they may devour,"
     and gratifying at once their malice and their avarice, by
     plundering their fellow-citizens, and filling their own pockets.
     In some towns they have been stationed at every turn of the road,
     ready to dart out upon the traveller, like a spider from the
     corner of his web. We rejoice at every occurrence which checks
     this persecuting spirit.--Those who know us, know that we
     respect the Sabbath and its holy institutions: for this very
     reason we reprobate conduct which has a direct tendency to bring
     these institutions into contempt. In all ages, the
     _anti-christian spirit_ of _christian professors_ has done more
     injury to the cause of religion, than the attacks of its declared
     enemies. Real Christianity cannot flourish by persecution.
     Excessive rigour defeats the very purposes it is intended to
     subserve. In time there will be a re-action, and men will go to
     the opposite extreme--religion and morals will be as much too
     lax, as they were before too strict.

     In no part of the world is the sabbath so scrupulously observed
     as in _New-England_. As we keep it, it resembles more the _Jewish
     Sabbath_, than the Sabbath of all other parts of Christendom. We
     had much rather see this nice punctiliousness, than that
     indifference which prevails in some places. But we think there is
     such a thing as _drawing the cord too tight_--so tight that it
     will be in danger of snapping in sunder! The good habits of our
     countrymen, and the increasing regard which is entertained for
     religion, will be a sure guaranty of the respectful observance of
     the Sabbath. There are very few men in the community, who dare to
     outrage public feeling by a wanton violation of the solemnity of
     the day. We have excellent laws to punish those who disturb the
     devotions of any society or individual. Let these laws be put in
     execution without fear, favour or affection. But for the rest,
     let religion take care of itself--it needs no assistance from the
     feeble arm of the magistrate.

       *       *       *       *       *

                           Tythingmen's Notice.

     WE the subscribers, Tythingmen of the several towns annexed to
     our names, having taken the Oath of Office, it becomes our
     indispensable duty to see the laws of this Commonwealth, "for the
     due observation of the Lord's Day," faithfully executed; which we
     are determined to do as far as may be in our power. We,
     therefore, call on all persons to abstain from the violation of
     said laws; as they would avoid "the several penalties annexed to
     the several offences therein described," and save us from the
     painful necessity of a prosecution, which otherwise must
     immediately follow.

                       }  Tithingman of Bedford in
     DAVID LANE,       }  behalf of himself and five
                       }  others.

                       }  Tithingman of Westford
     BENJ. OSGOOD,     }  in behalf of himself and
                       }  four others.

                       }  Tithingman of Carlisle in
     JOHN JACOBS,      }  behalf of himself and one
                       }  other.

                       }  Tithingman of Bilerica
     SAM'L WHITING,    }  in behalf of himself and
                       }  nine others.

     May 27th, 1815.



       *       *       *       *       *


                             Lord's Day.

     NOTICE is hereby given, that the Middlesex Convention for
     suppressing violations of the Laws of the Commonwealth, relative
     to the Sabbath, stands adjourned to the third Wednesday in May,
     at Hamilton's Tavern in Concord, at 10 o'clock, A.M.

                                               JACOB COGGIN, _Sec'y_.

     N. B.--It is particularly requested that all the Clergy, and
     others in the county, who feel interested in the object would
     attend.                                          may 13, 1815

THE SABBATH. An ecclesiastical council was lately convened at Kingsbury,
N. York, to decide a controversy which had originated between the minority
and majority of the Baptist Church, in Kingsbury, respecting an observance
of the Christian Sabbath. One of the Elders of the Church, Mr. Culver, had
written, preached and published a discourse, which, in the opinion of the
Council, amounted to a full and complete denial of all Scriptural
authority, for observing a day as a Christian Sabbath. The Council, after
stating the reasons, which in their opinion, conclusively proved the
obligation of the Christian to observe the Sabbath, recommend an union
between the parties to this controversy, and if the majority do not comply,
the Council deem it their imperious duty, to recognize the minority as the
regular Baptist Church.

In a former paper, we alluded to the manner in which the Sabbath was
regarded by our ancestors. It appears, that the following special
instructions on this subject were given to Gov. Endicott, by the
New-England Plantation Company.

     "And to the end, the Saboth may bee celebrated in a religious
     manner, we appoint, that all that inhabite the plantation, both
     for the general and particular employment, may surcease their
     labor, every Satterday throughout the year, at three of the clock
     in the afternoone, and that they spend the rest of the day in
     catechising and preparation for the Saboth, as the minister shall
     direct."

                                       _Salem Observer_, Aug. 4, 1827.



In the "Salem Register" of Oct. 11, 1820, we find the report of the trial
of a man charged with the crime of Sabbath-breaking by delivering milk to
his customers. The presiding judge (Mitchell) seems to have made a very
sensible address to the jury on this occasion. Probably the surest way to
bring about speedily the much-dreaded "European Sunday" would be for some
person or persons to prosecute such individuals as they happen to know who
violate certain obsolete Sunday laws.

                            _Law Intelligence._

                          COMMONWEALTH VS. GLOVER.

     This was an appealed case. The justice before whom it was
     originally tried, imposed a fine on Glover, who appealed to the
     Common Pleas. It was tried at Dedham on the 21st ult.

     The complaint was that said Glover had been guilty of the crime
     of Sabbath breaking, by delivering milk to his customers in
     Boston on the 25th June last. The evidence to support the
     complaint was from two gentlemen, Messrs. M'Clure and Vose. They
     testified, that on the 25th June last they walked out in company
     at 5, A.M. to see if they could discover any persons delivering
     milk from carts--that they had not been long in pursuit, before
     they descried a man, who descended from his vehicle, with a milk
     vessel, and poured milk from it, which he delivered to a family
     in their presence.--They approached him--enquired his name, and
     from whence he came. He answered, from Quincy, and his name was
     Glover.--They asked if he was in the habit of bringing milk to
     Boston on the Sabbath. He told them he had been when the weather
     was very hot. This was the evidence.

     The complaint being for doing labour on the Sabbath in the county
     of Norfolk, which was not labour of _necessity_ or _mercy_.

     Churchill, for Defendant, in cross examining the witnesses,
     enquired why they rose at so early an hour, on the 25th June, and
     went to walk? They answered that it was partly to exercise, and
     partly to perform their duty as professors of religion. They said
     they had made up their minds that the moiety of the fines they
     expected to receive, they would give to some charitable
     institution.

     The defence rested on two points--_First_, That no crime or act
     was proved to have been committed in Norfolk county--_Secondly_,
     If it should be proved that the act complained of had been
     committed, it was an act of _necessity_ and _mercy_.

     Counsellor Churchill entered with much spirit into the cause, and
     evinced that he had bestowed upon it much thought and labour. He
     gave an elaborate history of the Sabbatical Institution, and
     stated the various opinions and laws as to the division of holy
     time. He said that many families in Boston, both poor and rich,
     depended on milk to feed their children--that a large proportion
     of the people had no conveniences for keeping it from Saturday
     night till Monday morning; that those who had no other way of
     disposing of their milk, but by delivering it to those who would
     suffer without it, performed an act embracing both _necessity_
     and _mercy_; that those who sat up all night for the purpose of
     being up before day, to fatten on those who were performing the
     before-named charitable act, were like the Jews of old, who, when
     the Saviour of mankind raised the dead and restored the blind to
     sight, cried out, Crucify him! the Jews were but the M'Clures of
     the present day.

     The Judge (MITCHELL) charged the jury, that, if they had doubts
     whether any offence were proved to have been committed, within
     the county, they must acquit; or, if otherwise, and they were of
     opinion that it was necessary to deal out milk on the Sabbath in
     extreme hot weather, they must acquit. He stated that his
     neighbours bought milk of him, and took it on Sunday as on other
     days, and thought it no crime. He did not cast up the score,
     receive the money and rub out the chalks on that day; but
     apprehended that his conduct was virtually the same as that
     charged upon the defendant. The defendant pursued his regular
     course, and in doing so, he saved his property from waste, and
     relieved many from disappointment and distress. The clergy ride
     from town to town on the Sabbath, and the physicians ride without
     molestation. The Sabbath is a day of rest--but in the exercise
     of its duties, reason is to be regarded. Such worldly concerns as
     can well be done on other days, ought not to be done on the
     Sabbath--but if an ox fall into a pit, he must be taken out; that
     if a clergyman has agreed to exchange with a brother, he may as
     well ride a few miles on the Sabbath as to make a parade of going
     on Saturday night.

     The jury returned a verdict of--NOT GUILTY.

       *       *       *       *       *

OBSERVANCE OF THE SABBATH. There has been lately, in some of the Boston
papers, a discussion of the question, whether the sailing of a steam boat
on the Sabbath is not a profanation.

We allude to this subject, at the present time, not for the purpose of
taking a side in the controversy, but merely to show in what manner this
day was formerly noticed in England, and our own country.

In England, during the reign of James the first, it was lawful for his
subjects to indulge in certain sports, such as dancing, archery, leaping,
vaulting, may-games, whitsun ales, and morris dances, on _Sunday_ after
evening service. But it was not lawful to have bear-baiting, bull-baiting,
interludes, and bowling.

In reign of Charles 1st a statute was passed, prohibiting a meeting out of
the parish, on the Lord's day, to enjoy these sports. A statute was
afterwards passed, prohibiting carriers and drovers from travelling, and
butchers from slaughtering or selling on this day. Afterwards all
tradesmen, artificers, workmen, laborers, or other persons, were prohibited
from exercising their callings on this day, excepting works of necessity
and charity, and dressing and selling meat in families, inns, cook-shops,
&c. selling milk before nine in the morning, and after four in the
afternoon, _selling mackerell_ before or after divine service, and
excepting also forty watermen, who may ply between Vauxhall and Limehouse.

By a statute of George 2d fish carriages were allowed to pass on Sundays,
whether laden or empty. During the reign of this King, the Court decided in
favor of a Baker, charged "with baking puddings and pies on the Lord's day
for dinner." The court considered the case as falling within the exceptions
of works of necessity and charity. "That it was better that one baker and
his men should stay at home, than many families and servants." Under George
3d Bakers were prohibited from making, baking or selling, excepting between
nine in the morning and one in the afternoon, and the person requiring the
baking carried or sent it to the place where it was to be baked. A law was
afterwards passed, permitting bakers to work, so far as may be necessary in
setting or superintending the sponge, to prepare the dough for the next
day's baking.

The provisions of the Colony and Province laws, on this subject, were
embodied in our State law of 1792, which prohibits every person from
keeping open his shop, ware-house, or work-house, on the Lord's day, &
from doing any labor or work, excepting that of necessity and charity, and
from attending concerts of music, dancing, &c. It likewise prohibits
travelling by drovers, teamsters, &c. visiting taverns, &c. during the time
included between the midnight preceding and the sun-setting of the Lord's
day. It likewise prohibits games, diversions, recreations on the land or
water, on the evening next preceding or succeeding the Lord's day. Under
the Colonial government, it was for some time made a question when the
Sabbath should be considered as commencing; but in 1645 it became a custom
to regard the evening of the last day of the week as the beginning of the
Sabbath. Several clergymen however considered Saturday afternoon as the
commencement of holy time.

The following extracts from our town records will show in what manner the
Sabbath was observed by our pious ancestors.

                                    "1644.

     "Ordered, that twoe be appointed every Lord's day, to walk forth
     in the time of God's worshippe, to tak notice of such as either
     lye about the meeting-house, without attending to the word or
     ordinances, or that lye at home, or in the fields, without giving
     good account thereof, and to tak the names of such persons, and
     to present them to the magistrate, whereby they may be
     accordingly proceeded against."

                                    "1677.

     "Whereas, there hath been several complaints of several persons
     that doe profane the Sabbath, by unseasonable walking abroad even
     at the time of publique service, &c.--the Selectmen have agreed
     each of them to take their turns, with the constables to walk
     abroad on the Lord's day, both forenoon and afternoone, morning
     and evening, to redress such miscarriages as they shall at any
     time meet withal."

But the following license granted by the selectmen in 1672, shows a much
greater liberality than is exhibited in these days.

                                    "1672.

     "Nathaniel Ingerson is allowed to sell beer and syder by the
     quart, for the tyme whyle the farmers are a building of their
     meeting-house, and _on Lord's days_ afterwards."

                                  _Salem Observer_, July 14, 1827.

       *       *       *       *       *

The interest, which is now felt in the subject of the Sabbath, renders the
following article, respecting the curiosity of Le Sage, worthy the
attention of the reader. It was extracted from a review of Le Sage,
published in Scotland about twelve years ago.

     "At the time we are now speaking of the Sabbath was observed at
     Geneva, with a gloom and austerity of which we, in Scotland can
     probably form a more correct notion than the inhabitants of any
     other country in Christendom. Le Sage felt some curiosity to know
     whether the author of Nature still continued to impose on himself
     the same law that originally marked the institution of the day of
     rest. It would have puzzled the first philosopher in Europe to
     think of any method by which this question could be brought to
     the decision of experiment: but the ingenuity of our young
     enquirer soon suggested an experiment.--He measured, with great
     care, the increase of a plant day after day, in order to
     discover whether it would cease growing on the Sabbath. The
     result could not fail to solve the difficulty, and to convince
     the young man, that though the work of Creation might terminate,
     the work of Providence is never interrupted."

                                              _Salem Observer_, 1829.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Sunday in Salem in 1838.

                      SALEM AND THE SABBATH.

     On our way to church in the quiet city of Salem recently, a
     stranger overtook us, and inquired where the Rev. Mr. W---- was
     to preach that morning? We answered that we were going to his
     church, and would show him a seat. For which he expressed his
     thanks and immediately remarked, that he had travelled recently
     nearly over all our country, and nowhere had he witnessed such
     entire abandonment of all secular avocations on the Sabbath. It
     seemed like a different country, and made him feel the
     significance of the name of that ancient town--Salem, City of
     Peace.--_Christian (Boston) Monitor_.


Fifty years ago hardly any one thought of absenting himself or herself from
public worship. People went to church as a matter of course, partly from a
sense of duty, and partly from habit; and this is still the case to some
extent. The majority of thoughtful persons of all religious persuasions are
agreed upon one point, and that is, it is desirable to have Sunday set
apart as a day of rest and change from the ordinary cares and business of
life. From a sanitary point of view this rest is no doubt of the highest
importance. All people, moreover, who desire to have quiet for religious
worship should at least not be disturbed. Public opinion ought to be
protection enough; but unfortunately it might not be, so that laws to such
an extent as is necessary for this purpose should be in force. But the idea
entertained by certain fanatics, that no one should walk or ride for health
and recreation, or even engage in any innocent occupation, on Sunday, is so
absurd as not to deserve a moment's consideration.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1829 a futile attempt was made to put a stop to the delivery of Sunday
mails, one result of which was the holding of a number of public meetings
in Salem, the reports of which we take from the papers.

Meetings were also held in Boston and New York.

                           PUBLIC MEETING.

     At a very numerous and respectable meeting of the citizens of
     Salem, "_opposed to Legislative interference in respect to the
     religious observances of Sunday_," held at the Town Hall, Dec.
     27, 1828, PERLEY PUTNAM, Esq., was called to the chair, and Dr.
     BENJAMIN KITTREDGE, appointed Secretary.--The object of the
     meeting having been stated by the Chairman, it was

     _Voted_, That Messrs. George Cleveland, Leverett Saltonstall,
     Stephen C. Phillips, John W. Treadwell, Perley Putnam, Nath'l
     West, jun., Franklin H. Story, John Crowninshield, Jos. G.
     Waters, Charles A. Andrew, David Pingree, and David A. Neal, be a
     committee[2] to consider and report at an adjournment of the
     meeting, what measures it is expedient to take for the purpose of
     carrying into effect the objects of the meeting.

     The meeting was then adjourned for one week.

[2] The committee appointed consisted of Episcopalians, Unitarians, and
Universalists.

       *       *       *       *       *

     At the adjourned meeting on Saturday evening Jan. 3, 1829, the
     Committee reported the following Resolutions, which were
     unanimously adopted:--

     _Resolved_, That the observance of Sunday as a day of religious
     worship and instruction is eminently adapted to extend the
     knowledge and influence of truth and virtue, and thus to improve
     the character and increase the happiness of individuals and of
     the community.

     _Resolved_, That under no circumstances has religion excited such
     general interest, as when, not rendered odious by legal
     restraints, it has addressed its claims for support to the
     understandings and consciences of men.

     _Resolved_, That a "_system of regulations_" for the purpose of
     enforcing religious observances is opposed to the principles of
     religious liberty and to our form of civil government; and it is
     to be feared that any attempts to introduce such regulations will
     re-act in consequences detrimental to the interests which it may
     have been intended to promote.

     _Resolved_, That neither the precepts of Christianity nor the
     design of religious observances are incompatible with the prompt
     and faithful discharge of the various duties which belong to our
     social and civil relations; and the urgency of such duties may
     frequently render it of importance to every individual to receive
     or transmit intelligence with the least possible delay.

     _Resolved_, That for the necessary accommodation of the
     Government and citizens of this widely extended country, an
     arrangement of the mails, by which letters and packages are
     forwarded and delivered with the utmost despatch and safety, has
     been for a great length of time maintained under the vigilant
     superintendence of the Postmaster General; and such arrangement,
     while it is productive of innumerable advantages to the
     Government and to the citizens, is not allowed to interfere with
     the public religious services on Sunday.[B]

     _Resolved_, That any change in the present arrangement of the
     mails which shall have the effect to subject to increased delay
     and hazard the communication between distant parts of the country
     is impolitic; and if authorized by Congress for the sole purpose
     of enforcing religious observances, will be an exercise of power
     for the accomplishment of an object not recognized by the
     Constitution, and contrary to its spirit and the intentions of
     its framers.

     _Resolved_, That if Congress should prohibit the forwarding of
     mails and the delivery of letters on Sunday, individuals and the
     Government will be obliged to resort to such temporary
     arrangements for transmitting intelligence as their respective
     exigencies may require; and such temporary arrangements, while
     they will be attended with increased expense, will be productive
     of far greater inconvenience and disturbance to the religious
     public, than can justly be complained of under the present
     system.

     _Resolved_, That a committee be appointed, who shall be
     instructed to prepare a memorial to Congress expressive of the
     views of this meeting, whenever in their opinion, circumstances
     shall render it expedient to present such memorial; and such
     memorial shall be submitted by them for approbation, at a meeting
     to be called for that purpose.

     _Resolved_, That the committee appointed in conformity to the
     foregoing resolution, shall be authorized to call future
     meetings, to correspond with citizens of other towns, and
     generally to take such measures as they may deem expedient for
     the purpose of carrying into effect the objects of this meeting.

     The following gentlemen were appointed a committee to perform the
     duties specified in the two last resolutions, viz. George
     Cleveland, Dudley L. Pickman, Willard Peele, Perley Putnam,
     Philip Chase, Stephen White, Gideon Tucker, Nath'l Frothingham,
     Stephen C. Phillips. The Committee was authorized to fill any
     vacancies that may occur in their number.

     _Voted_, That an attested copy of the proceedings be published in
     the several newspapers in this town, and in one or more of the
     newspapers in the city of Washington, and that an attested copy
     be also forwarded to the Post Master General.

     The meeting was then dissolved.

                                           PERLEY PUTNAM, _Chairman_.
     BENJ. KITTREDGE, _Secretary_.

    [B] _Extract from Regulations respecting Post Offices_.--"At Post
    Offices where the mail arrives on Sunday, the office is to be kept
    open for the delivery of letters, &c. for one hour or more after
    the arrival and assorting of the mail; but in case that would
    interfere with the hours of public worship, then the office is to
    be kept open for one hour after the usual time of dissolving the
    meeting for that purpose."

    A very large meeting of citizens of New York, opposed to the
    proposition to discontinue the mails on Sunday, was held at New
    York this week. A similar meeting has also been held at Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

                             SABBATH MAILS.

                                          SALEM, (Mass.) Feb. 9, 1829.

     _To the Hon. Richard M. Johnson, Chairman of the Committee on the
     Post Office and Post Roads, Washington._

     SIR:--The subscribers, a committee appointed at a meeting of the
     inhabitants of this town, on the 3d January last, to take such
     measures as they may deem expedient to oppose any attempts to
     interfere for religious purposes with the transportation of the
     Mails and opening the Post Offices on Sunday, have read with
     pleasure the report of the Committee of the Senate on that
     subject.

     Previous to receiving that report, they were about petitioning
     Congress--and the public sentiment in this place is so universal
     against an interference for religious reasons, that a very
     respectable and numerous subscription could readily have been
     obtained.--But the report from the Senate represented the subject
     in so powerful a light--demonstrated so clearly the want of power
     in the government to legislate for the reasons given by the
     petitioners, and showed so conclusively, that if they had the
     power, they certainly had not the ability to determine for all
     the people of the United States, what God's law was--that we
     have concluded it would not be necessary at the present session
     of Congress to take any further steps in the business. We have
     thought, however, that tho' constituting but a small part of the
     United States, yet it might not be uninteresting to the
     committee, to know how much in accordance with our views are the
     sentiments expressed in their report and to assure them for
     ourselves, and those whom we represent, that we shall at all
     times consider them engaged in the highest and most momentous
     acts of legislation, whenever their efforts shall tend to prevent
     an interference of the religious with the civil power--all union
     between church and state--all attempts of religious zealots to
     enforce by law, what _they_ may term divine truth.

     You will please to convey to the gentlemen of the committee, our
     sense of their proceedings, and for yourself, sir, accept the
     assurance of our respectful consideration.

     GEORGE CLEVELAND,
     GIDEON TUCKER,
     DUDLEY L. PICKMAN,
     WILLARD PEELE,
     PERLEY PUTNAM,
     NATHANIEL FROTHINGHAM.



       *       *       *       *       *

The following item is from the "Observer" of Jan. 21, 1829:--

     THE REPORT OF THE SENATE ON THE SUNDAY MAILS. The Portsmouth
     Advertiser has attacked this Report, "tooth and nail," imputing
     to it an influence as disastrous as that which attends the
     writings of Tom Paine or Citizen Brisset. The writer states, that
     the Senate by adopting it, "has virtually declared, that the laws
     of Almighty God are no rule for human legislation." We will give
     one more extract from these remarks, to enable our readers to
     form a judgment of the writer's character. He must certainly
     belong to that unfortunate class of the community, for whom
     "strait-jackets and a spare diet," are usually prescribed.

     "By this report, Col. Johnson has put weapons into the hands of
     infidelity to annoy and harass that very portion of the
     republican community, which furnishes the only hope, and pledge,
     that our free institutions will continue permanent."


       *       *       *       *       *

The following account of a Parisian Sabbath we find in the "Salem Observer"
of 1830:

     PARISIAN SABBATH. There is little in the appearance of Paris on a
     Sabbath morning to remind us that it is a day of rest; the
     markets are thronged as on other days, carts and drays and all
     sorts of vehicles, designed for the transportation of merchandise
     are in motion; buying and selling and manual labor proceed as
     usual; there is rest for neither man nor beast. In the afternoon
     the shops are usually closed; and labor is suspended, and the
     remainder of the day is devoted to pleasure. Few of those who go
     to church appear to have any other motive than amusement. They
     walk about the aisles, gazing at the pictures, and listening to
     the solemn music of the mass and go away when they are tired.
     Those whom I have seen really engaged in worship appeared to
     belong to the lower classes; and with the exception of those few,
     the persons you see in church are merely idle spectators,
     attracted thither by curiosity, or to pass an idle half hour
     before they go to promenade in the gardens.
     --_Wheaton's Travels_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the "Salem Observer" of Dec. 10, 1829, is the following notice on the
Sunday-mail question:--

     SUNDAY MAILS. The following resolution on the subject of stopping
     the mails on Sundays, was passed at a recent session of the Salem
     Baptist Association in Kentucky:--

     "_Resolved_, That we as an Association cordially approve the
     Report and resolution, as presented to the Senate of the United
     States, by Col. R.M. Johnson, Chairman of the Committee upon the
     subject of the petition to stop the mail on the Sabbath: and
     sincerely advise all friends of civil and religious liberty, to
     refuse to subscribe any petition that has the least tendency to
     influence the legislative powers to act upon _religious matters_;
     for we consider an association of _civil_ and _ecclesiastical_
     power or an union of _Church_ and _State_, as one of the greatest
     calamities which could befal our country, and that it should be
     resisted in every possible shape in which it may be presented."

       *       *       *       *       *

A great change has taken place in some of our towns within a few years in
reference to the Sunday mail. Twenty-five years ago it was rare to see a
person belonging to one of the Evangelical sects at the post-office at the
time of the opening of the mail on Sunday noon; whereas now it is not
uncommon to see deacons and numerous other members of such churches hurry
from their several places of worship to get their letters and papers with
as much eagerness as "heretics." Sunday papers moreover are now bought by
the same class. The same change too is observable in the use of horse-cars
on Sunday. Few men are governed by the conscientious scruples once held
about riding to and from church, especially if the day happens to be hot or
stormy. This may or may not be an improvement; it depends upon the point
of view from which we look at it.

One of the most radical men we ever knew, one who thought "Sunday should be
abolished" and a "new Bible made by men of modern ideas, and reasonable
views introduced, and the old one discarded," said he was brought to these
views by having been forced when young to attend church and engage in
religious exercises, and told that he must conform to the established
belief and never ask any questions. It will be said that this man was an
exception to the general rule. Perhaps so, for one taking such an extreme
view; but we must all know cases somewhat similar. A careful inquiry will
show that if we look around among the clergy even, we shall find that the
most radical preachers of the day were brought up in the Orthodox ranks.
Who would wish to re-establish the gloomy Puritan Sabbath, with its barren
meeting-house, without fires or music, and its tedious, uninteresting
sermon, running on to "fifteenthly," gauged by an hour-glass turned over
perhaps once or twice during the discourse?

Speaking of the change of habits in New England, even, it is noticeable
how much more prevalent colds and other slight indispositions are now to
what they used to be on Sunday. The very thought of going to church makes
some people cough or have a headache. Theatres or concerts never seem to
affect these people in the same way. Even the weather, which keeps people
in-doors on Sunday, never keeps them in on other days.

Our own view of the subject is that while we should be glad to see more
interest taken in public worship than there is at present, we think people
should have the right of spending their Sundays in their own way,--always,
of course, provided they do not interfere with the rights and feelings of
others. It seems to us that the only way to have Sunday properly observed
is for those who are influential to make some little personal sacrifices,
if need be, to attend the Sunday services, and do all they can to promote
the most cheerful views of religion and make the services interesting.

Let those people who lament the decay of religious observances read the
following quotation from the "Salem Gazette" of 1830. Those who can
recollect how it was at that date must see that notwithstanding a perhaps
much smaller attendance now upon public worship, there is every reason to
believe that, at least as far as the native population is concerned, Sunday
is really more quiet than it was then. After reading this article we shall
perhaps be prepared to say that "tythingmen" may have been needed just
after the Revolution.

     THE TIMES WE LIVE IN. The dreadful tragedy performed in this town
     last April, and the subsequent arrests, developments,
     confessions, trials, &c., by keeping the thoughts and
     conversation of the community continually directed to that
     enormity, have led to the general but very erroneous notion, that
     there must have been a great deterioration of the public
     morals.--If the words of the aged are to be received as true, the
     very reverse is the fact. The revolutionary war left the whole
     country as well depraved in morals as exhausted in resources.
     This was particularly the case with such towns as Salem, which
     had been largely exposed to the irresistibly corrupting influence
     of privateering.

     At that time, when the population of Salem was not half so great
     as it is at present, more riot, debauchery, and vice, obtruded
     themselves upon the sight in a week, than could now be discovered
     by diligent search in a month. The corruption of manners was so
     general, that almost none escaped from its contaminating
     influence. Mechanics and other laboring men would leave their
     business in the day, and their families in the evening, to spend
     their time, dancing and drinking, in the dens of pollution which
     then abounded in "Naugus-Hole" and "Button-Hole." Merchants,
     professional men, &c. passed a great part of their time in
     taverns, drinking and gambling. Quarrelling and fighting there
     were not uncommon, and well-worn packs of cards were always lying
     about the bar-room tables, (though seldom long unemployed,) ready
     for the use of visitors,--the common game on these occasions
     being All-Fours, and the common stake a bowl of punch or a mug of
     flip. Pastimes like the above named, were current in every class
     of society. When the regular hours of drinking approached, the
     workmen left their labour to play at cards, the loser "treating
     the shop's crew." In a large establishment a boy would be kept
     running with his jug nearly the whole time, the contents being
     freely shared amongst master, journeymen, boys, and numerous
     visitors.

     At this time, and long afterward, infamous houses were kept open
     day and night, in the quarters of the town named in the preceding
     paragraph. The fiddles were kept in constant motion, and if any
     thought of stopping them they did not dare to attempt it. The
     most flagrant disorders and outrages were continually occurring,
     so that a timid man would go far out of his way to avoid passing
     near those places. The churches on Sunday were not nearly so well
     attended as they now are. The proportion of persons who made the
     Sabbath a day of recreation, was much greater. The time was spent
     in riding into the country, walking about the fields and
     pastures, and visiting friends in town. But little order was
     preserved in the streets on that day. People in passing to
     meeting thro' Prison Lane, (as County-street was then called) and
     its environs, encountered frequent and large groups of men and
     boys, noisily engaged in gambling with props, pitching coppers,
     &c. occasionally enlivened by the uproar of a quarrel.

     The doctrines of Tom Paine and his French coadjutors, were much
     more in vogue then than now. Infidelity stalked over the land
     with a giant stride, to which the mincing pace of the fooleries
     of Fanny Wright can bear no comparison; and virtue and good order
     were almost put out of countenance. Intemperance, habitual or
     occasional, was so common, as to be hardly considered a matter of
     reproach; and the kindred vices abounded, which usually follow in
     its train.

     The state of society has been continually improving since. The
     bad habits of that time have been discarded one after another, by
     all who would maintain a reputable standing; and open immorality
     now places a man at once in the lowest rank of society.
     Intemperance has been diminished in a surprising degree.
     Debauchery has been compelled to retreat to lurking holes and
     corners, instead of obtruding its "horrid front" to the public
     gaze. Education has been improved, and universally diffused; and
     public worship is more generally attended.--Terrible crimes have
     indeed been committed amongst us, and may be again, but the
     habits and manners which lead to crime, are less prevalent at the
     present time than they have been for fifty years before.

It seems to us to be clearly a mistake for those of ultra-liberal notions
to suppose that all who cannot assent to their views of Sunday must of
necessity be either Pharisees or hypocrites,--quite as great a mistake as
that of the ultra-conservatives, who condemn as wicked all who do not
believe in a puritanical observance of Sunday.

Whatever we may think or say or do, people nowadays will not be forced to
attend church. Among all denominations the services are more attractive
than they once were, and every year there is less and less of the repulsive
kinds of doctrine preached. But in spite of this, while many men regard
attendance on divine service as both a pleasure and a privilege, there are
others, and they not few, whom no influence or persuasion can induce to
attend Sunday worship. Such persons must be left to spend the day as they
please.

A very large proportion of those who do not attend church services are
people of culture and character, from whom church-goers have nothing to
fear as regards a disturbance of their worship. Generally this class are
interested in having Sunday kept as a day of quiet and rest, and their
non-attendance at church is no evidence that they have any desire to
secularize Sunday.

An eminent writer has said: "We live in a transition period, when the old
faiths which comforted nations, and not only so, but made nations, seem to
have spent their force.... There is faith in chemistry, in meat and wine,
in wealth, in machinery, in the steam-engine, galvanic battery,
turbine-wheels, sewing-machines, and in public opinion; but not in divine
causes.... A silent revolution has loosed the tension of the old religious
sects, and in place of the gravity and permanence of those societies of
opinion, they run into freak and extravagance.... In creeds never was such
levity: witness the heathenisms in Christianity,--the periodic revivals,
the millennium mathematics, the peacock ritualism, the retrogression to
popery, the maundering of Mormons, the squalor of mesmerism, the
deliration of rappings, the rat-and-mouse revelation, thumps in
table-drawers, and black art ... By the irresistible maturing of the
general mind the Christian traditions have lost their hold."

If these statements are true, we have a sufficient answer to the question
so often asked: "Why do not people go to church as they once did?" They do
not go because they have lost their faith in churches and worship,--at
least such have as are appealed to from those holding liberal and
reasonable views. There are no doubt men who consider the too often
expensive ways in which churches are supported as altogether beyond their
means. The demands of civilization upon individuals in these restless
times, when there are so many organizations, secret, secular, and
religious, are indeed too great for small incomes, especially as the cost
of food is continually increasing, and as society in other ways makes so
many secular demands upon them. Public worship is after all, in the view of
many persons, not a necessity, but only a luxury which can easily be
dispensed with. It might perhaps have been better for the whole community
if churches had undertaken to do the work which is now in the hands of
many charitable and secret societies; then those who take so much interest
in these outside, often expensive, organizations would have had all their
interest in the churches. But the latter were for years so divided on
doctrines of belief that their whole attention has for the most part been
directed to other matters than their legitimate work, which has thus been
thrown into the hands of outside agencies. In these times it seems
difficult to maintain religious societies except where the element of fear
is dominant in the creed, where some remarkable preacher takes the
attention, or where the ritual or fashion attracts. Do not the papers often
speak of "fashionable" churches?

One thing which prevents many people from attending public worship on
Sunday is the increasing tendency towards ritualism,--or perhaps, we should
say, making the services less instructive than formerly, and more
devotional or emotional. This is seen not only in the Episcopal Church, but
also among many other denominations. Even Congregational
Orthodox--descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers--introduce prayer-books and
responsive services, and make their church buildings more ecclesiastical in
appearance, to look as much as possible like Episcopal churches. All these
things to many minds are not edifying, to say the least, and consequently
such persons absent themselves from service. Those too who are impressed by
emotional religion join the Episcopalians, so that for the time there is an
apparent increase in the attendance at the Episcopal churches, gained from
churches of other denominations; and especially too as fashion decrees
nowadays that "it is the proper thing to do" to go to the Episcopal Church,
whether you believe in its doctrines or not. So that at length there are a
great many people who think when church-going gets to be a matter of
fashion, there is quite as much real religion to be found outside as inside
the church; consequently they lose their interest. All these causes must be
taken together; of course no one thing alone accounts for the change in
regard to church attendance.

We quote the following remarks from a recent English paper ("The Unitarian
Herald"); they have a direct bearing on our subject, and are worthy of
consideration by those who neglect public worship or favor a more secular
Sunday. Among other things, the speaker (the Rev. John Page Hopps) says:

     "So far as we can see, the old orthodox believers were right when
     they called public worship 'a means of grace;' and if human
     experience is of any value, it is an undoubted fact that a great
     multitude which no man could number _have_ felt the grace-giving
     influence of it. It is as true as ever that man cannot 'live by
     bread alone,' but that he needs also the 'word that proceedeth
     from the mouth of God;' and if it is true, as we believe, that
     the word of God does come home with special force and pathos when
     worship is joined in by kindred souls, the argument for public
     worship, from this point of view, seems complete. And yet, half
     in jest and half in earnest, and sometimes altogether in earnest,
     we hear it said that a man can worship God in the fields quite as
     well as in the church. 'Perhaps he can,' said a wise man once,
     'but _does_ he?' I wonder whether we shall go on in this
     direction until we hear it said that a man can worship God
     playing at lawn-tennis as in attending public worship? Thus there
     may actually come into existence a cant of the absentee which
     shall be as really cant as the cant of the devotee; for the use
     of the word 'worship' in such instances is a glaring case of
     exaggeration tinged with self-deception, which is the very
     essence of cant. Besides, one of the surest notes of the
     worshipping spirit is an increase of sympathy and love,--sympathy
     that suggests fellowship, and love that suggests anything but
     selfish isolation.

     "The irregularity also of attendance upon public worship might be
     cited as an instance of neglect or levity which 'personal
     consecration' alone can cure. In days gone by, attendance upon
     public worship was a habit, and nothing that could be avoided was
     allowed to interfere with it. Twice on the Sunday, too, was the
     rule, and not, as now, the decided exception. But with many it is
     now becoming once every other Sunday, or scarcely that; with so
     little of 'personal consecration' in the matter that the need for
     an umbrella may decide the doubter not to go.

     "Do we not, again, listen too much merely for delight? and does
     not the question, 'How did you like the sermon,' or 'How did you
     like the service,' indicate that we join in the service and
     listen to a sermon in an entirely wrong spirit? The critical or
     self-regarding spirit has its uses, but it may be fatal to
     'personal consecration' in public worship. How often does an
     entire service depend upon our own temper, our own mood, our own
     spirit? And how often is it true that a congregation has as much
     to do with the making of a minister as the minister has to do
     with the making of a congregation?

     "'If I neglect public worship, then,' a man should say to
     himself, 'the community is injured, the brotherhood is weakened,
     the young are confused. It is a grave responsibility.'

     "But now we must not shrink from the question: How far or how
     long ought these considerations to hold the man who has lost
     delight in public worship or faith in that to which it bears
     witness? When should doubt make worship impossible, or unbelief
     make worship wrong for the honest soul? When should 'personal
     consecration' say to a man, not _stay_, but _depart_? It is a
     grave question, and every one must shape his answer for himself.
     All I would say is: Give worship the benefit of the doubt: ay!
     give fellow-worshippers the benefit of the doubt. Continue with
     them as long as you can; if not as a full believer, then as a
     devout inquirer, a gentle seeker, a sympathetic friend. Why not?
     That is possible with us; for the very bond of our union is
     sympathetic regard for one another's freedom. It is also
     specially possible with us because our teachings do not, at all
     events, outrage the reason and shock the moral sense. Even an
     agnostic might listen to us and hope that our Gospel is true.

     "Special dangers call for special safeguards, special
     consideration, special wariness. It is an age of splendid advance
     in science, of restless energy in business, of stupendous
     activity in politics, of daring questioning everywhere. All that
     makes against public worship; and yet all that makes public
     worship a greater necessity and demonstrates 'the pressing need
     of personal consecration' to it. God only knows what we should
     do without it and the blessed Sunday!

    "'Dear old commemorative day,
      For weary man designed
    To help him on life's troubled way,
    To give his spirit freer play,
      To soothe his harassed mind!

    "'A day of worship and of grace,
      One calm, sweet day in seven,
    To grant a little breathing space
    To strengthen man life's work to face,
      And lift his life to heaven.'"

In conclusion, let us add to the above speech the following remarks, which
we heartily approve,--

     "Mr. Preston (London) testified to the falling off of attendance
     at public worship, and he attributed this largely to the parents
     not taking their children with them in early years, as of old
     times. He deprecated the going to public worship to have the
     brains tickled in hearing a particular man, and maintained that
     this was in no sense 'public worship.' He emphasized strongly the
     fact that those who say they can worship in the fields do not, in
     fact, worship at all. He urged that in worship the musical and
     devotional services should become more prominent, and the sermon
     become frequently but subsidiary."




    Benjamin H. Ticknor.      Thomas B. Ticknor.      George F. Godfrey.

[Illustration]

A LIST OF BOOKS

PUBLISHED BY

TICKNOR AND COMPANY

BOSTON.

       *       *       *       *       *

_AMERICAN-ACTOR SERIES_ (THE). Edited by LAURENCE HUTTON. A series of 12mo.
volumes by the best writers, embracing the lives of the most famous and
popular American Actors. Illustrated. Six volumes in three. Sold only in
sets. Per set, $5.00.

Vol. I. Edwin Forrest. By Lawrence Barrett. The Jeffersons. By William
Winter.

Vol. II. The Elder and the Younger Booth. By Mrs. Asia Booth Clarke.
Charlotte Cushman. By Clara Erskine Clement.

Vol. III. Mrs. Duff. By Joseph N. Ireland. Fechter. By Kate Field.

Also a limited edition on large paper, especially adapted to the use of
collectors and bibliophiles, for extending, extra illustrating, etc. 6
vols. Per vol., $5.00.

_AMERICAN ARCHITECT_. See last page.

_ARCHITECTURE_. See MONOGRAPH.

_ARNOLD'S_ (EDWIN) The Light of Asia. Beautiful illustrated edition. 8vo.
$6.00. In antique morocco, or tree-calf, $10.00.

_ARNOLD'S_ (GEORGE) Poems. Edited, with a Biographical Sketch of the Poet,
by WILLIAM WINTER. With Portrait. 16mo. $1.50. Half-calf, $3.00. Morocco
antique or tree-calf, $4.00.

_AUSTIN'S_ (JANE G.) Nantucket Scraps; Being Experiences of an
Off-Islander, in Season and out of Season, among a Passing People. 16mo.
$1.50.

_BACON'S_ (HENRY) Parisian Art and Artists. 8vo. Profusely illustrated.
$3.00.

_BALLOU'S_ (MATURIN M.) Edge-Tools of Speech. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.50; sheep,
$5.00; half-calf or half-morocco, $6.50.

_BARTLETT'S_ (TRUMAN H.) The Art-Life of William Rimmer. With Illustrations
after his Paintings, Drawings, and Sculptures. 4to. Full gilt. $10.00.

_BELLAMY'S_ (EDWARD) Miss Ludington's Sister. $1.25.

_BENT'S_ (SAMUEL ARTHUR) Short Sayings of Great Men. 8vo. Third edition.
$3.00. Half-calf, $5.50.

_BOIT'S_ (ROBERT APTHORP) Eustis. 12mo. $1.50.

_BOSTON_, Memorial History of. See page 22.

_BOWDOIN COLLEGE._ See CLEAVELAND.

_BROOKS'S_ (HENRY M.) Olden-Time Series. Each vol. 16mo. 50 cents.

  I. Curiosities of the Old Lottery.
  II. Days of The Spinning-Wheel in New England.
  III. New-England Sunday.

Other volumes in preparation.

_BROWN'S_ (FRANCES CLIFFORD) A Stroll with Keats. 1 vol. Square 16mo.
Richly illustrated. $1.50.

_BROWN'S_ (HELEN DAWES) Two College Girls. 12mo. $1.50.

_BROWN'S_ (SUSAN ANNA) The Invalid's Tea-Tray. Illuminated boards. 50
cents.

---- How the Ends Met. 12mo. 50 cents.

---- In Bridget's Vacation. Leaflets to hang up. 50 cents. On gilt bar and
rings. 75 cents.

_BUDDHIST RECORDS OF THE WESTERN WORLD._ Translated from the original
Chinese, with Introduction, Index, etc. By SAMUEL BEAL, Trinity College,
Cambridge. 2 vols. 12mo. $7.00.

_BUDGE'S_ (ERNEST A.) The History of Esarhaddon (Son of Sennacherib), King
of Assyria, B.C. 681-668. From Cuneiform Inscriptions. 8vo. Gilt top.
$4.00.

_BUNNER'S_ (H.C.) A Woman of Honor. 16mo. $1.25.

_BUSH'S_ (JAMES S.) The Evidence of Faith. 12mo. $2.00.

_BYRON'S_ (LORD) Childe Harold. A sumptuous new illustrated edition. In
box. $6.00. In antique morocco, or tree-calf, $10.00. in crushed Levant,
with silk linings, $25.00.

_The great holiday book of 1885-1886._

_CABLE'S_ (GEORGE W.) Doctor Sevier. 12mo. $1.50.

_CARLYLE_ (THOMAS) and _RALPH WALDO EMERSON_, The Correspondence of.
Edited by CHARLES ELIOT NORTON. 2 vols. 12mo. Gilt tops, and rough edges.
With new Portraits. $4.00. Half-calf, $8.00. Half-morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, $8.00.

_New revised edition with 100 pages of newly-found letters._

---- Supplementary Volume, including the newly-found letters, 16mo. $1.00.

_CAROLINO'S_ (PEDRO) New Guide of the Conversation in Portuguese and
English. First American edition. With an Introduction by MARK TWAIN. 16mo.
$1.00. Paper, 50 cents.

_CARRYL'S_ (CHARLES E.) Davy and the Goblin. 1 vol. 8vo. Fully illustrated.
$1.50.

_CESNOLA'S_ (GEN. L.P. DI) The Cesnola Collection of Cyprus Antiquities. A
Descriptive and Pictorial Atlas. Large folio. 500 Plates. _Sold by
subscription only._ Send for Prospectus.

_CHAMBERLAIN'S_ (BASIL HALL) The Classical Poetry of the Japanese. 8vo.
$3.00.

_CHASE'S_ (MISS E.B.) Over the Border. 1 vol. 12mo. Illustrated with
Heliotype Engravings from Original Drawings of Scenery in Nova Scotia. With
Map. 12mo. Third edition. $1.50.

_CHENOWETH'S_ (MRS. C. VAN D.) Stories of the Saints. Illustrated. 12mo.
$2.00.

_CLARK'S_ (T.M.) Building Superintendence. 8vo. With Plans, etc. $3.00.

_CLARKE'S_ (REV. JAMES FREEMAN) Every-Day Religion. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Events and Epochs in Religious History. Crown 8vo. Illustrated. $3.00.
Half-calf, $5.50.

---- The Ideas of the Apostle Paul. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Self-Culture. Eleventh edition. 12mo. $1.50. Half-calf, $3.00.

_CLEAVELAND'S_ (NEHEMIAH) and _PACKARD'S_ (ALPHEUS SPRING) History of
Bowdoin College. With Biographical Sketches of its Graduates, from 1806 to
1879, inclusive. With many full-page Portraits, and other Illustrations.
8vo. $5.00.

_CLEMENT'S_ (CLARA ERSKINE) and Laurence Hutton's Artists of the Nineteenth
Century. 12mo. Fully revised up to 1885. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.00.
Tree-calf, $7.00.

---- A Handbook of Legendary and Mythological Art. Eighteenth edition.
12mo. $3. Half-calf, $5. Tree-calf, $7.

---- Painters, Sculptors, Architects, Engravers, and their Works.
Illustrated profusely. Ninth edition. 12mo. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.00.
Tree-calf, $7.00.

---- Eleanor Maitland. A Novel. 16mo. $1.25.

_CLEMMER'S_ (MARY) Poems of Life and Nature. $1.50.

_COLLIER'S_ (ROBERT LAIRD) English Home Life. 16mo. Gilt top. $1.00.

_COLLING'S_ (J.K.) Art Foliage. Entirely new plates from the latest
enlarged London edition. Folio. $10.00.

_CONWAY'S_ (M.D.) Emerson at Home and Abroad. $1.50.

_COOKE'S_ (GEORGE WILLIS) George Eliot; A Critical Study of her Life,
Writings, and Philosophy. 12mo. With Portrait. $2.00. Half-calf, $4.00.

---- Ralph Waldo Emerson; His Life, Writings, and Philosophy. 12mo. With
Portrait. $2.00. Half-calf, $4.00.

---- (MRS. LAURA S.H.) Dimple Dopp. Small 4to. Illustrated. $1.25.

---- (ROSE TERRY) Somebody's Neighbors. 12mo. Fourth edition. $1.50.
Half-calf, $3.00.

---- The Sphinx's Children. 12mo. $1.50.

_CRADDOCK'S_ (CHARLES EGBERT) Where the Battle Was Fought. A Novel. 12mo.
Fourth edition. $1.50.

_CUNNINGHAM'S_ (FRANK H.) Familiar Sketches of the Phillips Exeter Academy
and Surroundings. Illustrated. $2.50.

_DAHLGREN'S_ (MRS. MADELEINE VINTON) A Washington Winter. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Memoir of John A. Dahlgren, Rear-Admiral U.S. Navy. 8vo. With Portrait
and Illustrations. $3.00.

---- South-Sea Sketches. 12mo. $1.50.

---- South-Mountain Magic. 12mo. $1.50.

_DAMEN'S GHOST._ Vol. VI. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo. $1.00.
In paper covers, 50 cents.

_DANENHOWER'S_ (LIEUT. J.W.) Narrative of the Jeannette. Paper covers. 25
cents.

_DESMOND HUNDRED_ (THE). Vol. XI. of the Round-Robin Series of novels.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_DOBSON'S_ (AUSTIN) Thomas Bewick and his Pupils. With numerous
Illustrations. Crown 8vo. $3.50. Limited large-paper edition. $10.00.

_DOCTOR BEN._ Vol. XIII. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. $1.00. In
paper covers, 50 cents.

_DODGE'S_ (THEODORE AYRAULT, U.S.A.) A Bird's-Eye View of our Civil War.
1 vol. 8vo. With Maps and Illustrations. $3.00

---- The Campaign of Chancellorsville. 8vo. $3.00.

_DOROTHEA._ Vol. X. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo. $1.00. In
paper covers, 50 cents.

_DU MAURIER'S_ (GEORGE) Pictures from Society. 50 full-page Pictures from
_Punch_. 1 vol. 4to. Full gilt. $5.00.

_EASTWICK'S_ (EDWARD B., F.R.S., M.R.A.S.) The Gulistan; or, Rose Garden of
Shekh Mushlin'ddin Sadi. 8vo. $3.50.

_EATON'S_ (D. CADY) Handbook of Greek and Roman Sculpture. Second edition,
revised and enlarged. 12mo. $2.00.

_EDMUNDSON'S_ (GEORGE) Milton and Vondel. A Curiosity of Literature. 1 vol.
Crown 8vo. $2.50.

_EMERSON_, The Genius and Character of. A Series of Lectures delivered at
the Concord School of Philosophy, by eminent authors and critics. Edited by
F.B. SANBORN. Illustrated. 12mo. $2.00.

_EMERSON-CARLYLE CORRESPONDENCE_ (THE). See CARLYLE.

_EMERSON'S_ (MRS. ELLEN RUSSELL) Myths of the Indians; or, Legends,
Traditions, and Symbols of the Aborigines of America. 8vo. Gilt top. With
numerous Plates and Diagrams. $5.00.

_FANCHETTE._ Vol. XV. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. $1.00. In paper
covers, 50 cents.

_FAVORITE-AUTHORS SERIES._ Favorite Authors, Household Friends, Good
Company. Three volumes in one. Illustrated. 8vo. Full gilt. $3.50.

_FAWCETT'S_ (EDGAR) Social Silhouettes. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Adventures of a Widow. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Tinkling Cymbals. A Novel. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Song and Story. A volume of Poems. $1.50.

_FEATHERMAN'S_ (A.) The Aramaeans; Social History of the Races of Mankind.
8vo. Uncut edges, gilt top. $5.00.

_FENOLLOSA'S_ (ERNEST F.) Review of the Chapter on Painting in Gonse's
"L'Art Japonais." 12mo. Paper covers. 25 cents.

_FOOTE'S_ (MRS. MARY HALLOCK) The Led-Horse Claim. A Novel. Illustrated by
the Author. 16mo. $1.25.

_FROMENTIN_ (EUGENE): Painter and Writer. From the French of Louis Gonse,
by Mrs. MARY C. ROBBINS. 8vo. Illustrated. $3.00.

_FROMENTIN'S_ (EUGENE) The Old Masters of Belgium and Holland. 8vo. With
eight full-page Heliotypes. Translated by Mrs. MARY C. ROBBINS. $3.00.

_FULLER'S_ (ALBERT W.) Artistic Homes in City and Country. Fourth edition.
Oblong folio. 76 full-page Illustrations. $4.50.

_GARDNER'S_ (E.C.) Homes and all about them. 3 vols. in 1. Profusely
illustrated. 12mo. $2.50.

_GARFIELD_ (PRESIDENT JAMES ABRAM) The Works of. Edited by BURKE A.
HINSDALE. 2 vols. 8vo. With new Steel Portraits. $6.00. Sheep, $8.50.
Half-morocco or half-calf, $10.00.

Edition de luxe. 2 vols. 8vo. $25.00. _Sold by subscription only._

_GAYARRE'S_ (CHARLES) Aubert Dubayet. 12mo. $2.00.

_GEORGIANS_ (THE). Vol. III. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_GERALDINE_: A Souvenir of the St. Lawrence. A Poetical Romance. 16mo.
Seventh edition. $1.25. Half-calf, $3.00.

_GOETHE_, The Life and Genius of. Concord Lectures for 1885. Edited by F.B.
Sanborn and W.T. Harris. With Portraits. $2.00.

_GOETHE'S_ Faust. Translated by A. Hayward. $1.25.

_GRANT'S_ (ROBERT) An Average Man. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Confessions of a Frivolous Girl. $1.25.

---- The Knave of Hearts. $1.25.

_GREENOUGH'S_ (MRS. R.) Mary Magdalene. $1.50.

_GREVILLE'S_ (HENRY) Cleopatra. A Russian Romance. 1 vol. 16mo. With
portrait of the author. $1.25.

---- Dosia's Daughter. Translated by Mrs. CLARA ERSKINE CLEMENT. $1.25.

_HALE'S_ (LUCRETIA P.) The Peterkin Papers. 16mo. $1.00.

_HAMLIN'S_ (AUGUSTUS C.) Leisure Hours among the Gems. Illustrated. 12mo.
$2.00.

_HARRIS'S_ (JOEL CHANDLER) Mingo, and other Sketches in Black and White.
16mo. $1.25.

---- Nights with Uncle Remus. Illustrated. $1.50.

_HARTING'S_ (JAMES EDMUND, F.L.S., F.Z.S.) British Animals Extinct within
Historic Times. With some Account of British Wild White Cattle.
Illustrated. 8vo. Gilt top. $4.50.

_HARTT'S_ (PROFESSOR C.F.) Geology and Physical Geography of Brazil. _In
preparation._

_HASSARD'S_ (J.R.G.) A Pickwickian Pilgrimage. 16mo. $1.00.

_HATTON'S_ (JOSEPH) Henry Irving's Impressions of America. 1 vol. 12mo.
$1.50.

_HAWTHORNE'S_ (JULIAN) Nathaniel Hawthorne and his Wife. A Biography. With
New Portraits on Steel, and Etched Vignettes. 2 vols. 12mo. $5.00.
Half-morocco or half-calf, $9.00. Edition de luxe. $12.00.

---- Love--or a Name. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Beatrix Randolph. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Fortune's Fool. 12mo. $1.50.

_HAWTHORNE'S_ (NATHANIEL) Dr. Grimshawe's Secret. 12mo. $1.50. Library
edition. Gilt top. $2.00.

_HAYES'S_ (HENRY) The Story of Margaret Kent. $1.50.

_HAYWARD'S_ (ALMIRA L.) The Illustrated Birthday Book of American Poets.
Revised and enlarged edition, with index for names, and portraits of
thirteen great American poets. 1 vol. 18mo. $1.00. Half-calf, $2.25.
Flexible morocco, seal or calf, $3.00.

_HAZEN'S_ (GEN. W.B.) A Narrative of Military Service. 8vo. With Maps,
Plans, and Illustrations. $3.00.

_HEARN'S_ (LAFCADIO) Stray Leaves from Strange Literature. Stories
reconstructed from the Anvari-Soheili, Baital-Pachisi, Mahabharata,
Gulistan, etc. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.50.

_HENDERSON'S_ (ISAAC). The Prelate. A Novel. 1 vol. 12mo. With covers
designed by Elihu Vedder. $1.50.

_HINSDALE'S_ (BURKE A.) President Garfield and Education. Portraits of Gen.
Garfield, Mrs. Garfield, etc. 12mo. $1.50. Half-calf, $3.00. Morocco
antique, $4.00.

---- Schools and Studies. 16mo. $1.50.

_HIS SECOND CAMPAIGN._ Vol. XVI. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_HOME-BOOK OF ART_ (THE). Heliotype Plates after One Hundred Classical and
Popular Pictures by the most famous Artists of the World. With
descriptions. Twenty-five parts at one dollar each. Or all bound in 1 vol.
Cloth, $28.00. Half morocco, $31.00. Full morocco, $33.00. _By subscription
only._

_HOMOSELLE._ Vol. V. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo. $1.00. In
paper covers, 50 cents.

_HOSMER'S_ (G.W.) The People and Politics. 8vo. $3.00.

_HOWARD'S_ (BLANCHE W.) Aulnay Tower. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Aunt Serena. A Novel. 16mo. Thirteenth edition. $1.25.

---- Guenn. 12mo. Fifth edition. $1.50.

_HOWE'S_ (E.W.) The Mystery of the Locks. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Story of a Country Town. 12mo. Fourth edition. $1.50.

_HOWELLS'S_ (W.D.) Tuscan Cities. With many fine Illustrations, by JOSEPH
PENNELL. Richly bound, full gilt edges, in box, $5.00. In tree-calf, or
antique morocco, $10.00.

---- Indian Summer. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Rise of Silas Lapham. 12mo. $1.50.

---- A Fearful Responsibility. 12mo. $1.50.

---- A Modern Instance. 12mo. $1.50.

---- A Woman's Reason. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Dr. Breen's Practice. 12mo. $1.50.

_HOWELLS'S_ (W.D.) The Elevator. 32mo. 50 cents.

---- The Sleeping-Car. 32mo. 50 cents.

---- The Parlor Car. 32mo. 50 cents.

---- The Register. 32mo. 50 cents.

---- Three Villages. Little-Classic size. $1.25.

---- Poems. New revised edition. 1 vol. 12mo. In box. Printed on fine
hand-made paper. Parchment covers. $2.00.

---- A Counterfeit Presentment. A Comedy. Little-Classic size. $1.25.

---- Out of the Question. A Comedy. Little-Classic size. $1.25.

---- A Little Girl among the Old Masters. Being her own Compositions and
Inventions in Sacred and Legendary Art. With Introduction and Commentary by
W.D. Howells. Oblong. Fifty-four Illustrations. $2.00.

---- Choice Autobiographies. A collection of the most entertaining
autobiographies, carefully edited, and with preliminary Critical and
Biographical Essays. Little-Classic size. 8 vols. Each, $1.25.

      I., II. Memoirs of Frederica Sophia Wilhelmina, Margravine
                of Baireuth.
         III. Lord Herbert of Cherbury, and Thomas Ellwood.
          IV. Vittorio Alfieri.
           V. Carlo Goldoni.
          VI. Edward Gibbon.
  VII., VIII. Francois Marmontel.

_HUBBARD'S_ (LUCIUS L.) Woods and Lakes of Maine. A Trip from Moosehead
Lake to New Brunswick in a Birch-Bark Canoe. With Indian place-names and
their meanings. 1 vol. 8vo. With Illustrations, and a large map. $3.00.
Half-calf, $5.50. Tree-calf, or antique morocco, $8.00.

_HUNNEWELL'S_ (JAMES F.) The Historical Monuments of France. 1 vol. 8vo.
Illustrated. $3.50.

---- Bibliography of Charlestown, Mass., and Bunker Hill. 1 vol. 8vo.
Illustrated. $2.00.

_HUTCHINSON'S_ (ELLEN M.) Songs and Lyrics. 16mo. With Frontispiece. $1.25.

_HUTTON'S_ (LAURENCE) Literary Landmarks of London. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

_IRVING_ (HENRY). See HATTON.

_JAMES_ (HENRY, SR.), The Literary Remains of. Edited by WILLIAM JAMES.
1 vol. 12mo. With Portrait. $2.00.

_JAMES'S_ (HENRY) The Author of Beltraffio; Pandora; Georgina's Reasons;
The Path of Duty; Four Meetings. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Siege of London; The Pension Beaurepas; and The Point of View.
12mo. $1.50.

_JAMES'S_ (HENRY) Tales of Three Cities (The Impressions of a Cousin; Lady
Barberina; A New-England Winter). 12mo. $1.50.

---- A Little Tour in France. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Portraits of Places. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Daisy Miller: A Comedy. 12mo. $1.50.

_JOHNSON'S_ (ROSSITER) Idler and Poet. 16mo. $1.25.

_JOHNSTON'S_ (ELIZABETH BRYANT) Original Portraits of Washington. Sixty
Portraits, from paintings, sculptures, etc. With descriptive text. 1 vol.
4to. $15.00. Half morocco, $20.00. _By subscription only._

_KEENE'S_ (CHARLES) Our People. Four Hundred Pictures from _Punch._ 4to.
$5.00.

_KENDRICK'S_ (PROFESSOR A.C.) Our Poetical Favorites. Three volumes in one.
Illustrated. 8vo. Full gilt. $3.50.

_KING'S_ (CLARENCE) Mountaineering in the Sierra Nevada. 12mo. With Maps.
Eighth edition. $2.00.

_KING'S_ (EDWARD) The Golden Spike. 12mo. $1.50.

---- The Gentle Savage. 12mo. $2.00.

_KIRK'S_ (MRS. ELLEN OLNEY) A Midsummer Madness. A Novel. 1 vol. 16mo.
$1.25.

_LEONE._ Vol. XII. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo. $1.00. In
paper covers, 50 cents.

_LEOPARDI'S_ (G.) Essays and Dialogues. 8vo. $3.00.

_LESSON IN LOVE_ (A). Vol. II. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_LIEBER,_ The Life and Letters of Francis. Edited by Thomas Sergeant Perry.
8vo. With Portrait. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.50

_LIGHT ON THE HIDDEN WAY._ With Introduction by JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE.
1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

_LINCOLN'S_ (MRS. JEANIE GOULD) Her Washington Season. A Novel. 12mo.
$1.50.

_LONGFELLOW'S_ (SAMUEL) Life of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. With extracts
from his Journals and Correspondence. Crown 8vo. 2 vols. With Steel
Portraits, Engravings on wood, fac-similies, etc. $6.00; half-calf, with
marbled edges, $11.00; half-morocco, with gilt top and rough edges, $11.00.

*_Also, Edition de Luxe, with Proof Portraits._

_LOWELL'S_ (PERCIVAL) Chosoen: The Land of the Morning Calm. A Sketch of
Korea. 1 vol. 8vo. Illustrated. $5.00.

_MACHIAVELLI_ (NICCOLO), The Historical, Political, and Diplomatic Works
of. Translated by Christian E. Detmold. 4 vols. 8vo, with Steel
Frontispieces, in a box. $15. Half-calf, $30.

_MADAME LUCAS_. Vol. VIII. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_MADDEN'S_ (F.W.) The Coins of the Jews. 4to. $12.00.

_MEREDITH'S_ (OWEN) Lucile, Illustrated. Holiday Edition. With 160 new
Illustrations. Elegantly bound, with full gilt edges, in box, $6.00.
Tree-calf or antique morocco, $10.00. Calf or morocco, inlaid mosaic,
$12.50. Crushed levant, silk linings, $25.00.

---- Lucile. Tremont Edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Beautifully illustrated. With
red lines and gilt edges, $2.50. Half-calf, $4.00. Antique morocco,
tree-calf, flexible calf, or seal, $6.00.

---- Lucile. Pocket Edition. 1 vol. Little-Classic size. Thirty
Illustrations. Elegantly bound, $1.00. Half-calf, $2.25. Antique morocco,
flexible calf, or seal, $3.00. Tree-calf, $3.50.

_MONOGRAPHS OF AMERICAN ARCHITECTURE_.

No. 1. Harvard Law School. H.H. Richardson, architect. 18 Plates (Gelatine,
from nature), 13 x 16. In portfolio. $5.00.

No. 2. The State Capitol, at Hartford, Conn., Richard M. Upjohn, architect.
22 Plates (Gelatine, from nature), 13 x 16. $6.00.

_MORSE'S_ (EDWARD S., PH.D.) Japanese Homes and their Surroundings. 8vo.
With 300 Illustrations. $5.00; half-calf, $9.00.

_NAMELESS NOBLEMAN_ (A). Vol. I. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_NELSON'S_ (HENRY L.) John Rantoul. 12mo. $1.50.

_NORTON'S_ (GEN. C.B.) American Inventions in Breech-loading Small Arms,
Heavy Ordnance, etc. 4to. 250 Engravings. $10.00.

_OWEN'S_ (WILLIAM MILLER) In Camp and Battle with the Washington Artillery
of New Orleans. Illustrated with Maps and Engravings. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.00.

_PALFREY'S_ (JOHN GORHAM) A Compendious History of New England. 4 vols.
12mo. With new Index. In a box. $6.00. Half-calf, $12.00.

_PATTY'S PERVERSITIES_. Vol. IV. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_PEIRCE'S_ (MRS. MELUSINA FAY) Co-operative House-keeping. Square 16mo. 60
cents.

_PENINSULAR CAMPAIGN_ (THE) of General McClellan in 1862. (Vol. I., Papers
of the Military Historical Society of Massachusetts.) 8vo. With Maps.
$3.00.

_PERRY'S_ (NORA) For a Woman. 16mo. $1.00.

---- A Book of Love Stories. 16mo. $1.00.

_PERRY'S_ (THOMAS SERGEANT) From Opitz to Lessing. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.

_PICTURESQUE SKETCHES_. Statues, Monuments, Fountains, Cathedrals, Towers,
etc. 1 vol. Oblong folio $1.50.

_PLYMPTON'S_ (MISS A.G.) The Glad Year Round. Square 8vo. $2.50.

_POETS AND ETCHERS_. Twenty full-page etchings, by James D. Smillie, Samuel
Colman, A.F. Bellows. H. Farrer, R. Swain Gifford, illustrating poems by
Longfellow, Whittier, Bryant, Aldrich, etc. 4to. $10.00. _Also limited
editions on China and Japan paper._

_POOLE'S_ (W.F., LL.D.) An Index to Periodical Literature. 1 vol. Royal
8vo. $15.00. Sheep, $17.00. Half-morocco, $18.00. Half-morocco, extra. Gilt
top. Uncut edges, $19.00.

_POPE_ in 1862, The Virginia Campaign of General. Vol. II. of Papers read
before the Military Historical Society of Massachusetts. 8vo. With Maps and
Plans. $3.00.

_PORTER'S_ (ROBERT P.) Protection and Free Trade To-Day: At Home and
Abroad. 16mo. Paper covers, 10 cents.

_PREBLE'S_ (ADMIRAL GEORGE H.) History of the Flag of the United States of
America, etc. Third Revised Edition. 240 Illustrations, many of them in
colors. 1 vol. Royal quarto. $7.50.

_PRESTON'S_ (MISS H.W.) The Georgics of Vergil. 18mo. $1.00

---- The Georgics of Vergil. Holiday Edition. Four full-page Illustrations.
1 vol. Small 4to. Full gilt. $2.00.

_PUTNAM'S_ (J. PICKERING) The Open Fire-Place in all Ages. With 300
Illustrations, 53 full-page. 12mo. $4.00.

---- Lectures on the Principles of House Drainage. With Plates and
Diagrams. 16mo. 75 cents.

_QUINCY'S_ (EDMUND) The Haunted Adjutant; and other Stories. Edited by his
son, EDMUND QUINCY. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Wensley; and other Stories. Edited by his son, EDMUND QUINCY. 1 vol.
12mo. $1.50.

_RACHEL'S SHARE OF THE ROAD_. Vol. XVI. of the Round-Robin Series of
novels. $1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_REVEREND IDOL_ (A). A Novel. 12mo. Twelfth edition. $1.50.

_RICHARDSON'S_ (ABBY SAGE) Abelard and Heloise. 1 vol. Little-Classic size.
$1.00.

---- Old Love-Letters; or, Letters of Sentiment. Written by persons eminent
in English Literature and History. 1 vol. Little-Classic size. $1.25.

_ROCKHILL'S_ (W. WOODVILLE) The Life of the Buddha, and the Early History
of his Order. 1 vol. 12mo. Gilt top. $3.00.

_ROLFE'S_ (WILLIAM J.) Scott's The Lady of the Lake, etc. See Scott.

---- The Princess, etc. See TENNYSON.

_ROSEMARY AND RUE_. Vol. VII. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_ROUND-ROBIN SERIES_ (THE). A series of original novels by the best
writers. Each is complete in 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00. Also, new popular edition,
in paper covers, each, 50 cents.

  A Nameless Nobleman.
  A Lesson in Love.
  The Georgians.
  Patty's Perversities.
  Homoselle.
  Damen's Ghost.
  Rosemary and Rue.
  Madame Lucas.
  A Tallahassee Girl.
  Dorothea.
  The Desmond Hundred.
  Leone.
  Doctor Ben.
  Rachel's Share of the Road.
  Fanchette.
  His Second Campaign.

_SADI'S GULISTAN._ See EASTWICK.

_SANBORN'S_ (KATE) A Year of Sunshine. Comprising cheerful selections for
every day in the year. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

---- Grandma's Garden. Leaflets, with illuminated covers, $1.25.

---- Purple and Gold. Choice Poems. Leaflets, with illuminated covers by
ROSINA EMMET. $1.25.

---- Round-Table Series of Literature Lessons. Printed separately on
sheets. Twenty-five authors. Price for each author, enclosed in envelope,
25 cents.

_SANGSTER'S_ (MARGARET E.) Poems of the Household. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.50.

_SCHIEFNERS_ (PROFESSOR) Tibetan Tales. Translated by W.R.S. RALSTON, M.A.
$5.00.

_SCHOPENHAUER'S_ (ARTHUR) The World as Will and Idea. Translated from the
German by R.B. HALDANE. M.A., and JOHN KEMP, M.A. 3 vols. 8vo. Vol. 1.
$5.00.

_SCOTT'S_ (SIR WALTER) Marmion. Holiday Edition. Over 100 new Illustrations
by famous artists. Elegantly bound. Full gilt edges. In box, $6.00.
Tree-calf, or antique morocco, $10.00. Crushed levant, with silk linings,
$25.00.

---- Marmion. Tremont Edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Beautifully illustrated. With
red lines, bevelled boards, and gilt edges, $2.50. Half-calf, $4.00.
Antique morocco, flexible calf, flexible seal or tree-calf, $6.00.

---- Marmion. Pocket Edition, 1 vol. Little-Classic size. With thirty
Illustrations. Elegantly bound, $1.00. Half-calf, $2.25. Antique morocco,
or flexible calf or seal, $3.00. Tree-calf, $3.50.

---- Marmion. Students' Edition. Edited, with Notes and Introduction, by
W.J. ROLFE. 12mo. Illustrated. 75 cents.

---- The Lady of the Lake. Holiday Edition. 1 vol. 8vo. In box. 120
Illustrations. $6.00. Tree-calf or antique morocco, $10.00. Calf or
morocco, inlaid mosaic, $12.50. Crushed levant, with silk linings, $25.00.

---- The Lady of the Lake. Tremont Edition. 16mo. Beautifully illustrated.
Red lines. $2.50. Half-calf, $4.00. Tree-calf, antique morocco, flexible
calf or seal, $6.00.

_SCOTT'S_ (SIR WALTER) The Lady of the Lake. Pocket Edition. 1 vol.
Little-Classic size. 30 Illustrations. $1.00. Half-calf, $2.25. Antique
morocco, flexible calf, or seal, $3.00. Tree-calf, $3.50.

---- The Lady of the Lake. Students' Edition. Edited, with Notes and
Introduction, by W.J. ROLFE. 1 vol. 12mo. Beautifully illustrated. 75
cents.

_SENSIER'S_ (ALFRED) Jean-Francois Millet: Peasant and Painter. Translated
by HELENA DE KAY. With Illustrations. $3.00.

_SHALER'S_ (PROFESSOR N.S.) and _DAVIS'S_ (WILLIAM M.) Illustrations of the
Earth's Surface. Part I. Glaciers. Copiously illustrated. Large folio.
$10.00.

_SHEDD'S_ (MRS. JULIA A.) Famous Painters and Paintings. Revised edition.
With 13 Heliotypes. 1 vol. 12mo. $3.00 Half-calf, $5.00. Tree-calf, $7.00.

---- Famous Sculptors and Sculpture. With thirteen Heliotype Engravings.
12mo. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.00. Tree-calf, $7.00.

---- Raphael: His Madonnas and Holy Families. Illustrated with 22 full-page
Heliotypes. 1 vol. 4to. Full gilt. $7.50.

_SHERIDAN'S_ (RICHARD BRINSLEY) Comedies: The Rivals, and the School for
Scandal. Edited, with Biography and Notes and Introduction, by BRANDER
MATTHEWS. Illustrated. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.00.

_SHERRATT'S_ (R.J.) The Elements of Hand-Railing. 38 Plates. Small folio.
$2.00.

_SIKES'S_ (WIRT) British Goblins. Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, and
Traditions. Illustrated. 8vo. Gilt top. $4.00.

_SNIDER'S_ (DENTON J.) Agamemnon's Daughter. A poem. 1 vol. Square 16mo.
Fine laid paper. $1.50.

---- A Walk in Hellas. 1 vol. 8vo. $2.50.

_SPOONER'S_ (SAMUEL) and _CLEMENT'S_ (MRS. CLARA E.) A Biographical History
of the Fine Arts. _In preparation._

_STANWOOD'S_ (EDWARD) A History of Presidential Elections. 1 vol. 12mo.
$1.50.

_STERNBERG'S_ (GEORGE M., M.D.) Photo-Micrographs, and How to Make them.
Illustrated by 47 Photographs of Microscopic Objects, reproduced by the
Heliotype process. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.00.

_STEVENSON'S_ (ALEXANDER F.) The Battle of Stone River, near Murfreesboro',
Tenn., December 30, 1862, to January 3, 1863. 1 vol. 8vo. With Maps. $3.00.

_STILLMAN'S_ (DR. J.D.B.) The Horse in Motion, as Shown in a Series of
Views by Instantaneous Photography, and Anatomical Illustrations in Chromo,
after Drawings by WILLIAM HAHN. With a Preface by LELAND STANFORD. 1 vol.
Royal quarto. Fully illustrated. $10.00.

_STIRLING'S_ (A.) At Daybreak. A Novel. 16mo. $1.25.

_STODDARD'S_ (JOHN L.) Red-Letter Days Abroad. 8vo. With 130 fine
Illustrations. Richly bound, full gilt edges, in box. $5.00 In tree-calf or
antique morocco, $10.00. In mosaic inlaid, calf, $12.50.

_STONE'S_ (CHARLES J., F.R.S.L., F.R.Hist.C.) Christianity before Christ;
or, Prototypes of our Faith and Culture. Crown 8vo. $3.00.

_SWEETSER'S_ (M.F.) Artist-Biographies. With twelve Heliotypes in each
volume. 5 vols. 16mo. Cloth. Each, $1.50.

  Vol. I. Raphael, Leonardo, Angelo.
  Vol. II. Titian, Guido, Claude.
  Vol. III. Reynolds, Turner, Landseer.
  Vol. IV. Duerer, Rembrandt, Van Dyck.
  Vol. V. Angelico, Murillo, Allston.

The set, in box, 5 vols. $7.50. Half-calf, $15.00. Tree-calf, $25.00.
Flexible calf, elegant leather case, $28.00.

_TALLAHASSEE GIRL_ (A). Vol. IX. of the Round-Robin Series of novels. 16mo.
$1.00. In paper covers, 50 cents.

_TENNYSON'S_ (LORD) A Dream of Fair Women. Forty Illustrations. 4to. $5.00.
In morocco antique or tree-calf, $9.00.

---- The Princess. Holiday Edition. 120 Illustrations, Rich binding. In a
box. 8vo. $6.00. Morocco antique or tree-calf, $10.00. Crushed levant, with
silk linings, $25.00.

---- The Princess. Tremont Edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Beautifully illustrated.
With red lines, bevelled boards, and gilt edges, $2.50. Half-calf, $4.00.
Antique morocco, flexible calf, flexible seal or tree-calf, $6.00.

---- The Princess. Pocket Edition. 1 vol. Little-Classic size. With 30
Illustrations. Elegantly bound, $1.00. Half-calf, $2.25. Antique morocco,
or flexible calf or seal, $3.00. Tree-calf, $3.50.

---- The Princess. Students' Edition. Edited, with Notes and Introduction,
by W.J. ROLFE. 12mo. Illustrated. 75 cents.

---- Select Poems. Students' Edition. Edited, with Notes and Introduction,
by W.J. ROLFE. Beautifully illustrated, 1 vol. 12mo. 75 cents.

_THACKERAY_ (WILLIAM M.), The Ballads of. Complete illustrated edition.
Small quarto. Handsomely bound. $1.50.

_THOMAS A KEMPIS'S_ The Imitation of Christ. 16mo. Red edges. 300 cuts.
$1.50. Flexible calf or morocco, $4.00.

Pocket edition. Round corners. $1.00. Flexible calf, $3.00.

Edition de luxe. 8vo. Many full-page etchings, red ruling, etc. Full
leather binding, $9.00. In parchment covers, $5.00.

_THOMPSON'S_ (MAURICE) Songs of Fair Weather. $1.50.

_TICKNOR'S AMERICAN GUIDE-BOOKS: Newly revised and Augmented Editions._

New England. With nineteen Maps and Plans. Ninth edition. 16mo. $1.50.

The Maritime Provinces. With ten Maps and Plans. Fifth edition. 16mo.
$1.50.

The White Mountains. With six Maps and six Panoramas. Seventh edition.
16mo. $1.50.

The Middle States. With twenty-two Maps and Plans. 16mo. _Seventh Edition
in preparation._

_TICKNOR'S COMPLETE POCKET GUIDE TO EUROPE._ Revised edition. With six
Maps. 32mo. $1.50.

_TOWLE'S_ (GEORGE MAKEPEACE) England and Russia in Central Asia, No. 1,
Timely-Topics Series. 1 vol. 16mo. With Maps. 50 cents.

---- England in Egypt. No. 2, Timely-Topics Series. 1 vol. 16mo. With Maps.
50 cents.

_TOWNSEND'S_ (MARY ASHLEY) Down the Bayou. A volume of Poems. 12mo. $1.50.

_TOWNSEND'S_ (S. NUGENT) Our Indian Summer in the Far West. With full-page
Photographs of Scenes in Kansas, Colorado, New Mexico, Texas, etc. 4to.
$20.00.

_UNDERWOOD'S_ (FRANCIS H.) John Greenleaf Whittier. A Biography. 1 vol.
12mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

---- Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. 12mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

---- James Russell Lowell. A Biographical Sketch. 1 vol. Small quarto. 6
Heliotypes. $1.50.

_VIOLLET-LE-DUC'S_ (E.E.) Discourses on Architecture. Vol. I. Translated by
HENRY VAN BRUNT. With 18 large Plates and 110 Woodcuts. 8vo. $5.00.

_VIOLLET-LE-DUC_ (E.E.) _The Same._ Vol. II. With Steel Plates, Chromos,
and Woodcuts. 8vo. $5.00.

_WALLACE'S_ (SUSAN E.) The Storied Sea. 1 vol. Little-Classic size. $1.00.

_WARE'S_ (PROFESSOR WILLIAM R.) Modern Perspective. A Treatise upon the
Principles and Practice of Plane and Cylindrical Perspective. 1 vol. 12mo.
With Portfolio of 27 Plates. $5.00.

_WARING'S_ (COL. GEORGE E., JR.) Whip and Spur. Little-Classic size. $1.25.

---- Village Improvements and Farm Villages. Little-Classic size.
Illustrated. 75 cents.

---- The Bride of the Rhine. Two Hundred Miles in a Mosel Row-Boat. To
which is added a paper on the Latin poet Ausonius and his poem "Mosella,"
by Rev. CHARLES T. BROOKS. 1 vol. Square 16mo. Fully illustrated. $1.50.

---- Vix. No. 1 of Waring's Horse-Stories. 10 cents.

---- Ruby. No. 2 of Waring's Horse-Stories. 10 cents.

_WARNER'S_ (CHARLES DUDLEY) The American Newspaper. 32mo. 25 cents.

_WARREN'S_ (JOSEPH H., M.D.) A Plea for the Cure of Rupture. 12mo. In
cloth, $1.25. In parchment paper covers, $1.00.

---- A Practical Treatise on Hernia. 8vo. $5.00. Sheep. $6.50.

_WEDGWOOD'S_ (HENSLEIGH) Contested Etymologies in the Dictionary of the
Rev. W.W. SKEAT. 1 vol. 12mo. $2.00.

_WEEKS'S_ (LYMAN H.) Among the Azores. 1 vol. Square 16mo. With Map and 25
Illustrations. $1.50.

_WELLS'S_ (KATE GANNETT) About People. A volume of Essays. Little-Classic
size. $1.25.

_WENDELL'S_ (BARRETT) The Duchess Emilia. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

_WHEELER'S_ (CHARLES GARDNER) The Course of Empire; Being Outlines of the
Chief Political Changes in the History of the World. 1 vol. 8vo. With 25
colored Maps. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.50.

_WHEELER'S_ (WILLIAM A. and CHARLES G.) Familiar Allusions: A Handbook of
Miscellaneous Information. 12mo. $3.00. Half-calf, $5.50.

_WHIST_, American or Standard. By G.W.P. Sixth edition. Revised and
enlarged, 16mo. $1.00.

_WILLIAMS'S_ (ALFRED M.) The Poets and Poetry of Ireland. With Critical
Essays and Notes. 1 vol. 12mo. $2.00.

_WINCKELMANN'S_ (JOHN) The History of Ancient Art. Translated by Dr. G.H.
LODGE. With 78 copperplate Engravings. 2 vols. 8vo. $9.00. Half-calf,
$18.00. Morocco antique or tree-calf, $25.00.

_WINTER'S_ (WILLIAM) English Rambles, and other Fugitive Pieces in Prose
and Verse. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

---- Poems. New revised edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Cloth, $1.50. Half-calf,
$3.00. Morocco antique or tree-calf, $4.00.

---- The Trip to England. With Illustrations by JOSEPH JEFFERSON. 16mo.
$2.00. Half-calf, $4.00. Morocco antique or tree-calf, $5.00.

_WOODS'S_ (REV. LEONARD) History of the Andover Theological Seminary.
1 vol. 8vo. $3.50.

       *       *       *       *       *

=MR. HOWELLS'S LATEST NOVELS.=

=Indian Summer. The Rise of Silas Lapham. A Woman's Reason. A Modern
Instance. Dr. Breen's Practice. A Fearful Responsibility.= Each in 1 vol.
12mo. $1.50. The 6 volumes in a neat box, $9.00.

"There has been no more rigidly artistic writing done in America since
Hawthorne's time."--_The Critic (N.Y.)_.

=MR. HOWELLS'S COMEDIES.= Each in 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.

  =Out of the Question.
  A Counterfeit Presentment.=

=MR. HOWELLS'S PLAYS.= Each in 1 vol. 32mo. 50 cents.

  =The Register.
  The Sleeping-Car.
  The Parlor-Car.
  The Elevator.=

=MR. HOWELLS'S POEMS.= Printed on imported hand-made paper. White parchment
covers. Enlarged edition. $2.00.

=THREE VILLAGES.= 1 vol. Little-Classic size. $1.25.

=CHOICE AUTOBIOGRAPHIES.= 8 vols. 16mo. $1.25 each.




=TICKNOR & COMPANY'S NEW BOOKS,=

SPRING OF 1886.


The prices named below are subject to revision on publication.


_ROMANCE AND REVERIE._ By EDGAR FAWCETT. 1 vol. 12mo. Printed on fine
hand-made paper, with gilt top. $2.00. A volume of poems, by the author of
"Song and Story."

"Mr. Fawcett was the man of whom Longfellow expected more than from any of
the other young American authors, both as a poet and novelist."--_American
Queen._

"The _Revue des Deux Mondes_ gives high praise to Mr. Fawcett's poetry, and
compares his briefer lyrics to the famous 'Emaux et Camees' of Theophile
Gautier."--_Beacon._


_STORIES AND SKETCHES._ By JOHN BOYLE O'REILLY, editor of the _Pilot_,
author of "Moondyne," Songs, Legends, Ballads etc. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

The great popularity of the author, and the intrinsic merit and interest of
his writings, will ensure a warm reception to this collection of his latest
and best works.

MOROZ' KRASNYI-NOS' (Red-Nosed Frost). Russian: Sostavil' Nikolai
Alekseevich' Nekrasov'. Translated in the original meters from the Russian
of N.A. NEKRASOV.


_CHRISTIAN SYMBOLS AND STORIES OF THE SAINTS._ By CLARA ERKSINE CLEMENT.
Assisted by KATHERINE E. CONWAY. 1 vol. Large 12mo., with many full page
illustrations. $2.50.

This is a revised version of the greater part of the author's "Hand-book of
Legendary Art,"--of which seventeen large editions have been exhausted. The
clear and beautiful explanation of the expressive symbols by which men's
minds are helped to reverent contemplation of the mysteries of revealed
religion, leaves nothing to be desired. The "Stories of the Saints" will be
illustrated by numerous full page engravings from the rarest and finest
works of the great masters of Christian Art--prominence being given to
scenes from the life of the Blessed Virgin, and pictures of the
Evangelists, and the Founders and notable Saints of the Religious Orders.


_MONOGRAPHS OF AMERICAN ARCHITECTURE._

No. II. THE HARTFORD CAPITOL. R.M. Upjohn, Architect.

No. III. AMES MEMORIAL BUILDINGS, NORTH EASTON. H.H. Richardson, Architect.

Gelatine Plates (from nature), 13 x 16. Each in portfolio. $5.00.

The remarkable success of the first Monograph shows the demand existing for
artistic work of this high grade; and an equal sale may be predicted for
the portfolio that illustrates the beautiful marble Gothic building of the
Connecticut State Capitol. This possesses perhaps even a higher interest
than the Harvard Law School, because it is a great public building, and not
an appendage of an institution.

_The American Architect_ says: "The execution of the work is all that could
be asked. It would be hard to offer a more encouraging example of the kind
of work to be expected in this series."

_JOHN BODEWIN'S TESTIMONY._ By MARY HALLOCK FOOTE, Author of "The Led
Horse Claim," &c. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

"Mrs. Foote's first novel raised her to a level on which she is only to be
compared with our best women novelists. To make this comparison briefly,
Miss Woolson observes keenly, Mrs. Burnett writes charmingly, and Mrs.
Foote feels intensely."--_The Critic._

_NEXT DOOR._ By CLARA LOUISE BURNHAM, Author of "Dearly Bought," "A Sane
Lunatic," &c. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

One of the brightest, prettiest, and most charming tales yet offered to the
public. The scene is in Boston, the time the present, the plot exciting,
the characters lifelike, while the style is graceful and skilful.

_POETS AND PROBLEMS._ By GEORGE WILLIS COOKE, Author of "Emerson; His Life,
Writings and Philosophy." 1 vol. 12mo. $2.00.

Mr. Cooke brings to his work the most inexhaustible and painstaking
patience, the most thorough devotion to the labor he has undertaken, and
the deepest mental sympathy with his subjects. His present work embraces
Tennyson, Ruskin, and Browning.

_THE OLDEN-TIME SERIES._ 16mo. Per vol., 50 cents.

There appears to be, from year to year, a growing popular taste for quaint
and curious reminiscences of "Ye Olden Time," and to meet this, Mr. Henry
M. Brooks has prepared a series of interesting handbooks. The materials
have been gleaned chiefly from old newspapers of Boston and Salem, sources
not easily accessible, and while not professing to be history, the volumes
will contain much material for history, so combined and presented as to be
both amusing and instructive. The titles of some of the volumes indicate
their scope and their promise of entertainment:--"Curiosities of the Old
Lottery," "Days of the Spinning Wheel," "Some Strange and Curious
Punishments," "Quaint and Curious Advertisements," "Literary Curiosities,"
"New-England Sunday," etc.

_THE IMPERIAL ISLAND--ENGLAND'S CHRONICLE IN STONE._ By JAMES F. HUNNEWELL.
1 vol. 8vo. Richly illustrated. $3.50.

This admirable and impressive work is a companion to the same author's
well-known "Historical Monuments of France," and contains a vivid record of
the life of Merrie England, as exemplified by her august castles and
palaces, abbeys and cathedrals.

=LIFE AND WORKS OF MRS. CLEMMER.=

_AN AMERICAN WOMAN'S LIFE AND WORK._ A Memorial of Mary Clemmer, by EDMUND
HUDSON, with Portrait.

_POEMS OF LIFE AND NATURE._

_HIS TWO WIVES._

_MEN, WOMEN, AND THINGS._ Revised and augmented.

The whole in four 12mo. volumes, tastefully bound, forming a beautiful,
uniform set of the selected works, together with the memorial biography of
this popular and lamented writer.

_THE SAUNTERER._ By CHARLES GOODRICH WHITING. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.

A rare and choice collection of charming little essays and poems about
nature, some of which have won the highest possible commendation from
Stedman and other eminent critics. The author has for many years been
connected with the editorial staff of "The Springfield Republican."

_THE LOST NAME._ By MRS. MADELEINE VINTON DAHLGREN, author of "A Washington
Winter," "South-sea Sketches," etc. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

The remarkable success of Mrs. Dahlgren's previous portrayals of society
make it certain that her forthcoming work will be full of life and purpose,
and therefore sure to attract and interest.

_ITALIAN POETS._ By W.D. HOWELLS. 12mo. $1.50.

Biographical and Critical Notices of the masters of Italian poetry.

_A SEA CHANGE_; or, Love's Stowaway. A Comic opera. By W.D. HOWELLS. 1 vol.
16mo. Little-Classic size.

_THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF GENERAL POPE IN 1862._ Being Volume II. of Papers
read before the Military Historical Society of Massachusetts. With Maps and
Plans. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.00.

_THE YOUNG PEOPLE'S TENNYSON._ Students' Edition. 1 vol. 16mo. Edited, with
Notes and Introduction, by W.J. Rolfe. Beautifully illustrated. 75 cents.

_SELECT POEMS OF TENNYSON._ Second Part. Students' Edition. Edited, with
Notes and Introduction, by W.J. Rolfe. 1 vol. 16mo. Beautifully
illustrated. 75 cents.

_SONGS AND BALLADS OF THE OLD PLANTATIONS, BY UNCLE REMUS._ By JOEL
CHANDLER HARRIS. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

"Uncle Remus's" legends have created a strong demand for his songs, which
will be eagerly welcomed.

_A ROMANTIC YOUNG LADY._ By ROBERT GRANT, author of "The Confessions of a
Frivolous Girl," "An Average Man," etc. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

This is the latest and one of the strongest works of the successful
delineator of modern society life and manners. It will be read eagerly and
enjoyably by thousands of lovers of the best fiction.

_A NEW AND ENLARGED CONCORDANCE TO THE HOLY SCRIPTURES._ By Rev. J.B.R.
WALKER.

This monumental work of patient industry and iron diligence is
indispensable to all students of the Bible, to which it is the key and
introduction. Many errors and omissions in the plans of the older
Concordances have been avoided in this one, which also bears reference to
the Revised Bible, as well as to the King-James version.




=JUST PUBLISHED.=


_THE STORY OF MARGARET KENT._ By HENRY HAYES. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50. 6th
thousand.

A new and thrilling novel of literary life in New York, written with
masterly skill. One of the most exacting of reviewers says that it will
"convince and touch thoughtful and sensitive readers"; and another, a
well-known novelist and poet, says: "The plot and situations are original
and natural. It is out of the common run, and sparkles with life--real
life--and deep feeling."

_AMERICAN WHIST._ By G.W.P. 1 vol. 16mo. Sixth Edition, Revised. $1.00.

A new and fully revised and much-enlarged edition of this foremost classic,
best teacher, and wisest companion as to the most enjoyable game of cards.
After running through several successful editions during the past five
years, this invaluable book is now to be brought out improved in many ways,
and will be indispensable to all who play Whist.

_CLEOPATRA._ By HENRY GREVILLE. Original Copyright Edition, with new
Portrait. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.

"Cleopatra" is a brilliant new novel by the author of "Dosia" and "Dosia's
Daughter," who is acknowledged as foremost among the European novelists of
to-day. The remarkable success that has attended Henry Greville's previous
works, foreshadows the popular demand for "Cleopatra," her latest (and in
many respects, her best) novel.

_EVERY-DAY RELIGION._ By REV. JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE, D.D., Author of
"Self-Culture," "The Ideas of Paul," &c., &c. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

An admirable group of terse, strong, and practical discourses on the
religion of the home, the office, the work-shop, and the field. It tells
how, amid the cares and annoyances of this workaday world, one may grow
towards a noble and peaceful life. It will be an invaluable companion, an
indispensable "guide, philosopher, and friend." The eminent success of
JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE in works of this high class is shown by the great
popularity of his "Self-Culture," which is now in its eleventh edition.

_EDGE-TOOLS OF SPEECH._ By MATURIN M. BALLOU, Author of "A Treasury of
Thought," "Due South," &c., &c. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.50.

"A great new work, in which are preserved the choicest expressions and
opinions of the great thinkers and writers of all ages, from Confucius to
Ruskin. These pungent apothegms and brilliant _memorabilia_ are all
carefully classified by topics; so that the choicest work of many years of
patient labor in the libraries of America and Europe is condensed into
perfect form and made readily available. It will be indispensable to all
writers and speakers, and should be in every library"--_Traveller._

_TWO COLLEGE GIRLS._ By HELEN DAWES BROWN. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

One of the most important of recent books. It is a capital study of
girl-students from Boston, New York, and Chicago, exemplifying the most
piquant characteristics of the respective phases of civilization and social
criteria of the three cities. It is suited alike to old and young, being
rich in beautiful passages of tender pathos, strong, simple and vivid, and
full of sustaining interest. Nothing has been published since "Little
Women" that will so strike the popular taste.

_LIGHT ON THE HIDDEN WAY._ With an Introduction by JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE.
1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

A remarkable and thrilling romance of immortality, illustrating by an
account of personal experiences the relations between the seen and the
unseen. All readers of the literature of the supernatural in books like
"The Little Pilgrim," &c., will be profoundly interested in this strange
record of the nearness of the spiritual and material worlds.

_THE PRELATE._ By ISAAC HENDERSON. 12mo. $1.50.

A story of the American colony and native society in Rome. The situations
in this powerful book are among the most intense and dramatic of anything
that has been offered by an American author for years.

_INDIAN SUMMER._ By W.D. HOWELLS, Author of "The Rise of Silas Lapham," &c.
1 vol. 12 mo. $1.50.

"Mr. Howells's new story is in his pleasantest vein, full of his quiet
humor clothed in the neatest expressions. It is international; the contrast
of American and foreign ways runs through it, and Mr. Howells has added the
contrast of the old and the new Americanism. The hero is a Western
journalist, a Mugwump, much given to banter of the American sort."--_The
Nation._

_A STROLL WITH KEATS._ By FRANCES CLIFFORD BROWN. 1 vol. Illustrated.
Square 16mo. $1.50.

One of the choicest gems of art in illustration, consisting of illuminated
pages, in beautiful designs, illustrating some of the finest verses of the
great English poet.

_THE SPHINX'S CHILDREN AND OTHER PEOPLE'S._ By ROSE TERRY COOKE, Author of
"Somebody's Neighbors," &c. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

This volume of short stories, reprinted from the author's contributions to
the _Atlantic_, _Harpers_, _The Galaxy_, &c., will be found like
"Somebody's Neighbors," to show "that profound insight into Puritan
character, and that remarkable command of Yankee dialect, in which Mrs.
Cooke has but one equal, and no superior. These exquisite chronicles are
full of high local color, pathos and piquancy, and their perusal is
attended with alternate tears and smiles. Their narration is vigorous and
spirited, sparkling in all points, and outlined with rare dramatic skill."

_THE LIFE AND GENIUS OF GOETHE._ The Lectures at the Concord School of
Philosophy for 1885. Edited by F.B. SANBORN and W.T. HARRIS. 1 vol. 12mo.
With 2 portraits. $2.00.

"A work of exceptional interest, containing fifteen of the lectures
concerning Goethe which were read at the Concord School of Philosophy last
summer. Prof. Hewett furnishes an account of the newly-discovered Goethe
manuscripts for the introduction to the volume. Among the writers are Drs.
Bartol and Hedge, Mrs. Howe, Mrs. Cheney, Mrs. Sherman of Chicago, Mr.
Soldan of St. Louis, Mr. Snider of Cincinnati, Mr. Partridge of Brooklyn,
N.Y., Mr. Davidson of New Jersey, Prof. White of Ithaca, N.Y., and Messrs.
Emery, Harris, and Sanborn of Concord, the last named the
editor."--_Traveller._

_LIFE AND LETTERS OF HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW._ Edited by Rev. Samuel
Longfellow. 2 vols. 12mo. $6.00. With new steel engraved Portraits and many
wood Engravings.

_Also a limited edition de Luxe, with Proof Portraits._

The biography of the foremost American poet, written by his brother, is
probably the most important work of the kind brought out in the United
States for years. It is rich in domestic, personal, and family interest,
anecdotes, reminiscences, and other thoroughly charming _memorabilia_.


THE =MEMORIAL HISTORY OF BOSTON=,

In Four Volumes. Quarto.


With more than 500 Illustrations by famous artists and engravers, all made
for this work.

Edited by JUSTIN WINSOR, LIBRARIAN OF HARVARD UNIVERSITY.

Among the contributors are:--

  Gov. JOHN D. LONG,
  Hon. CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS,
  Rev. PHILLIPS BROOKS, D.D.,
  Rev. E.E. HALE, D.D.,
  Hon. ROBERT C. WINTHROP,
  Hon. J. HAMMOND TRUMBULL,
  Admiral G.H. PREBLE,
  Dr. O.W. HOLMES,
  JOHN G. WHITTIER,
  REV. J.P. CLARKE, D.D.,
  Rev. A.P. PEABODY, D.D.,
  Col. T.W. HIGGINSON,
  Professor ASA GRAY,
  Gen. F.W. PALFREY,
  HENRY CABOT LODGE.

VOLUME I. treats of the Geology, Fauna, and Flora; the Voyages and Maps of
the Northmen, Italians, Captain John Smith, and the Plymouth Settlers; the
Massachusetts Company, Puritanism, and the Aborigines; the Literature,
Life, and Chief Families of the Colonial Period.

VOL. II. treats of the Royal Governors; French and Indian Wars; Witches and
Pirates; The Religion, Literature, Customs, and Chief Families of the
Provincial Period.

VOL. III. treats of the Revolutionary Period and the Conflict around
Boston; and the Statesmen, Sailors, and Soldiers, the Topography,
Literature, and Life of Boston during that time; and also of the Last
Hundred Years' History, the War of 1812, Abolitionism, and the Press.

VOL. IV. treats of the Social Life, Topography, and Landmarks, Industries,
Commerce, Railroads, and Financial History of this Century in Boston; with
Monographic Chapters on Boston's Libraries, Women, Science, Art, Music,
Philosophy, Architecture, Charities, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

* * * _Sold by subscription only. Send for a Prospectus to the Publishers,_

TICKNOR AND COMPANY, Boston.


THE CHOICEST EDITIONS OF THE =FIVE GREAT MODERN POEMS.=


Drawn and engraved under the care of A.V.S. ANTHONY. Each in one volume,
8vo., elegantly bound, with full gilt edges, in a neat box. Each poem, in
cloth, $6.00; in tree calf, or antique morocco, $10.00; in crushed levant,
extra, with silk linings, $25.00. Copiously illustrated after drawings by
Thomas Moran, E.H. Garrett, Harry Fenn, A.B. Frost, and other distinguished
artists.

CHILDE HAROLD.

The choicest gift-book of 1885-1886. With nearly 100 noble Illustrations,
of great artistic value and beauty, representing the splendid scenery and
architecture of the Rhine, Greece, Italy, etc.

THE PRINCESS.

The most famous poem of ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON. With 120 new and beautiful
Illustrations.

"The most superb book of the season. The exquisite binding makes a fit
casket for Tennyson's enchanting 'Princess.'"--_Hartford Journal._

THE LADY OF THE LAKE.

A superb fine-art edition, with 120 Illustrations. The choicest edition of
Scott's wonderful poem of Scottish chivalry.

"On page after page are seen the great dome of Ben-an rising in mid-air,
huge Ben-venue throwing his shadowed masses upon the lakes, and the long
heights of Ben Lomond hemming the horizon."--_Atlantic Monthly._

LUCILE.

By OWEN MEREDITH. With 160 Illustrations.

The high peaks of the Pyrenees, the golden valleys of the Rhineland, and
the battle-swept heights of the Crimea.

"This new edition is simply perfect--paper, type, printing, and especially
the illustrations,--a most charming Christmas gift."--_American Literary
Churchman._

MARMION.

With more than 100 Illustrations, and Borders.

"Wild Scottish beauty. Never had a poem of stately and immortal beauty a
more fitting setting."--_Chicago Inter-Ocean._

       *       *       *       *       *

_For Sale by Booksellers. Sent, postpaid, on receipt of price, by the
Publishers_,

TICKNOR AND COMPANY, Boston.

THE
AMERICAN ARCHITECT
_AND BUILDING NEWS_.

An Illustrated Weekly Journal of Architecture and the Building Trades


Each number is accompanied by six fine quarto illustrations, while
illustrative cuts are liberally used in the text. Although the paper
addresses itself primarily to architects and builders, by its discussions
upon matters of interest common to those engaged in building pursuits, it
is the object of the editors to make it acceptable and necessary to that
large portion of the educated classes who are interested in and appreciate
the importance of good architectural surroundings, to civil and sanitary
engineers, draughtsmen, antiquaries, craftsmen of all kinds, and all
intelligent readers.

As an indication of the feeling with which this journal is regarded by the
profession, we quote the following extract from a report of a committee of
the American Institute of Architects upon "American Architectural
Journals":--

     "At Boston, Mass., is issued the AMERICAN ARCHITECT AND BUILDING
     NEWS, a weekly of the first class, and, it must be acknowledged,
     the only journal in this country that can compare favorably with
     the great London architectural publications. It is very liberally
     illustrated with full-page lithographic impressions of the latest
     designs of our most noted architects, and with occasional views
     of celebrated European buildings. Once a month a fine gelatine
     print is issued in a special edition. Its editorial department is
     conducted in a scholarly, courteous, and, at the same time,
     independent tone, and its selections made with excellent
     judgment. It is the accepted exemplar of American architectural
     practice, and is found in the office of almost every architect in
     the Union."--_April 15, 1885._


Subscription Prices. (In Advance.)

REGULAR EDITION.--$6.00 per year; $3.50 per half year.

GELATINE EDITION (the same as the regular edition, but including 12 or more
Gelatine Prints).--$7.00 per year; $4.00 per half year.

IMPERIAL EDITION (the same as the regular edition, but including 40
Gelatine Prints, and 36 additional double-page Photo-Lithographic
Prints).--$10.00 year; $6.00 per half year.

MONTHLY EDITION (identical with the first weekly issue for each month, but
containing no Gelatine Prints).--$1.75 per year; $1.00 per half year.

Bound volumes for 1876, 1877, 1878, 1879, 1880, 1881, $10.50; 1882, 1883,
1884, and 1885, $9.00 each.

Bound volume (Gelatine edition) for 1885, $10.00.

Specimen numbers and advertising rates furnished on application to the
publishers,

=TICKNOR AND COMPANY,=

_211 TREMONT STREET, BOSTON, MASS._




Transcriber's notes:

Footnotes represented by Numbers are part of New-England Sunday text
Footnotes represented by Letters are footnotes from quoted sources.
Punctuation standardised.
Hand symbol replaced by [-->] in txt version.
$1, changed to $1.00. In Advertisement section
* * * used to represent Inverted Asterism in txt version.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Olden Time Series, Vol. 3:
New-England Sunday, by Henry M. Brooks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLDEN TIME SERIES ***

***** This file should be named 17483.txt or 17483.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/4/8/17483/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
