The Project Gutenberg EBook of Prairie Farmer, Vol. 56: No. 1, January 5,
1884., by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Prairie Farmer, Vol. 56: No. 1, January 5, 1884.
       A Weekly Journal for the Farm, Orchard and Fireside

Author: Various

Release Date: January 14, 2006 [EBook #17512]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRAIRIE FARMER ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







PRAIRIE FARMER

A Weekly Journal for

THE FARM, ORCHARD, AND FIRESIDE.

ESTABLISHED IN 1841.
ENTIRE SERIES: VOL. 56--NO. 1.

CHICAGO, SATURDAY, JANUARY 5, 1884.

PRICE, $2.00 PER YEAR,
IN ADVANCE.


[Transcriber's Note: Some pages in the original had the corner torn off.
Missing text has been marked [***].]

[Transcriber's Note: The Table of Contents was originally located on
page 8 of the periodical. It has been moved here for ease of use.]


THE CONTENTS OF THIS NUMBER.

AGRICULTURE--Tall Meadow Oat-Grass, Page 1; The Barbed-Wire
Business, 1-2; A Rambler's Letter, 2; Let Us Be Sociable, 2; Seed Corn
Again, 2; Field and Furrow, 3.

LIVE STOCK--Mr. Grinnell's Letter, Page 14; Prices of 1883, 4;
Docking Horses, 4; Items, 4.

THE DAIRY--Lessons in Finance for the Creamery Patron, Page 5.

VETERINARY--Fever, Page 5.

HORTICULTURE--Ill. Hort. Society, Page 6; A Short Sermon on a
Long Text, 6; Prunings, 6-7.

FLORICULTURE--Gleanings by an Old Florist, Page 7; Am I a Scot
or am I Not, Poetry, 7; Primitive Northwest, 7.

EDITORIAL--Items, Page 8; Seed Samples, 8; The Pork Question in
Europe, 8; Corn, Wheat, and Cotton, 8; Chicago in 1883, 9; Strong Drink,
9; Questions and Answers, 9; Wayside Notes, 9; Champaign Letter, 9.

POULTRY NOTES--Chat With Correspondents, Page 10; Feather Ends,
10.

THE APIARY--Keep Bees, Page 10; The New Bees, 10; Hive and
Honey Hints, 10.

SILK CULTURE--Women In Silk Culture, Page 11.

HOUSEHOLD--The Schoolmarm's Story, Poem, Page 12; A Chat About
the Fashions, 12; A Kitchen Silo, 12; Items, 12.

YOUNG FOLKS--Talk about the Lion, Page 13; A Jack-knife Genius,
13; Little Johnny, 13.

BOOK NOTICES--Page 13.

LITERATURE--Robin, Dear Robin, Poetry, Page 14; Mrs. Wimbush's
Revenge, 14.

HUMOROUS--The Carpenter's Wooing, Poetry, Page 15; Where the
Old Maids Come From, 15; Items, 15.

NEWS OF THE WEEK--Page 16.

MARKETS--Page 16.




TALL MEADOW OAT-GRASS.

Prof. John W. Robson, State Botanist of Kansas, sends THE PRAIRIE FARMER
an extract from his last report, concerning a tame grass for hay and
pasturing which is new to that State. The grass has been on trial on an
upland farm for two years, during which time he has watched it very
closely. The Professor says, "It possesses so many excellent qualities
as to place it in the front rank of all cultivated grasses." He
enumerates from his notes:

1st. The seed will germinate and grow as easily as common oats. 2d. It
maintains a deep green color all seasons of the year. 3d. Its roots
descend deeply into the subsoil, enabling this grass to withstand a
protracted drouth. 4th. Its early growth in spring makes it equal to rye
for pasturage. 5th. In the next year after sowing it is ready to cut for
hay, the middle of May--not merely woody stems, but composed in a large
measure of a mass of long blades of foliage. The crop of hay can be cut
and cured, and stowed away in stack or barn, long before winter wheat
harvest begins. 6th. It grows quickly after mowing, giving a denser and
more succulent aftermath than any of the present popular tame grasses.

For several years, he says, we have been looking for a grass that would
supply good grazing to our cattle and sheep after the native grasses
have become dry and tasteless. In the early portion of 1881, his
attention was called to a tame grass which had been introduced into the
State of Michigan from West Virginia. This forage plant was causing some
excitement among the farmers in the neighborhood of Battle Creek. So he
entered into a correspondence with a friend living there, and obtained
ten pounds of seed for trial. The result has been satisfactory in every
respect. The seed was sown April 1, 1881. It germinated quickly, and the
young plants grew vigorously. During the whole summer they exhibited a
deep-green color, and did not become brown, like blue-grass, orchard
grass, or timothy. As soon as the spring of 1882 opened, growth set in
rapidly, and continued till the latter end of May, at which period it
stood from three to four feet high. At this time it was ready for the
mower; but as the production of seed was the object in view, it was not
cut till the second week in June. The plot of ground of about half an
acre, on which ten pounds of seed were sown, produced three barrels of
seed.

He exhibited a little sheaf of this grass at the semi-annual meeting of
the Kansas State Horticultural Society, where it excited much
attention--the height, softness of the stem, length of blade, and sweet
aroma surprised every one present.

On the last day of August, he went into the plot with a sickle, and cut
two handfuls of aftermath which measured twenty inches in growth. This
he tied to a sheaf of the June cutting, and exhibited the same at the
State Fair, where it attracted much attention and comment.

Here, then, we have, he continues, a grass that will insure a "good
catch" if the seed is fresh; that can endure severe drouth; that
produces an abundant supply of foliage; that is valuable for pasture in
early spring, on account of its early and luxuriant growth; that makes a
valuable hay; that shoots up quickly after being cut; and affords a fine
crop of aftermath for grazing during the late fall and winter months.

The Professor is very anxious that the farmers of Kansas should test
this grass during the season of 1883. Still, his advice is not to invest
too largely in the experiment. Purchase from five to ten pounds of
seed, and give it a fair trial, and he is confident that the experiment
will be satisfactory.

The name given to this valuable grass in the State of Michigan is
"Evergreen," but this is only a local synonym. Its scientific name is
Avena elatior; its common name, "Tall Meadow Oat-grass." Fearing that he
might be mistaken in its nomenclature, he sent a specimen to Professor
Carruth, State Botanist. This is his reply:

    "Mr. J.W. Robson--Dear Sir: Yours mailed on the 22d, I
    received last evening. I do not get my mail every day. The
    specimen of grass you sent agrees perfectly with the Avena
    elatior, of Wood, and the Arrenatherrum avenaceum, of Gray;
    but I have never seen this grass before. I agree with you in
    the scientific name, and also in the common name, 'Tall
    Meadow Oat-grass.'

    Yours truly, J.H. CARRUTH."

The ground should be plowed in the fall, and early in the spring, as
soon as the soil is in good tilth; sow broadcast two bushels (or
twenty-eight pounds) of seed to the acre; cover well with the harrow,
both lengthways and across the piece of ground sown. Should the ground
prove weedy, cut the weeds down with the mowing machine in June, and
leave them upon the surface, and they will afford shade to the young
plants.

This grass is extensively grown in Eastern Tennessee, and is very
popular in that portion of the State. In some portions of Western
Virginia it is largely grown for hay and for grass. It is known as tall
meadow oat-grass in each of the States we have mentioned above.

       *       *       *       *       *

The main building for the New Orleans Cotton Centennial Exposition next
year will be 1,500 feet long and 900 feet wide, with 1,000,398 square
feet of floor space, including Music Hall in the center, with a seating
capacity of 12,000 persons. The design also provides for main offices,
telegraph office, newspaper department, fire department, police,
hospital, waiting-rooms, and life saving apparatus. The building will be
the largest exposition building ever erected, except the one in London
in 1862. The design adopted was the work of G.M. Jorgenson, of Meridian,
Mississippi. There were ten competitors.




JOSEPH F. GLIDDEN.

The Barb-Wire Industry--Some Facts in its Early History not Generally
Known--Its Growth.


Joseph Farwell Glidden, "the Father of the Barb-Wire Business" of this
country, is now a hale and hearty man of seventy-one. He was born at
Charleston, N.H. When about one year old the family came West, to
Clarendon, Orleans county, New York, and engaged in farming. The young
lad, besides mastering the usual branches taught in the common schools,
gave some time to the higher mathematics and Latin, intending to take a
college course, an idea that he finally abandoned. He taught in the
district schools for a few terms. In 1842 he came to Illinois and
purchased a quarter section of land a mile west of what is now the site
of the pleasant and prosperous town of DeKalb. With the exception of
three years his life since then has been passed upon this farm and at
DeKalb. He has from time to time added to his homestead, his farm now
embracing 800 acres. His land is under excellent cultivation, a
considerable portion of it having been thoroughly tiled, and his farm
buildings are first-class. Mr. Glidden has been twice married. Two
children were born of the first union, both dying in infancy. By his
second marriage he has one daughter, now the wife of a Chicago merchant.

[Illustration: JOSEPH FARWELL GLIDDEN.]

Mr. Glidden has held several local offices of trust and honor and enjoys
in a marked degree the esteem and confidence of the citizens of his
neighborhood and county. The rapid accumulation of property of late
years, through his barb-wire patents and business, gave him the means to
gratify his feelings of public spirit, and in consequence the town of
DeKalb has benefited greatly at his hands. Its leading hotel and many
other buildings are the work of his enterprise. Mr. Glidden has never
lost the simple manners of the farm. He is unostentatious, quiet,
genial, and at his hotel makes everybody feel as much at home as though
enjoying the hospitalities of his private house. His kindly, firm, and
intelligent face is well shown in the accompanying portrait, though, as
is usually the case, the hand of the artist has touched his features
more lightly than has the hand of time.

       *       *       *       *       *

Few names are now more widely known among the land holders of the
country than that of Joseph F. Glidden, the unpretending gentleman whose
life we have briefly sketched. It was his fortune to seize upon an idea,
and push it to development, which has not only given him fame and
fortune, but which has enriched many others and saved many millions of
dollars to the farmers of America. He has not only founded a mammoth
industry, but he has revolutionized an economic system of the world. By
his ingenuity and perseverance the fencing system of a pastoral
continent has been reduced to a minimum of expense and simplicity. Not
that he individually has accomplished all this, but as the patentee of
the first really successful barb-wire fence, he laid the solid
foundation for it all.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first application for a patent for the Glidden barb was filed
October 27, 1873. For some weeks previous to this date Mr. Glidden had
had in his mind the idea of a barb of wire twisted about the main wire
of the fence, leaving two projecting points on opposite sides. He made
some of these by hand with the aid of pinchers and hammer. He strung two
wires between two trees and twisted them together with a stick placed
between them. A pair of cutting nippers was the next addition to his
"kit" of tools. His next means for twisting the two wires together was
the grindstone--attaching one end of the wire to shaft and crank, the
others being fastened to the wall of the barn. And here, as in most
things great and small in this world, woman furnished the motor power.
The strong arm of the good helpmeet, Mrs. Glidden, turned the grindstone
that twisted the first wire that made the first Glidden barb fence that
kept stock at bay in Illinois or the world. Then followed a device for
twisting and barbing, and the application of horse power. Business
expanded, and steam took the place of the horse, and inventive genius
modified and improved the entire machinery, it being estimated that at
least the sum of $1,000,000 has been expended in bringing the machinery
for barb-wire making to its present state of perfection.

       *       *       *       *       *

At about the same time that Mr. Glidden was wrestling with his ideas and
devices, Mr. I.L. Ellwood was experimenting to accomplish a like result
with a thin band of metal, the barbs cut and curved outward from the
strip. In the meantime Mr. Glidden had put up a few rods of his
hand-made barb-wire along the roadside at his farm. And here again the
good genius of woman enters upon the scene. One Sunday Mr. Ellwood and
his wife were driving along this road and attracted by the wire fence
stopped to examine it. Mrs. Ellwood, much to the chagrin of her husband,
remarked: "This seems to me a better device than your own, don't it to
you?" It did not then, for the remark disappointed and angered him. But
it set him to thinking and before the next morning he was of the same
opinion. The two men meeting the next day it did not take long to
compromise and unite. Mr. Ellwood dropped his own plans and accepted a
half interest in the Glidden patents, and assumed the management of the
business end of the concern, in which position he developed ability and
tact possessed by few business men in this country.

       *       *       *       *       *

The barb-wire fence met an unexpected and general demand. We know of few
things like it in the history of manufactures. From this small
beginning, scarce ten years ago more than fifty large establishments are
now turning out this wire to meet an ever insatiate demand. The
establishment of I.L. Ellwood (making the Glidden wire) at DeKalb is the
most complete and extensive of them all. The building is 800 feet in
length, and is supplied with about 200 machines for twisting and barbing
the wire. It gives, when running full force, employment to about 400
men, and turns out a car-load of wire each hour for ten hours per day,
on an average, though this amount is considerably increased at certain
times of the year. These figures, though not given us by Mr. Ellwood, we
are satisfied do not overstate the production of this one factory. The
progress of the barb-wire industry of the whole country is shown by the
following record of the past nine seasons. In

  1874 there were 10,000 lb made and sold.
  1875 there were 600,000 lb made and sold.
  1876 there were 2,840,000 lb made and sold.
  1877 there were 12,863,000 lb made and sold.
  1878 there were 26,655,000 lb made and sold.
  1879 there were 50,337,000 lb made and sold.
  1880 there were 80,500,000 lb made and sold.
  1881 there were 120,000,000 lb made and sold.
  1882 there were about 180,000,000 lb.

The record for 1883 is not yet made up, but will probably show a
corresponding increase.

In 1876 Mr. Glidden disposed of his half interest in the concern of
Glidden & Ellwood to the Washburn & Moen (wire) Manufacturing Company,
of Massachusetts, receiving therefor $60,000 in cash and a royalty on
the future goods manufactured, Mr. Ellwood retaining his interest. The
new concern began the purchase of prior unused and conflicting patents
involving itself in extensive litigation, but, sustained by the courts,
soon gained control of almost the entire barb-wire business of the
country. Nearly all wire-making companies are now running under license
from the parent concern. The following is a list of the licensees of
last year:

  Pittsburg Hinge Co.--Limited, Beaver Falls, Pa.
  H.B. Scutt & Co., Buffalo, N.Y.
  Hawkeye Steel Barb Fence Co., Burlington, Iowa.
  James Ayers and Alexander C. Decker, Bushnell, Ill.
  Indiana Wire Fence Co., Crawfordsville, Ind.
  Cedar Rapids Barb Wire Co., Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
  Cincinnati Barbed Wire Fence Co., Cincinnati, Ohio.
  Cleveland Barb Fence Co., Cleveland, Ohio.
  Ohio Steel Barb Fence Co., Cleveland, Ohio.
  Edwin A. Beers & Co., Chicago, Ill.
  Crandal Manufacturing Co., Chicago, Ill.
  Chicago Galvanized Wire Fence Co., Chicago, Ill.
  Lyman Manufacturing Co., Chicago, Ill.
  Daniel S. Marsh, Chicago, Ill.
  Oscar F. Moore, Chicago, Ill.
  National Wire Co., Chicago, Ill.
  Herman E. Schnabel, Chicago, Ill.
  Aaron K. Stiles and John W. Calkins, Chicago, Ill.
  Thorn Wire Hedge Co., Chicago, Ill.
  Baker Manufacturing Co., Des Moines, Iowa.
  Superior Barbed Wire Co., DeKalb, Ill.
  Jacob Haish, DeKalb, Ill.
  Frentress Barbed Wire Fence Co., East Dubuque, Ill.
  Grinnell Manufacturing Co., Grinnell, Iowa.
  Janesville Barb Wire Co., Janesville, Wis.
  Iowa Barb Wire Co., Johnstown, Pa.
  William J. Adam, Joliet, Ill.
  Lock Stitch Fence Co., Joliet, Ill.
  Lambert & Bishop Wire Fence Co., Joliet, Ill.
  Alfred Van Fleet & A.H. Shreffler, Joliet, Ill.
  David G. Wells, Joliet, Ill.
  Southwestern Barb Wire Co., Lawrence, Kan.
  Arthur H. Dale, Leland, Ill.
  Union Barb Wire Co., Lee, Ill.
  Lockport Wire Fence Co., Lockport, Ill.
  Norton & DeWitt, Lockport, Ill.
  Iowa Barb Steel Wire Fence Co., Marshaltown, Iowa.
  Omaha Barb Wire Co., Omaha, Neb.
  H.B. Scutt & Co.--Limited, Pittsburg, Pa.
  Missouri Wire Fence Co., St. Louis, Mo.
  St. Louis Wire Fence Co., St. Louis, Mo.
  J.H. Lawrence & Co., Sterling, Ill.
  North Western Barb Wire Co., Sterling, Ill.
  Novelty Manufacturing Co., Sterling, Ill.
  Sandwich Enterprise Co., Sandwich, Ill.
  Robinson & Hallidie, San Francisco, Cal.
  The Hazard Manufacturing Co., Wilkes Barre, Pa.
  Worcester Barb Fence Co., Worcester, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Glidden & Ellwood first began the sale of the Glidden fence, which
was confined to the vicinity of DeKalb, they received 25 cents per pound
for the barbed wire. Since then, as production has increased and the
facilities for manufacturing have been multiplied and perfected, the
price has gradually dropped, until now a farm can be well fenced for
forty-five cents, or less, per rod, and to the incalculable advantage of
the country over fencing by posts and boards, hedges or rails, as any
one may see by a simple dollar and cent comparison of materials at his
own door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barb-wire has done much for the city of DeKalb. It has built its fine
business blocks and residences, and it has peopled it with industrious,
thrifty citizens. It has made a home market for many of the products of
the country 'round about. It should give a new name, "Barb City," to the
bustling, busy town. There are three concerns now making barb-wire at
this point. The one spoken of is the largest. Next is that of Jacob
Haish, an extensive establishment, turning out an excellent wire, and
the Superior, run by Mr. Hiram Ellwood, Mr. Glidden having a
considerable interest in it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. I.L. Ellwood is the owner of some 2,600 acres of land in the
vicinity of DeKalb. Much of this land is naturally low and wet. The
proprietor, with his accustomed energy and intelligence, has set
vigorously to work to reclaim it. To this end he has already laid eighty
miles of tile. He last year expended nearly $15,000 in this work. His
poorest land is rapidly becoming his most productive. Mr. Ellwood has
also turned his attention somewhat to horse-breeding, and he is now the
owner of a fine stud of draft-horses, the equal of many better-known
establishments of the kind in the State. Of his drainage operations we
hope to speak more in detail in a future number.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Glidden told the writer that his first trial of his fence with stock
was not undertaken without some misgivings. But he thought to himself,
"It will stop them, at any rate, whether it kills them or not." So he
took down an old board fence from one side of his barn-yard, and towards
night when his stock came up, turned them into the yard as usual. The
first animal to investigate the almost invisible barrier to freedom was
a strong, heavy grade Durham cow. She walked along beside the wires for
a little put her nose out and touched a barb, withdrew it and took a
walk around the yard, approached the wires again and gave the barbs a
lap with her tongue. This settled the matter, and she retired, convinced
that the new-fangled fence was a success.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barb-wire is now sent from this country to Mexico, South America, and
Australia. It is also being manufactured in England under American
auspices.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Glidden, associating with himself a Mr. Sanborn, a young man of push
and enterprise, has opened up an extensive cattle ranch in Potter and
Randall counties, Texas. They have fenced with wire a tract thirty miles
long by about fifteen miles broad, and have now upon it 14,000 head of
cattle. Two twisted No. 11 wires were used for this fence, and the posts
are the best that could be procured. The wire was taken 200 miles on
wagons. The total cost of the completed fence was about $36,000.

       *       *       *       *       *

Messrs. Glidden & Ellwood put up the first barb-wire ever used by a
railway company--the Northwestern. So great was the caution of the
company that the manufacturers built it themselves, agreeing to remove
it if it proved unsatisfactory. The railway folks feared it would injure
stock, the damages for which they would be forced to pay. It is needless
to say that the fence was not removed. More than one hundred railway
companies are now using the Glidden wire, and it stretches along many
thousands of miles of track.




A RAMBLER'S LETTER.


I would like to call your attention to the fact that there is
considerable cholera among swine in Dewey township, Ill., west from
Joliet. Mr. Cooter lost about 130 hogs. Other farmers have suffered
equally.

I have been looking over the stock in this part of the country and find
it excellent, as a general thing. Many of the farmers are breeders of
fine Hereford cattle. They also own first-class horses. Some of them
whom I called upon would like to know the address of State Veterinary
Surgeon Dr. Paaren, and I should be pleased if you will give it in THE
PRAIRIE FARMER.[A] I have often thought, Why is it that so many sons of
wealthy farmers leave their homes for the purpose of either studying in
some classical college, to learn a trade, or to become book-keepers and
clerks in mercantile business. I think if farmers would take more
interest in agricultural papers, instead of having their children
fooling away their time on novels or comic stories and pictures, it
would be better for both old and young. Let the parents buy a microscope
and let the young folks examine insects and fungi of all kinds, and let
them write their experiences down in a book whenever there is leisure
time. Or let them write to THE PRAIRIE FARMER something in the line of
farming, be it agriculture, horticulture, or about raising and caring
for stock. In so doing the boys of our farming country will become proud
of their noble profession and of their homes. They will gradually be, as
every farmer should be, educated up to the times. There are few farmers
who can afford to let their sons study in an agricultural university,
but every one can surely afford to subscribe for an agricultural paper,
it being one of the most profitable investments for himself and family.

The ground is covered with snow to a small extent, and the roads are in
a fine condition. The crops are all good here except corn, which is very
poor indeed, even the crop in most cases is small. Farmers are not at
all satisfied, and times are not at all encouraging.

  H.A.P. WEISSBERGER.
  WILL CO., ILL.

[A] 355 Western Avenue (south), Chicago.




A FARMER'S LIBRARY.


As this is the season to make up our list of papers and magazines for
the ensuing year, I will take a glance around my own cosy room set apart
for a library.

It is here that I do the most of my reading, writing, and planning; and
although I pretend to be deeply engaged while ensconced in the large
willow rocker, strictly forbidding entrance to my farmer office, yet the
children and "Spot," my Gordon setter, will intrude, making things
lively for awhile, driving my thoughts wool-gathering and breaking many
a thread of thought that I had fondly hoped would place my name high on
the roll of scribblers. It is a good thing to have the little innocent
children and the dog to blame for these shortcomings, as they can not
take issue with us on the question.

But I started to talk about a farmer's library; and taking my own for a
small sample, let us see how it looks.

For the purpose of keeping my papers in order, I have prepared thin
laths of tough wood dressed with the draw knife to a thin edge, the back
being one fourth of an inch thick, leaving the lath one and a quarter
inch broad; these are cut in lengths to suit the paper they are intended
to hold. Take for instance THE PRAIRIE FARMER. I cut the lath just two
inches longer than the paper is long, then cut notches half of an inch
from each end, in which I tie the ends of a cord; this forms a loop to
hang up the file. In this I file each paper so soon as read, by which
means they are never lost or mislaid. When at the end of each three
months the papers are taken from off the file, the oldest number is laid
face down on a broad piece of plank and the number that follows laid
face down on the top of the first, then they are squared evenly and a
strong awl pierces three holes in the back edge through which a strong
twine string is laced and tied firmly; this finishes the job, and the
book thus simply and quickly made is placed on the shelf with its mates.
This done the file is returned to its hook to await the next number.

This is a simple plan for filing papers of any size, and any farmer can
do it, there being no expense or outlay for material. On glancing up
from the stand on which I am writing, the first objects that attract my
notice are my breach loader, cartridge belt, and game-bag hanging on the
wall; then by the side of the stove hangs the file of THE PRAIRIE
FARMER, within easy reach of my left hand; next it swings the
Country Gentleman, then comes the Forest and Stream, then Colman's Rural
World, then the Drainage Journal; next Harper's Weekly, then Harper's
Bazar. This is my wife's paper and she persists in hanging it among
mine. Then comes Harper's Monthly and the Century, not forgetting the
Sanitary Journal. On the other side of the room we find the Inter Ocean,
Democrat, and several other political papers fairly representing both
sides, also some standard books of valuable information; and last but
not least, the PRAIRIE FARMER Map which you sent for my club.

Now, this may be considered a pretty large outlay for a common farmer to
make, but outside of life insurance, I consider it my best investment.

In this selection I get the cream of all matters of practical importance
to the farmer. From THE PRAIRIE FARMER I get the latest and most
reliable information of the great central ruling markets of the West
Chicago, which has saved me sundry times from three to five cents per
bushel on wheat, sometimes paying the price of the paper twenty times
over in one transaction. From the C.G. I get the Eastern markets, while
Colman gives the St. Louis; and by a close study of the three a farmer
can always make enough to pay for twenty or thirty dollars worth of good
current literature for the use of his family. Then the F. and S. is
always full of delightful reading for the boys, refining their cruel
propensities, and teaching them to be kind to the feathered tribe which
are the farmer's friends. By reading it they soon lay aside their traps,
nets, and snares, with which they capture whole covies of the dear
little Bob-whites, and disdain to touch a feather, only when on the
wing, and then with their light, hammerless breach loader. Such reading
as that ties the farmer's boys to country life, and makes them contented
under the parental roof-tree until they are ready to build up homes of
their own. The Journal tells them all about tile making and drainage, a
very necessary accomplishment when they get their own homestead.

The pictures in H.W. furnish a fountain of amusement for the little
folks, and teach them--with a little help--many things that will be
useful to them in life. As a matter of course the "Bezar" is for mother
and the girls, and [***]
consultations [***]
before the fair, a [***]
daughters, your [***]
good when she insisted [***]
be put on the list.

A boy or a girl with [***]
the Century in their hands, [***]
room, with a bright clear lamp [***]
has no thought of city life, or [***]
In those bright pages the [***]
outer world painted in all its various [***]
so interesting and so fascinating [***]
have no desire to see it in reality; in [***]
they bring the brightest and best thought, [***]
historic, and romantic to our hearth and home; furnishing food for the
youthful minds, leaving no room for evil or discontented thoughts to
enter. Then I say to every farmer who has children, get the magazines
for them, they will save you a mountain of trouble.

Then to balance things have one or two spicy news papers, which picture
in horrid colors the blackest side of human life. This is necessary to
guard the young against the riff-raff of humanity, such as tramps,
sharpers, sewing machine and book agents, the lightning rod man, and a
dozen other sharp swindlers that prey on the farmer and his family for
an existence. The Sanitary Journal treats of health, purity, and
cleanliness, and ought to be read and studied by all. Ah, I had almost
forgotten THE PRAIRIE FARMER Map which hangs by the door. What can I say
about it? that it is a handsome ornament for a living room or library?
yes, but that is not all, it is useful. When it arrived I took it to the
railroad office and compared it with the best map they had, also with a
map made by the U.S. land office. I came away satisfied that it was
reliable; it ought to be in the home of every farmer in this great
country of ours, so that their children can learn and know what a grand
heritage they have got. There is no excuse for being without it, as a
few pounds of butter or dozens of eggs will procure it and a paper that
will gladden the hearts of both old and young.

  ALEX ROSS.
  CAPE GIRARDEAU, MO.




LET US BE SOCIABLE.


A happy new year to all of the readers of THE PRAIRIE FARMER, and may
your labors of 1884 be crowned with success. Mr. Granger, what are you
doing these long winter evenings? Can't you find time to write a few
lines to the readers of THE PRAIRIE FARMER? You can send a little report
from your county, at least. Come, let us be a little more sociable and
talk more to each other through the columns of our paper. We can learn
something by reading each other's views on different subjects. In my
next I shall try and tell some of the careless fellows how to run a farm
to make it pay. If I fail to give a little light on the subject perhaps
some one else will try it. We are having what you might call winter,
now. Snow is about six inches deep, but the weather is not very cold.
The thermometer has not been below zero but once. Nearly all of the corn
is gathered; only about one-third of the crop is sound enough to keep
until next summer. Farmers are feeding their soft corn to hogs and
cattle. In that way the soft corn will pay pretty well after all, for
fat stock brings a good price. Stock cattle are wintering well, for feed
in the fields is good, and most farmers have got plenty of good hay. The
weather was so nice the first part of this month that the farmers did a
large amount of plowing. Potatoes are plenty and cheap; worth from 30 to
40 cents. Apples are scarce, and good ones bring a big price. Butter is
worth from 25 to 30 cents.

  S.O.A.
  KNOX CO., ILL.




SEED CORN AGAIN.


There has been much complaint of soft corn in this section on account of
planting foreign seed last spring, but it is all solid since the late
cold spell.

Those who planted seed of their own raising and got a stand have fair
corn, while much of that which was raised from Kansas and Nebraska seed
was caught by the frost when in the milk. Now we will be in just the
same "fix" about seed next spring that we were last. This county has
lost thousands of dollars this year in the corn crop alone, all of which
might have been avoided by going through the fields before freezing
weather and selecting seed and properly drying it before it froze.

And now right here I want to say that the great secret of good farming
is simply being punctual in attending to the small matters, and I
"guess" Fanny Field would say the same about poultry.

  Z.L. THOMPSON.
  IROQUOIS CO., ILL.


       *       *       *       *       *


REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _from this
date to January 1, 1885; For $2.00 you get it for one year and a
copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED STATES,
FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any first-class
weekly agricultural paper in this country._


       *       *       *       *       *




FIELD AND FURROW.


Says the Iowa Register: One hundred bushels of corn will shrink to
ninety in the crib, and to an extent more than that, depending on the
openness of the crib and the honesty of the neighbors.

The agricultural editor of the New York Times says that no doubt many
farmers who are intending to underdrain their farms would save money by
employing an expert at the first to lay out the whole system and make a
good beginning, and so avoid any possible mistake, which might cost ten
dollars for every one paid for skilled advice.

The New York Times says that lime seems to be a preventive of rot in
potatoes in the cellar. Some potatoes that were rotting and were picked
out of a heap of forty or fifty bushels were put into a corner and well
dusted with air-slaked lime. They stopped rotting at once, and the
decayed parts are now dried up. There is no disagreeable smell about
them.

Cincinnati Gazette: It is remarked that when young hogs are fed mainly
on corn they stop growing at an early age and begin to grow fat; but
that green food makes them thriftier and larger than dry grain. In fact,
it is better to prevent all domestic animals from becoming very fat
until they have attained a fair natural size, particularly breeding
animals.

A member of the Elmira Farmers' Club recently expressed the opinion that
bad results would always be found with wheat sown on land into which the
green growth of any crop had just been turned, although it was believed
that buckwheat was the worst green manure. All green growth incorporated
with the soil near the time of seeding will in all cases be found
prejudicial to wheat.

It is announced that Robert Clarke, of Cincinnati will have ready, in
February, an extensive work on sorghum, containing the results of the
latest experiments and experience of the most successful growers, as to
the best varieties and their culture, and also the details of the latest
and best machinery used in the economical manufacture of sirups and
sugars therefrom. The work is by Prof. Peter Collier, whose name is a
guarantee of the value of the book. It will be very fully illustrated.

A Michigan man writes the Michigan Farmer: I have noticed tarred twine
and willows recommended for binding corn stalks. I think I can propose a
better substitute than either for those who are using a twine binder:
save the strings from straw stacks this winter. They are less trouble
than grass and never slip. Tie a knot in the end of the twine with your
knee on the bundle, then slip the other end through in the form of a
bow, take off your knee and the spring of the bundle will draw the knot
tight. Pull the bow and use again.

"Human labor," says Dr. Zellner, of Ashville, Ala., "is the most costly
factor that enters into the production of cotton, and every consistent
means should be adopted to dispense with it." And then the doctor, who
has the reputation of having raised some of the finest samples ever
grown in the South, describes how, by planting at proper distances, in
checks five by three apart, one-half of the after labor of cultivating
may be saved. About the same amount of plow work is said to be
necessary, but not more than one-fourth as much work with the hoe as is
required by cotton in drills.

Prof. J.W. Sanborn: "Deep tillage in times of drought of surface-rooted
crops, like corn, is an erroneous practice, founded on erroneous views.
'Plowing out corn' not only involves too deep tillage in drought but
adds to the mischief by severing the roots of corn, needed at such
times. Our double-shovel plows work too deeply. Our true policy, in
drought, for corn is frequent and shallow tillage. For this we now have
after the corn gets beyond the smoothing harrow, no suitable implement
on our markets, with a possible exception."

Correspondent New York Tribune: Of the use of oatmeal for cows mention
is not often made in this country; but when spoken of it is always with
praise. That it is better than corn meal there can be no doubt; it is
richer in both albuminoids and fat; and the usefulness of these two
nutriments, and especially the former, for making milk is shown not
only by the results of numerous careful experiments, but by the
acknowledged usefulness of oil-cake meal. Where this meal is used freely
there would be less use for oatmeal; but under some circumstances it
might be advantageously substituted for the bran in the favorite mixture
for cows of Indian meal and bran.

The following paragraph appears in an English cotemporary: The
introduction of a new industry connected with farming into Ireland will
be hailed by everybody, and therefore we rejoice to learn that a company
has been formed with the design of purchasing or renting nearly a
million and a quarter acres of land in Ireland, and devoting them to
beet culture, from which the sugar will be extracted in a manufactory
erected on the land. The promoters of the new company expect that from
the 120,000 acres which they propose cultivating they will produce
400,000 tons of sugar in the year. Immense quantities of sugar extracted
from the beet-root are manufactured on the continent and imported into
these countries, and there is no reason whatever why Ireland should not
have her finger in the sugar pie.

In a paper before the Oxford (Ohio) Farmers' Club, on the subject "The
Morality of the System of Grain Gambling," Mr. Wetmore said: There is a
difference between speculation and investment. Putting money into an
established industry is an investment. Putting it into a doubtful or
untried business, with the hope of gaining much or risk of losing all,
is speculation. The latter is infatuating as it increases the risk and
yet turns to profit. Investments pay no high per cents. Speculations may
pay much or lose all. Hence it is unsafe; and the farmer who makes his
gains only by a yearly turn of his crops, should not try speculation,
but may judiciously invest his surplus year by year in things of real
value, as land or chattels. Invest the last dollar, but speculate only
with loose change. No man can safely invest in a business with which he
is not familiar.

A lawful wire fence in Georgia is described by legislative enactment as
composed of not less than six horizontal strands of barbed wire tightly
stretched from post to post. The first wire no more than four and a half
nor less than three and a half inches from the ground; the second wire
not more than nine and a half nor less than eight and a half inches from
the ground; the third wire not more than fifteen and a half nor less
than fourteen and a half inches from the ground; the fourth wire not
more than twenty-two and a half nor less than twenty-one and a half
inches from the ground; the fifth wire not more than thirty-two nor less
than thirty-one inches from the ground; the sixth wire not over
fifty-five nor less than fifty-three inches from the ground. Posts to be
not over ten feet apart, and every alternate post to be securely set in
the ground. Provided, a plank not less than ten inches wide shall be
used instead of two strands of wire at bottom of fence, it is also
required that a railing shall be placed at equal distance between the
two top wires, which shall answer the same purpose as a wire, and to
extend from post to post in like manner.

Correspondent Country Gentleman: I notice that your journal recently
gave currency to the "saltpetre method" of extracting stumps, and W.H.
White also recommends it in your columns. His method is to bore a hole
in the stump in the fall of the year, fill in the hole with saltpetre,
plug up till the following summer, then fill the hole with kerosene and
fire the stump. It is alleged that the saltpetre and kerosene will so
saturate the stump that it will be entirely consumed, roots and all.
This recipe has been floating around the press for years. It is usually
credited to the Scientific American, but that paper has several times
denied its paternity. The uselessness of the process can easily be
learned by trial. There are few more inflammable substances than pitch
and turpentine. The roots of pine stumps are saturated with these, but
it is impossible to burn them out. The addition of saltpetre would not
help much. Yet there are seasons when the soil and air are so dry that
hard wood stumps may be burned out without either saltpetre or kerosene.
We had such a year in 1881, when corn and clover standing uncut in the
field were burned. In some instances the curbing was burned out of wells
during terrible forest fires that raged in Michigan. If tried in such a
season the recipe would undoubtedly be successful. In any ordinary
season it is "no good."

       *       *       *       *       *

No matter how wretched a man may be, he is still a member of our common
species, and if he possesses any of the common specie his acquaintance
is worth having.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

FARM MACHINERY, Etc.

GREAT SAVING FOR FARMERS.

THE
Lightning
Hay Knife!

(WEYMOUTH'S PATENT.)

[Illustration]

Awarded "FIRST ORDER OF Merit" at Melbourne Exhibition, 1880.

Was awarded the FIRST PREMIUM at the International Exhibition in
Philadelphia, 1876, and accepted by the Judges as SUPERIOR TO ANY OTHER
KNIFE IN USE.

It is the BEST KNIFE in the _world_ to cut _fine feed_ from bale, to
cut down _mow_ or _stack_, to cut _corn-stalks_ for feed, to cut _peat_,
or for ditching in marshes, and has no equal for cutting ensilage from
the silo. TRY IT.

IT WILL PAY YOU.

Manufactured only by
HIRAM HOLT & CO., East Wilton, Me., U.S.A.

_For sale by Hardware Merchants and the trade generally_

       *       *       *       *       *

SEDGWICK STEEL WIRE FENCE

[Illustration]

IT is the only general-purpose Wire Fence in use, being a STRONG NET
WORK WITHOUT BARBS. It will turn dogs, pigs, sheep and poultry, as well
as the most vicious stock, without injury to either fence or stock. It
is just the fence for farms, gardens stock ranges, and railroads, and
very neat for lawns, parks, school lots and cemeteries. Covered with
rustproof paint (or galvanized) it will last a life time. It is
SUPERIOR TO BOARDS or BARBED WIRE in every respect. We ask for it a
fair trial, knowing it will wear itself into favor. The SEDGWICK
GATES, made of wrought iron pipe and steel wire, DEFY ALL COMPETITION
in neatness, strength, and durability. We also make the best and
cheapest ALL IRON AUTOMATIC OR SELF-OPENING GATE, also CHEAPEST AND
NEATEST ALL IRON FENCE. BEST WIRE STRETCHER AND POST AUGER. For
prices and particulars ask hardware dealers, or address, mentioning
paper, SEDGWICK BROS. Manf'rs. Richmond. Ind.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

CHICAGO SCALE CO.

2 TON WAGON SCALE, $40. 3 TON, $50.
4 Ton $60, Beam Box Included.

240 lb. FARMER'S SCALE, $5.

The "Little Detective," 1/4 oz. to 25 lb. $3.

300 OTHER SIZES. Reduced PRICE LIST FREE.

FORGES, TOOLS, &c.

BEST FORGE MADE FOR LIGHT WORK, $10,

40 lb. Anvil and Kit of Tools. $10.

Farmers save time and money doing odd jobs.

Blowers, Anvils, Vices & Other Articles

AT LOWEST PRICES, WHOLESALE & RETAIL.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIVE-TON WAGON SCALES $60

[Illustration]

All Iron and Steel, Double Brass Tare Beam. Jones _he_ pays the freight.
All sizes equally low, for free book, address

JONES OF BINGHAMTON,
Binghamton, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE PROFIT FARM BOILER

is simple, perfect, and cheap; the BEST FEED COOKER; the only dumping
boiler; empties its kettle in a minute. OVER 5,000 IN USE; Cook your
corn and potatoes, and save one-half the cost of pork. Send for circular.
D.R. SPERRY & CO., Batavia, Illinois.

       *       *       *       *       *

FARM IMPLEMENTS, Etc.


THE CHICAGO DOUBLE HAY AND STRAW PRESS

[Illustration]

Guaranteed to load more Hay or Straw in a box car than any other, and
bale at a less cost per ton. Send for circular and price list.
Manufactured by the Chicago Hay Press Co., Nos. 3354 to 3358 State St.,
Chicago. Take cable car to factory. Mention this paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sawing Made Easy

Monarch Lightning Sawing Machine!

Sent on 30 Days test Trial.

A Great Saving of Labor & Money.

[Illustration]

A boy 16 years old can saw logs FAST and EASY. MILES MURRAY, Portage,
Mich. writes, "Am much pleased with the MONARCH LIGHTNING SAWING
MACHINE. I sawed off a 30-inch log in 2 minutes." For sawing logs into
suitable lengths for family stove-wood, and all sorts of log-cutting, it
is peerless and unrivaled. Illustrated Catalogue, FREE. AGENTS WANTED.
Mention this paper. Address MONARCH MANUFACTURING CO., 163 N. Randolph
St., Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

BEST MARKET PEAR.

[Illustration: KIEFFER]

99,999 PEACH TREES All _best varieties_ of new and old Strawberries,
Currants, Grapes, Raspberries, etc.

EARLY CLUSTER

New Blackberry, early, hardy, good. Single hill yielded 13 quarts at
one picking. Send for FREE Catalogue.

J.S. COLLINS, Moorestown, N.J.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAMPION BALING PRESSES.

[Illustration]

A Ton per Hour. Run by two men and one team. Loads 10 to 15 tons in car.

Send for descriptive circular with prices, to GEHRT & CO., 216, 218
and 220 Maine St., Quincy, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE BEST IS THE CHEAPEST."

ENGINES
SAW MILLS, THRESHERS,
HORSE POWERS,

(For all sections and purposes.) Write for FREE Pamphlet and Prices to
The Aultman & Taylor Co., Mansfield, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOW READY FOR DISTRIBUTION.

VOLUMES ONE AND TWO
OF THE
NATIONAL REGISTER NORMAN HORSES

The most reliable, concise, and exhaustive history of the horse in
general, and by far the most complete and authentic one of the Norman
horse in particular, ever published in the United States.

PRICES:

Volume I.........................................$ 2.00

Volume II........................................  1.50

When the two volumes are sent in one package to one address, $3.00.
Sent, postpaid, on receipt of price.

Address your orders to

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MODERN HORSE DOCTOR.

CONTAINING Practical Observations on the Causes Nature and Treatment of
Diseases and Lameness in Horses, by GEO. H. DADD, M.D. Will be
sent upon receipt of price, $1.50; or free to any sender of three
subscribers to this paper, at $2 each, by

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.


DIAMONDS FREE!

We desire to make the circulation of our paper 250,000 during the next
six months. To accomplish which we will give absolutely free a genuine
FIRST WATER Diamond Ring, and the Home Companion for one year, for
only $2.00. Our reasons for making this unprecedented offer are as
follows;

A newspaper with 200,000 subscribers can get 1c. per line per 1,000 of
circulation for its advertising space, or $5,000 per issue MORE than
it costs to produce and mail the paper. With but 10,000 or 20,000
subscribers, its advertising revenues do not pay expenses. Only the
papers with mammoth circulations make fortunes for their owners,
DERIVED FROM ADVERTISING SPACE. For these and other reasons, we regard
100,000 subscribers as being of more financial benefit to a paper than
the paper is to the subscribers. With 100,000 or 200,000 bona-fide
subscribers, we make $100,000 to $200,000 a year clear profit from
advertising, above cost of publishing. Without a large circulation, we
would lose money. Therefore, to secure a very large circulation, and
thus receive high rates and large profits from advertising space, this
ONLY EQUITABLE plan of conducting business is adopted.

THE FIRST QUESTION TO BE ANSWERED IS,--is the diamond pure--a genuine
stone?

OUR ANSWER IS YES.

The stone is GUARANTEED to be no Alaska Diamond, Rhine Pebble, or other
imitation, but a

WARRANTED GENUINE AND PURE DIAMOND.

If it is not found so by the most careful and searching tests, we will
refund the money, enter the subscriber's name on our list, and have the
paper mailed to him free during its existence. To the publisher of this
paper has been sent a guarantee from the manufacturing Jeweler, from
whom we obtain these rings, that they are just as represented, so that
readers may rely upon the promises being fulfilled to the letter.


The second question is, IS THE PAPER A DESIRABLE FAMILY JOURNAL? YES.
It contains contributions from the first writers of the times: fiction,
choice facts, intellectual food of the most interesting, instructive and
refined character. It is one of the

LEADING PAPERS OF THE PROGRESSIVE WEST.

We are determined to make it the most desirable and reliable paper in
the United States; will spare no effort or money to achieve that object.
Sample Copies sent free on application. Remit by draft, express, or new
postal note, to

THE HOME COMPANION.
N.W. Cor. Fourth and Race Streets, Cincinnati, O.

Don't fail to name the paper in which you see this advertisement.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _from this date to
January 1, 1884; $2.00 pays for it from this date to January 1, 1885.
For $2.00 you get it for one year and a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER
COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED STATES, FREE! _This is the most liberal offer
ever made by any first-class weekly agricultural paper in this country._

       *       *       *       *       *




LIVE STOCK DEPARTMENT.

[Illustration]

Stockmen. Write for Your Paper.


MR. GRINNELL'S LETTER.


Last week we briefly noted the fact that Hon. J.B. Grinnell, of Iowa,
Secretary of the Committee of the National Cattle-Growers' Convention,
appointed to secure legislation for the protection of live stock from
contagious diseases, had issued a circular letter to the public. In this
letter he discusses with his usual intelligence and ability the
important question in hand. As it will form the basis of Congressional
discussion and prove an important factor in shaping legislation, we give
the letter space in our columns. Mr. Grinnell says:

    To find a legitimate market for our surplus products is a
    question of grave concern. After meeting home demands the
    magnitude of foreign consumption determines in a large degree
    the net profits of production. It thus becomes the especial
    concern of the American agriculturist and statesman to find
    the best market for meat products. The profits in
    grain-raising for exportation, which impoverishes the soil,
    are exceptional, while our animal industries enrich it,
    augmenting the rural population in the line of true economy,
    the promotion of good morals, and the independence and
    elevation of the citizen. Under the laws of domestic animal
    life gross farm products and rich, indigenous grasses are
    condensed into values adapted to transportation across oceans
    and to various climes with little waste or deterioration;
    thus the brute a servant, becomes an auxiliary to the cunning
    hand of his master, blending the factors which determine our
    facilities for acquisition in rural life, and attractions
    which stimulate enterprise, adventure, individual
    independence, and contribute to National wealth.

    THE MEAT PRODUCTS.

    No nation has so large a relative portion of its wealth in
    domestic animals, and none can show such strides in material
    advancement during the present century. But what is our
    foreign trade? The exports of provisions from the United
    States during the last fiscal year were in value about
    $107,000,000. Those in 1882 amounted to $120,000,000, equal
    to a falling off in a single year of $13,000,000. Our exports
    of manufactured articles for the last year aggregate
    $211,000,000, against $103,000,000, a gain of $108,000,000 in
    a single year. It was a reasonable expectation that our
    animal exports would have increased in like ratio as the
    manufactures, which would have enhanced the value of all
    domestic animals and furnished, instead of a mortifying fact,
    a proud exhibit.

    The causes of a decline are not found in high prices at home
    nor in inferior product; rather in suspicions of diseases,
    and the clamor of interested parties which led to arbitrary
    restrictions, oppressive quarantine regulations, and
    forbidding beeves which were ripened for the highest markets
    to pass beyond the shambles; and the egress of young immature
    cattle on the English pastures. Pork products up to the
    Chicago meeting were prohibited by France, and they are
    inhibited now from Germany, our long-time valuable customer.
    It was their whims, caprices, jealousies, commercial
    restrictions and bans which decreased our exports and led the
    Commissioner of Agriculture to call the Chicago meeting of
    November.

    The convention developed facts and was fruitful in results:
    That there were solitary cases of pleuro-pneumonia, and
    limited to the eastern border States; that Western herdsmen
    had just cause of alarm on account of the shipment of young
    stock West from the narrow pastures and dairy districts of
    the East. It was shown that across the ocean there was a
    morbid appetite for suspicions and facts which would justify
    severe restrictions and an absolute inhibition of our
    products.

    The Cattle Commission formed by the Treasury Department gave
    decided opinions and imparted valuable information, but they
    were constrained to admit that they were powerless in an
    emergency to stop the spread of contagious diseases, and that
    it was a vain hope that there would be an increased foreign
    demand for our cattle and meat without radical Congressional
    enactment.

    Skilled veterinarians, fancy breeders, political economists,
    and savants from the East met the alarmed ranchmen,
    enterprising breeders, and delegations and officials from
    many agricultural and State associations, representing
    millions of cattle and hundreds of millions of dollars,
    resolved that a meeting should be held at Washington, and a
    committee was appointed to secure appropriate legislation.

    In the discharge of duties assigned to the Secretary I at
    once repaired to Washington for consultation and to gather
    pertinent facts. The heads of the State Treasury and
    Agricultural Departments were awake to the necessity of early
    and radical legislation. President Arthur evinced great
    cordiality, and gave good proof of his interest by calling
    attention in the annual message to the approaching meeting in
    Washington, which I have called the 10th of January.

    FACTS.

    I have sent out in a circular to the committee the following
    "head-land" facts of startling import, which should be well
    considered:

    1. That there is an investment of $1,008,000,000 in cattle as
    estimated by the Department of Agriculture, representing
    41,171,000 animals. That of swine is $291,000,000,
    representing over 43,000,000 animals.

    2. That losses annually on exportation of cattle and beef,
    consequent upon restrictive regulations and the decreased
    relative consumption of our beef, aggregates many millions of
    dollars. We reach an approximate estimate by these facts
    relative to our foreign trade as follows:

    The exports of 1880-81 were 368,463 animals. Those of 1882-83
    were 212,554--a loss of 155,009 animals, and in value a loss
    of $11,506,000 in two years.

    The exports of fresh beef for two years were less by
    40,071,167 pounds, and by a value of $2,191,190. The value of
    pork products decreased in the same time to the extent of
    $35,679,093.

    This shows a falling off of about $25,000,000 per annum for
    two years, as compared with the receipts for the two
    preceding years.

    CONTAGION TO BE AVERTED.

    It should be known that the pleuro-pneumonia often mentioned
    as a scare or a myth by the thoughtless and optimist is a
    stern reality. Its journeys and track of destruction among
    cattle have been as marked as that of small pox and
    cholera--contagious diseases which have so tearfully
    decimated the human family. Lung diseases of the modern type
    were known before the Christian era, and were considered by
    Columella and other Latin writers. Australia resigned her
    great herds to flocks of sheep, as did South Africa, never
    yet recovered from the blow to her cattle industries.

    England has been tardy in the publication of her losses by
    lung-fever, yet it is a fact which forbids secrecy that
    calamity has reached the enterprising breeders, and colossal
    fortunes have been swept away by the cattle-plague. In our
    own country it has been no more the policy of secretive
    owners to publish facts than that of city authorities to
    proclaim the prevalence of small-pox in the town. Still,
    startling facts have sprung from original sources of inquiry.
    A town meeting is called in the State of Connecticut,
    terror-stricken owners in New Jersey, Maryland, and
    Pennsylvania meet for council. Massachusetts had a Governor
    twenty years ago bold in telling truth, which led to
    searching investigations by experts and officers of the
    State. With autocratic power they made a diagnosis of
    diseases, which led to the stamping out of the infection by
    law, and a truthful proclamation that the plague was stayed.

    The sacrifice of 1,000 brutes at a cost to the Commonwealth
    of about $70,000 was a trivial sum compared to the perils
    that beset a State valuation of $7,000,000, for bovines, and
    the cattle of the Nation, numbering 40,000,000, and worth
    nearly $1,100,000,000.

    The monarchies of the Old World have set us an example; even
    Denmark, Norway, and Sweden have pioneered for the world by
    sagacious acts and the stern enforcement of law in
    prevention.

    AN AMERICAN POLICY

    worthy of us is not secrecy, but boldness--sacrifice
    commensurate with exposure. This will lead to the formulation
    of a bill by the Washington Convention, which Congress will
    enact in the interest of individuals, the State, and for the
    National protection. If State-Rights theorists bring
    objections, the law may be so equitable to the States that
    its ratification may be asked on the ground of a just
    National policy and a right which inheres to the General
    Government under the Constitution in the regulation of
    commerce between the States. This implies a power to destroy
    a contagious disease which if allowed to spread would arrest
    all commerce in bovines between the States. A State may and
    ought to waive the question of damage if it is fixed by a
    neutral Commissioner, and the General Government and not the
    State meets the losses to which unfortunate cattle owners
    maybe subject. This will be the touchstone--trust by the
    State and statesmanlike generosity by the Nation--that means
    courage for the now fearful ranchman of the unfenced domain,
    and the furnishing of a "clean bill of health" for our
    products seeking a foreign market. Having evinced zeal in
    doing justice, it can ask for justice--that the rights of our
    meat-producers be respected under our

    COMMERCIAL TREATIES.

    Commerce means a mutual exchange, and having performed our
    home duty will be in no mood to tolerate a whim or a caprice.
    Non-intercourse has been proposed in Congress. That may be a
    final resort when a conference, practical discussion, and
    even arbitration have failed. A graver subject measured by
    dollars may yet engage the statesman diplomat than the Geneva
    arbitration, and we shall have no fair status in discussion
    or arbitration until our meat and cattle are made healthy by
    prevention and the best sanitary laws known to civilized
    countries.

    THE TIME IS AUSPICIOUS.

    Cattle-raising as an attractive and profitable vocation is
    now exciting a deep interest. A lull in politics forbids the
    wants of our agriculturists, numbering 60 per cent of the
    population, being waived out of notice and their voiced
    demands drowned by partisan clamor. The treasury has hundreds
    of millions in its vaults and a fraction of 1 per cent of our
    surplus will only be required, under a just disbursement, to
    isolate and destroy the diseases which fetter our commerce
    and repress home enterprise.

    A full and able convention at Washington is assured by the
    responsive letters received. The State of Iowa will make her
    requests to Congress by fine-stock meeting and other
    associations, as becomes the State with $100,000,000 invested
    in domestic animals.

    Who can be indifferent in the face of our great perils, and
    recounting the losses by foreign restrictions and inhibition?
    We are emphatically a Nation of beef-eaters, and by the
    extent of our domain and healthful climate are justly
    entitled to the honored designation of the first producer
    among civilized nations.

    It is the question of healthful food for the masses, of
    profitable tonnage for the railways, and of deep concern in
    cultivating fraternal relations abroad, not less than a
    question for the political economist in maintaining a good
    trade balance-sheet. If we can impress our Congressional
    delegations with the necessity of early and decisive
    legislation, we shall have accomplished a noble work and have
    earned the warm commendation of millions of citizens whose
    interests have been neglected and whose vocation and property
    have been imperiled.

    For the committee by request of the Chicago Convention.

    J.B. GRINNELL.


       *       *       *       *       *

During the first eleven months of 1883, no less than 411,992 animals in
Great Britain were attacked by by foot-and-mouth disease. December
opened with a greater number of ailing animals than did November.

       *       *       *       *       *

An Iowa farmer is experimenting with steamed clover hay for feeding
hogs.




PRICES OF 1883.


The average price of Short-horns at the public sales in this country in
1883, as reported by the auctioneers, was $205.56. The Breeder's Gazette
figures up the number of cattle of the different breeds disposed of at
public sales as follows:

  Breeds.           | Number.    | Totals.     | Average.
Short-horns         | 3,284      | $ 675,057   | $205.56
Herefords           |   112      |    53,330   |  476.61
Aberdeen-Angus      |   300      |   154,885   |  516.28
Galloways           |   263      |   111,200   |  422.81
Angus and Galloways |    44      |    16,865   |  383.13
Holsteins           |   239      |    89,290   |  373.60
Jerseys             | 1,688      |   690,405   |  409.01
Guernseys           |    52      |    12,090   |  232.50
Red Polled          |    15      |     4,435   |  295.70
                    -------------------------------------
    Totals          | 5,997      |$1,807,557   | $301.41

Of the above Short-horns, 1,609 were sold in Illinois, 541 in Kentucky,
and 1,134 in other States. In Illinois the average price received was
$222.23; in Kentucky, $271.01, and in other States, $149.73. Of the beef
breeds there were sold $4,018, the total receipts were $1,015,772,
making the general average $253.80. Of the dairy breeds 1,979 were sold
at an average of $400.10.

It will be seen that the average for Short-horns is less than that for
either of the other breeds though, of course, the number sold is greatly
in excess of the others. In 1882 the average for Short-horns was but
$192.10, and in 1881 but $158, so that on the whole the breeders are
perfectly satisfied with the way the business is running.

The dairy breeds did remarkably well in 1883, the Holsteins coming up
well to the Jerseys, but the latter leads greatly in point of numbers.

The pure bred cattle business of the country as indicated by these sales
is exceedingly prosperous.

In Great Britain the Short-horn sales were less numerous than last year,
or, in fact, any year since 1869, but the average was better than since
1879. In 1880 the average for 1,738 head was $225, while in 1881 and
1882 the average further declined to $175. In 1883 the average was close
upon $230, but, upon the other hand, the number of animals sold fell to
1,400. The highest price paid was 1,505 guineas, for a four-year-old cow
of the fashionable Duchess blood, which was purchased by the earl of
Bective at the sale of Mr. Holford's herd in Dorsetshire. The
Australians purchased largely at the Duke of Devonshire's annual sale in
1878, and this year American and Canadian buyers bid briskly for animals
of the Oxford blood. These were the only two sales at which the average
reached three figures, the next best being that of a selection from Mr.
Green's herd in Essex, when forty-one lots averaged $360 each, or less
than half secured by the Duke of Devonshire's Short-horns.




DOCKING HORSES.


An English veterinary society has lately been discussing the question of
docking the tails of horses. The President looked upon docking as an act
of cruelty. By docking, the number of accidents from the horse holding
the rein under the tail was greatly increased, for the horse has less
power of free motion over the tail. If a short dock is put over the
rein, the animal has so little control of the tail that he can not
readily liberate the rein. The "stump" is sensitive, the same as the
remaining part of an amputated finger. In the majority of cases he
considered docking entirely unnecessary.

On the contrary, Doctor Axe (rather a suggestive name for an advocate of
docking) thought the practice improved the looks of a horse, thus
rendering it more salable. His sentimentality did not allow him to argue
this question of increased value. He did not think docking increased
accidents. Statistics, not assertions, were needed to establish facts of
this kind. As to the remark of the President, that the shortened tail
could not be so easily freed from the rein, he said it would depend on
who was driving; an expert would more quickly disengage the rein from a
docked tail. It may be true, he said, that there was more flexibility in
an uncut tail because its more flexible portion had not been removed;
but the docked tail had not the same power of covering and fixing down
the rein that the long tail possessed. The long retention of a certain
degree of sensibility after amputation was a known fact, but neither
this, nor the operation itself, involved much pain. He detailed the
structures divided, and said that they possessed a low degree of
sensation. He would be glad to see horses have the free use of all their
members, if practicable, and would leave them their tails if the removal
of them could not increase the animal's comfort, value, or power of
being safely used, but he would not do anything to lessen the value of
horses without good reason.

It seems that prosecutions for docking, under
the cruelty to[***]
common in England [***]
convictions are not [***]
in the discussion [***]
vigorous prosecutions are [***]

We notice that with [***]
and docking are on the increase [***]
of this country. Fortunately [***]
beasts, public sentiment in this [***]
against the barbarous act; still [***]
is it that fashion has not yet so [***]
the taste of the majority of people [***]
convince them that docking adds to [***]
beauty of the noble animal. But the rage is now to imitate the English
in nearly all manners and customs, and it may not be long before the
miserable fashion will gain new headway with us.

       *       *       *       *       *

Too much care can hardly be taken in packing pork so as to have it keep
through the season. The chief requisites are pure salt and freeing the
meat from every taint of blood. The pieces of pork should be packed as
closely as possible. After a few weeks if any scum rises on the surface
of the brine it should be cleaned out and the brine boiled so that all
impurities may be removed. If pork is to be kept all summer twice
boiling the brine may be necessary. For some reason a barrel that has
once held beef will never do for a pork barrel, though the rule may be
reversed with impunity.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the firm of Galbraith Brothers Janesville, Wis., is now in
Scotland to make selection for an early spring importation of
Clydesdales. While making mention of this we may say that Messrs.
Galbraith though disposing of twenty-one head of Clydesdales at the late
sale in Chicago, have yet on hand an ample supply of superior horses of
all ages from sucklings upward. They will be pleased to receive a visit
from intending purchasers of this class of stock, and from all
interested in the breed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first lot of Dr. W.A. Pratt's Holsteins, from quarantine, recently
arrived at Elgin. The Doctor informs us that the animals are in prime
condition and choice in every respect. He says he is preparing to open a
ranch near Manhattan, Kansas, for the breeding of high grade Holsteins
and Short-horns. He will also keep on this ranch a choice herd of
pure-bred Holsteins for supplying the growing Western demand for this
very popular dairy stock.




PUBLICATIONS.


_The Free Seed Distribution alone of the Rural New Yorker is worth at
catalogue prices more than $3.00. This journal and the Rural, including
its Seed Distribution, will be sent for $3.00. For free specimen copies,
apply to 34 Park Row, New York. The Rural New-Yorker is the Leading
National Journal of Agriculture and Horticulture._

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Rural New-Yorker has over 600 contributors, among them the most
distinguished writers of America and England. It is the complete Journal
for the country home and for many city homes as well. Free specimen
copies 34 Park Row, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE RURAL NEW-YORKER

The great national farm and garden journal of America, with its
Celebrated Free Seed Distribution, and

THE PRAIRIE FARMER

one year, post-paid, all for only $3.00. It is a rare chance. Specimen
copies cheerfully sent gratis. Compare them with other rural weeklies,
and then subscribe for the best. Apply to

34 PARK ROW, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DAIRY.

Dairymen, Write for Your Paper.


LESSONS IN FINANCE FOR THE CREAMERY PATRON.[A]


Any business to be permanent must make reasonable returns for the
capital employed and give fair compensation for the labor bestowed upon
it, otherwise it will be abandoned, or if continued at all it will be
done under the protest of economic law. In addition to the ordinary
circumstances attaching to business enterprise, the creamery business is
essentially and peculiarly co-operative. It thrives with the thrift of
all concerned--owner and patrons. It fails only with loss to all. The
conditions of success, therefore, to the patrons are included in the
conditions of success to the creamery, and vice versa.

The object of this paper is to suggest some of these conditions and some
of the instances of violation of them.

It is hardly necessary to discuss the case in which peculiarity of soil
or climate, the greater profitableness of some other kind of industry,
or other reason, would so restrict the size and number of dairy herds as
to make the locality a barren dairy region. Notwithstanding the splendid
achievements of the dairy industry it is safe to say that it may not be
profitable in any and every locality. Given the soil, the climate, the
water, the people intelligent and disposed toward the exacting duties of
this business, there are still many questions to be considered and many
mistakes to be avoided.

It has been a pet idea in this country that competition is the
corrective of all industrial evils. Competition without doubt holds an
important place among the industrial forces, but may be carried so far
as to defeat the very objects it is adapted to subserve, when
intelligently encouraged. Carried to the extent of employing two persons
or more to do the work of one, of absorbing capital without the full
employment of it, it becomes destructive and expensive. We find, for
instance, in many towns, a large number of commercial establishments
doing business at an immense profit on single transactions, but the
transactions are so few and so divided up among struggling competitors,
that neither secures a profitable, nor even a respectable, business.
With choice cuts of meat from twelve to eighteen cents a pound and
butcher's stock at three and four cents, we often see butcher shops
multiply, but the price of meat usually remains the same. Indeed, the
very increase of middle man establishments beyond the employment of
these to their full capacity, and the consequent full utilization of the
capital and labor employed, is a sure loss to somebody, and if it does
not all go to the producer it is almost always shared by him.

One of the greatest burdens which the creamery business has to carry
to-day is the excessive number of its creameries beyond legitimate
demands. The co-operative idea, so far as it enters into this business,
implies the most profitable use possible of the resources employed in it
both of patron and creamery owner, and a fair and equitable distribution
of the profits. Said a large creamery owner to me recently, "I find
the comparative value of my butter steadily decreasing from year to
year. I have the same territory, the same butter-makers, the same
patrons, substantially, but my butter is not up in quality and price as
it used to be. I ascribe it to the excessive competition prevailing in
it, i.e., it is one of its results. I have lost my influence over
patrons in securing the best quality of cream. If I make any criticism
of their modes or practices they say to me, 'Mr. ----, if you do not
want my cream I will let the other creamery have it. Do just as you like
about it; take it or leave it.'" But the loss of one or two cents a
pound on the net proceeds of a season means five or ten per cent of its
value, or of the entire season's results enough difference to make any
community in a few years rich or poor, thrifty or unthrifty, according
to the circumstances in the case.

Further: the idea of co-operation implies the doing of equal and exact
justice to all included within the co-operative limits. This, an
excessive and unprincipled competition greatly interferes with. It can
properly be demanded by every fair and honest patron of a creamery that
every other patron should be as fair and honest as himself. Indeed, this
is an essential part of the implied contract. But in the case of
excessive competition no restraints can be imposed and no penalties can
be made to follow attempts to violate the principles of equity, except
the possible inconvenience of changing from one creamery to another. The
straight and honorable patron is powerless; the owner of the creamery is
powerless; and the co-operative element is rendered a nullity.

Further: the co-operative element, in the relations of creamery and
patrons, requires that the price of milk or cream shall vary with the
market price of the finished product. Contracts for the future are mere
speculation, as a rule. If the transaction is large and the turn of the
market unfavorable to the creamery, ruin is liable to come to the
business, and loss and disaster follow to all concerned. If the turn of
the market should be the other way, among the numerous patrons there is
sure to be more or less dissatisfaction and a more or less breaking up
of the condition of friendly reciprocity which should exist between
creamery and patron. Patrons may damage their own interest by exacting
too much from the creamery as well as by accepting too little, and a
greedy grasping after an unreasonable share of the profit on the part of
the creamery owner is sure to bring retaliation, disturb cordiality of
feeling, and bring loss to all concerned.

The remedy for most of these evils can only come from intelligent and
wise action on the part of the creamery patrons of a given locality.
They should study to prevent an unseemly and expensive competition.
They, as the encouraging source, will surely in the end pay the expense
of it. It has been said that no people in the world enjoy paying taxes
like Americans, provided they are only indirect, sugar coated, and with
some plausible pretense. It would seem, however, that even American
dairymen could see that the maintenance of superfluous creameries,
superfluous teams for hauling cream and milk, superfluous men for
manufacturing and handling the product is an extra expense of which they
will surely bear their full share; if not at once, they will do so
before the outcome is reached.

Another thing the patrons of creameries may properly take note of is
that the expense of manufacturing butter in all well regulated
creameries is nearly the same, and the value of the product does not
widely differ. When a creamery therefore claims large and peculiar
advantages, and offers a price for milk or cream markedly above the
ordinary price paid for it by other creameries, you may be sure there is
something illegitimate about it. It may be done to drum up business, to
beat a rival, or it may be a downright swindle, it surely will not be
lasting, and the operator intends at some time to recoup for himself.

It is to be remembered that the dairy business is not one which can be
taken up and laid down hastily without greater or less inconvenience,
expense, and loss. Like most other branches of agriculture, it must be
engaged in with the purpose of a steady, long, strong pull in order to
be a success. It has the advantage of springing directly from the earth
without fictitious help, props, or governmental protection, so-called.
It taxes no other industry for its own benefit, and has expanded to its
present magnificent proportions in spite of the burdens laid upon it
from outside sources.

But it is written "And Satan came also." Nothing could more aptly
describe the full influence of adulteration which has come upon this
industry. It has come clothed in deceit and fraud, the very habiliments
of the devil. It can be exterminated no more than sin itself. It must be
fought by exposing its nature; by stamping upon it its own features.
Wise legislation, I believe, will be in the direction of Government
inspection and the sure and prompt punishment of fraud. The interest of
the creamery patron is more deeply involved in this matter than that of
any other class, just as in other branches of production the perils and
losses by fraud, deterioration, and adulteration ultimately fall back
upon the producer of the raw product. The apathy now existing among the
producers of milk and cream is ominous of evil, and discouraging to
those who are working in the interest of unadulterated goods. We have no
doubt that the time will come when not only the adulteration of butter,
but the adulteration of other food products as well, will only be
carried on under the stamp and inspection of Government supervision.

The thoughts I have presented are intended to be suggestive rather than
dogmatic, and I leave the subject with the hope that the intelligence of
the average dairyman may be as active in tracing and comprehending the
subtler principles of trade and commerce relating to the products of his
labor as he is in comprehending the more immediate facts of his calling,
such as breeding, seeding, and the handling of the raw products of his
herd.

[A] Paper read before the Illinois Dairymen's Convention by C.C. Buell,
of Rock Falls.




VETERINARY.


FEVER.


Many kinds of horse fevers have been described by antiquated veterinary
writers; but most exist only in the imagination of the writers, or have
been manufactured out of the mistaken analysis of human fevers. All the
real fevers of the horse may be comprised in two,--the idiopathic, pure
or simple fever, constituting of itself an entire disease, and the
symptomatic fever, occasioned by inflammatory action in some particular
part of the body, and constituting rather the attendant of a disease
than the disease itself.

Though idiopathic fever is comparatively infrequent in occurrence, it
unquestionably meets the attention of most persons who have extensive
stable management of horses, and its general tendency to degenerate into
local inflammation and symptomatic fever, seems to arise far less from
its own nature than from foul air, vicissitudes of temperature, and
general bad management. If idiopathic fever is not easily reduced, the
blood accumulates in the lungs, the viscera, or some other internal part
of the body, and provokes inflammation; or, if a horse, while suffering
under this fever, be kept in a foul or ill-ventilated stable, or be
exposed to alternations of heat and cold, he speedily becomes locally
inflamed from the action of the filth or exposure. The symptoms of
idiopathic fever are shivering, loss of appetite, dejected appearance,
quick pulse, hot mouth, and some degree of debility; generally, also,
costiveness and scantiness of urine; sometimes, likewise, quickness of
breathing, and such pains of the bowels as accompany colic. Idiopathic
fever, if it does not pass into inflammation, never kills, but is
generally always curable.

Cattle are subject to both idiopathic and symptomatic fever, very nearly
in the same manner as the horse, and require, when suffering them, to be
very similarly treated. The idiopathic fever of cattle has, in many
instances, an intermitting character, which may easily be subdued by
means of ordinary care; and, in other instances, has a steady and
unintermitting character, and is exceedingly liable to resolve itself
into pleurisy, enteritis, or some other inflammatory disease. The
symptomatic fever of cattle is strictly parallel to the symptomatic
fever of horses, and is determined by the particular seat and nature of
the exciting inflammation. But besides these fevers, cattle are subject
to two very destructive and quite distinct kinds of fever, both of an
epizootic nature, the one of a virulent and the other of a chronic
character,--the former inflammatory and the latter typhoid. Numerous
modifications of these fevers, or particular phases of them, are more or
less extensively known among our readers as black-leg, bloody murrain,
etc. The fever which in many instances follows parturition, particularly
in the cow, is familiarly known as calving fever, or milk fever; and the
ordinary fevers of sheep, swine, dogs, upon the whole, follow the same
general law as the ordinary fevers of the horse, and are classifiable
into idiopathic and symptomatic.


       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.


[Illustration]

YOUR NAME printed on 50 Cards ALL NEW designs of _Gold Floral.
Remembrances, Sentiment, Hand Floral_, etc., with _Love, Friendship_,
and _Holiday Mottoes_, 10c. 7 pks. and this elegant Ring, 50c., 15 pks.
& Ring, $1.

[Illustration]

12 NEW "CONCEALED NAME" Cards (name concealed with hand holding flowers
with mottoes) 20c. 7 pks. and this Ring for $1. Agents' sample book and
full outfit, 25c. Over 200 new Cards added this season. Blank Cards at
wholesale prices.

NORTHFORD CARD CO. Northford, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Print Your Own Cards

Labels, Envelopes, etc. with our $3 PRINTING PRESS. Larger sizes for
circulars, etc., $8 to $75. For pleasure, money making, young or old.
Everything easy, printed instructions. Send 2 stamps for Catalogue of
Presses, Type, Cards, etc., to the factory.

KELSEY & CO., MERIDEN, CONN.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

We will send you a watch or a chain BY MAIL OR EXPRESS, C.O.D., to be
examined before paying any money and if not satisfactory, returned at
our expense. We manufacture all our watches and save you 30 per cent.
Catalogue of 250 styles free. EVERY WATCH WARRANTED. ADDRESS
STANDARD AMERICAN WATCH CO., PITTSBURGH. PA.

       *       *       *       *       *

AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE to sell the best FAMILY KNITTING MACHINE ever
invented. Will knit a pair of stockings with HEEL and TOE COMPLETE,
in 20 minutes. It will also knit a great variety of fancy-work for which
there is always a ready market. Send for circular and terms to the
TWOMBLY KNITTING MACHINE CO., 163 Tremont Street, Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

500 VIRGINIA FARMS & MILLS

FOR SALE AND EXCHANGE. Write for free REAL ESTATE JOURNAL.

R.B. CHAFFIN & CO., Richmond, Virginia.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BIGGEST THING OUT.

ILLUSTRATED BOOK SENT FREE.

(NEW) E. NASON, & CO., 120 Fulton St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




A MYSTERY OF THE SEA.

THE FATE WHICH OVERTOOK THE "CITY OF BOSTON."--CAPTAIN MURRAY'S IDEAS
AND EXPERIENCES.


A few years ago, the City of Boston sailed from harbor, crowded with an
expectant throng of passengers bound for a foreign shore.

She never entered port.

The mystery of her untimely end grows deeper as the years increase, and
the Atlantic voyager, when the fierce winds howl around and danger is
imminent on every hand, shudders as the name and mysterious fate of that
magnificent vessel are alluded to.

Our reporter, on a recent visit to New York, took lunch with Captain
George Siddons Murray, on board the Alaska, of the Guion line. Captain
Murray is a man of stalwart built, well-knit frame and cheery, genial
disposition. He has been a constant voyager for a quarter of a century,
over half of that time having been in the trans-Atlantic service. In the
course of the conversation over the well-spread table, the mystery of
the City of Boston was alluded to.

"Yes," remarked the Captain, "I shall never forget the last night we saw
that ill-fated vessel. I was chief officer of the City of Antwerp. On
the day we sighted the City of Boston a furious southeast hurricane set
in. Both vessels labored hard. The sea seemed determined to sweep away
every vestige of life. When day ended the gale did not abate, and
everything was lashed for a night of unusual fury. Our good ship was
turned to the south to avoid the possibility of icebergs. The City of
Boston, however, undoubtedly went to the north. Her boats,
life-preservers and rafts were all securely lashed; and when she went
down, everything went with her, never to re-appear until the sea gives
up its dead."

"What, in your opinion, Captain, was the cause of the loss of the City
of Boston?"

"The City of Limerick, in almost precisely the same latitude, a few days
later, found the sea full of floating ice; and I have no doubt the City
of Boston collided with the ice, and sunk immediately."

Captain Murray has been in command of the Alaska ever since she was put
in commission and feels justly proud of his noble ship. She carries
thousands of passengers every year, and has greatly popularized the
Williams & Guion line. Remarking upon the bronzed and healthy appearance
of the Captain, the reporter said that sea life did not seem to be a
very great physical trial.

"No? But a person's appearance is not always a trustworthy indication of
his physical condition. For seven years I have been in many respects
very much out of sorts with myself. At certain times I was so lame that
it was difficult for me to move around. I could scarcely straighten up.
I did not know what the trouble was, and though I performed all my
duties regularly and satisfactorily, yet I felt that I might some day be
overtaken with some serious prostrating disorder. These troubles
increased. I felt dull and then, again, shooting pains through my arms
and limbs. Possibly the next day I would feel flushed and unaccountably
uneasy and the day following chilly and despondent. This continued until
last December, when I was prostrated soon after leaving Queenstown, and
for the remainder of the voyage was a helpless, pitiful sufferer. In
January last, a friend who made that voyage with me, wrote me a letter
urging me to try a new course of treatment. I gladly accepted his
counsel, and for the last seven months have given thorough and
business-like attention to the recovery of my natural health; and to-day
I have the proud satisfaction of saying to you that the lame back, the
strange feeling, the sciatic rheumatism which have so long pursued me,
have entirely disappeared through the blood purifying influence of
Warner's Safe Rheumatic Cure which entirely eradicated all rheumatic
poison from my system. Indeed, to me, it seems that it has worked
wonders, and I therefore most cordially commend it."

"And you have no trouble now in exposing yourself to the winds of the
Atlantic?"

"Not the least. I am as sound as a bullet and I feel specially thankful
over the fact because I believe rheumatic and kidney disease is in the
blood of my family. I was dreadfully shocked on my last arrival in
Liverpool to learn that my brother, who is a wealthy China tea merchant,
had suddenly died of Bright's disease of the kidneys, and consider
myself extremely fortunate in having taken my trouble in time and before
any more serious effects were possible."

The conversation drifted to other topics, and as the writer watched the
face before him, so strong in all its outlines, and yet so genial, and
thought of the innumerable exposures and hardships to which its owner
had been exposed, he instinctively wished all Rheumatic Cure which
entirely eradicated who are suffering from the terrible rheumatic
troubles now so common might know of Captain Murray's experience and the
means by which he had been restored. Pain is a common thing in this
world, but far too many endure it when they might just as well avoid it.
It is a false philosophy which teaches us to endure when we can just as
readily avoid. So thought the hearty captain of the Alaska, so thinks
the writer, and so should all others think who desire happiness and a
long life.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.


  Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB. CO.,
  150 Monroe Street, Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _from this
date to January 1, 1885; For $2.00 you get it for one year and a copy
of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED STATES, FREE!
_This is the most liberal offer ever made by any first-class weekly
agricultural paper in this country._

       *       *       *       *       *




HORTICULTURAL

Horticulturists, Write for Your Paper.


ILLINOIS HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY.

The ad-interim committee of the Illinois State Horticultural Society for
the northern part of the State reported through Mr. O.W. Barnard and
Arthur Bryant, Jr. Mr. Barnard had found the orchards thrifty and
healthy. The yield of apples had not been large this season, but
orchardists generally felt encouraged in regard to the future of their
orchards. He had found the high clay soils preferable for the apple. Mr.
Bryant reported the apple crop small. Some orchards had borne good
crops, especially of the Ben Davis. In others, this variety had failed.


ORCHARD CULTURE.

Mr. W.T. Nelson, of the committee on orchard culture, recommended the
planting of orchards on high, sloping ground. In the rather low and
level country in which he lived (Will county) orchard trees lasted but
fifteen or twenty years. But few varieties seem to do well in any
locality. He would advise men about to set out orchards to ascertain
what varieties do well in their particular locality, and then plant no
others. He would not prune young orchards. He recommended the tiling of
orchards.


HIGH OR LOW, LAND.

Mr. Nelson's report opened up the subject of high or low lands for
orchards. Mr. Robinson got more apples from trees on low lands than from
elevated sites. Prof. Budd did not commit himself to either theory, but
remarked that some varieties do best on low lands, while others
preferred the higher situations. Parker Earle thought that this theory
of low lands for our apple orchards was contrary to the past teachings
of the society. In his opinion high grounds are preferable. The subject
was a complicated one for Prof. Burrill. He had seen many low ground
orchards that bore good crops this year. There are many modifications
that effect the crop. It is not merely the elevation of orchard sites.
It was his belief that high ground, all things considered, is the best.
Mr. Robinson was not enthusiastic about the tile drainage of orchards.
Our trees need more water than they usually get. They do not suffer from
too much water, but from dry summers and rolling land. Mr. Spalding, of
Sangamon county, had found his nursery trees poorest when planted on a
depressed surface. He tiled extensively. His subsoil was a clay loam.
Nine years ago he laid tile 3-1/2 feet deep and 30 feet apart. He did
not believe in manuring young trees. Too rapid growth is not wanted.
Trees in Illinois grow as much in one year as they do in two years in
the State of New York, where they raise more fruit than we do. The most
rapid growing trees are the tenderest. He does not force the growth of
his orchard trees. He is satisfied nurserymen have manured their young
stock too much. The question of high or low land was not settled. It was
hard for members to give up the old theory that high lands are best for
orchards in Illinois; but it may be set down as a fact that the matter,
as first brought to public discussion through THE PRAIRIE
FARMER by B.F. Johnson, Esq., of Champaign, is having wide
discussion among our fruit men. It will result in close future
observation and closer scrutiny of past results. Without doubt this is
the leading new horticultural question of the day. It requires a careful
collection of facts and a broad generalization. The theories and
teachings of the past are nothing if facts are opposed to them.


FRUIT GROWERS AND FRUIT SELLERS.

Mr. Ragan, of Indiana, read a suggestive paper upon the relation of the
fruit-grower to the commission man and the transportation companies. The
paper led to considerable discussion. Mr. Earle always sells his fruit
through a commission house. Without the commission men market-fruit
growers could not do business. He found no difficulty in getting
honorable men to do business with. When he got a good man he stuck to
him. The commission man is just as important a factor in the fruit
business as the grower or consumer. He believes in a liberal percentage
for commissions. Dealers can not do an honest business for nothing. He
is willing to pay ten per cent to the man who sells his fruit to the
best possible advantage, and who makes prompt and honest returns. The
cheap commission man is to be avoided. The proper handling of fruit by
intelligent dealers at fair rates is what we want. He ships small fruits
in full quart boxes. Uses new boxes every time. Wants no returned
crates. To get best returns we must have neat packages. Stained drawers,
baskets, old barrels, and the like do not help to sell fruit. He would
advise shipping black and red raspberries in pint boxes; blackberries
and strawberries in quart boxes. He picks his berry plantations every
day during the ripening season. Sundays not excepted. No man who is not
prepared to work seven days in the week during the picking season, or
who can not get help to do the same, will succeed in the raising and
marketing of small fruits. He has this year paid two cents per quart for
picking blackberries and strawberries, and the same for pints of
raspberries. It requires from five to ten pickers to the acre. He likes
women or grown-up girls to do this work. As to varieties he likes
Longfellow and Sharpless. They ripen slowly and everyday picking is not
so necessary. Mr. Pearson said the apple growers in his locality find
that judgment must be used in marketing apples. The Lord made little
apples and we must do the best we can with them. A neighbor had small
apples and the shippers grumbled at them. The neighbor would not stand
this and shipped his apples to Chicago and had them sold on their
merits. The result was satisfactory. An Iowa buyer came down there and
offered 50 cents per bushel for apples without regard to size, etc., and
he got them and shipped them in boxes to Muscatine where they were made
into jelly, dried fruit, etc. We can have no cast iron rules in regard
to marketing, but must be governed by circumstances. This year it was
better for his people to sell as they come, without the trouble of hand
picking, sorting, and careful packing. We must act like intelligent men
in this business as in all others. Circumstances alter cases. Good
common sense is a prime requisite. Mr. Miller agreed with Mr. Earle
about packages for marketing fruit. He uses white wood boxes from
Michigan.


MULCHING AND MANURING.

Mr. Earle was questioned about the use of castor bean pomace for
strawberries. He uses it mixed with wood ashes. It is capital on poor
land. He likes unleached ashes in both strawberry and orchard culture.
He pays six cents per bushel for them. The castor bean pomace is good
for anything in the poor soils of Southern Illinois. He uses about half
a ton to the acre. Spreads with a Kemp spreader. Five hundred pounds per
acre will show excellent results. Has tried a tablespoonful of the
mixture to the strawberry plant when setting out. Has tried salt to kill
grubs in asparagus beds, but found it to kill the weeds and most of the
asparagus, while the grubs seemed to enjoy the application. Did not find
it of much value as a manure. Bone dust had shown no particular results.
Superphosphates acted much like the bean pomace. Does not think coal
ashes of much value. He uses the pomace as early in the spring as
possible. Sometimes he plows it under and sometimes applies after the
plants are set, and cultivates it in. One application answers for two
years' cropping. He fruits a strawberry plantation but two years, and he
sometimes thinks one year sufficient. He does not agree with some of his
neighbors that mulching has resulted unfavorably. Does not think the
mulch has increased the noxious insects. Knows of a plantation not
mulched at all, that suffered more than any other this year from the
tarnished plant bug.


CENTRAL DISTRICTS.

Mr. Vickroy reported for Central Illinois. In August of the present year
he visited the orchards in the vicinity of Champaign, among them the
noted Hall fruit farm, near Savoy. He found the orchards in fair
condition. Many were sheltered by belts of trees. He observed that in
the lower or bottom land he found in connection with drainage, the best
orchards and the healthiest trees, and that on the more rolling or
higher grounds the trees were not as hardy nor did not bear as well. His
observations led him to believe in the draining of orchards, although it
was opposed to his previous education and of the teachings he had
received in this society. He regarded the experimental orchard which he
visited at Champaign a failure, for the very reason that it was on too
high ground; that the trees were dying, and many were not bearing. There
were, however, some varieties that showed good fruit. In his visit
referred to, he found the following varieties of apples did well in this
latitude:

Fall Varieties--First, Snow; second, Standard; third, Maiden Blush;
fourth, Colvert; fifth, Baker Sweet; sixth, Pound Sweet; seventh, Fall
Romanite.

Winter Varieties--First, Minkler; second, Rawles' Genet; third, Willow
Twig; fourth, Little Romanite; fifth, English Russet; sixth, Ben Davis;
seventh, Michael Henry Pippin; eighth, Jonathan; ninth, Gravenstein;
tenth, Rome Beauty.

In varieties in pears he gave the Howell and the Bartlett. In grapes he
recommended the Martha in white grapes.


GRAPES.

Mr. E.A. Riehl, of Alton, read a very exhaustive and complete report on
grapes and grape culture, including the so-called grape rot. The
suggested remedies were bagging and training vines up on elevated wires,
so the sun and air could get freely to the fruit. This point was
combated by Dr. Shroeder. Grapes ripen best in the shade. Another
gentleman suggested that with the wire system as suggested by Mr. Riehl,
the grapes are shaded by the foliage in all the hottest part of the day.


INSECTS.

Prof. Forbes gave a learned and scientific dissertation on contagious
diseases of insects, and a number of germinal diseases, and experimental
and successful attempts to kill them. The Professor showed that nausea
is contagious and may be transferred by diseased worms, and that
therefore the spread of disease in worms would considerably lessen the
danger to plants and fruits from their inroads. These facts, said the
Professor, give us reason to hope that we have discovered another means
of defense from destructive insects.

Mr. Earle will try pyrethrum next season for the tarnished bug. Prof.
Budd gave a brief sketch of latest methods of killing off noxious
insects as followed by J.N. Dixon, of the State of Iowa, one of the
greatest fruit farmers in that State or in the Northwest. He destroys
the insect by sprinkling the trees with water diluted with arsenic,
using one pound of white arsenic to 200 gallons of water. This has
proven a great success and is not at all expensive. Some members
objected to the use of arsenic on account of its poisonous properties.
London-purple or Paris-green were recommended by some. Some members did
not like to have hogs running in their orchards; others found them a
benefit if but few were permitted. They did a good work. If the orchard
is overstocked with them they do harm. They root about the trees and rub
against them. It is not an uncommon thing for them to kill the trees in
the course of a couple of years.


FRUIT COMMITTEES.

Dr. Schroeder, member of the committee on pear culture, made no formal
report, but in brief remarks urged the general planting and raising of
the kind of fruit as being profitable and productive. Mr. Samuel
Edwards, of Mendota, chairman of committee on currants, read a very
interesting report on currants and gooseberries, in which it appeared
that the cultivation of this fruit was neglected and was on the decline.
Dr. A.L. Small, of Kankakee, made a report on plums, in which he
recommended the general planting of this fruit, he making a specialty of
plum trees, and regarded the plum as a fruit that was coming more in
demand and popular, and one that readily adapts itself to the many kinds
of climates and soils.

Mr. Weir also read a paper on plums and plum culture. He recommended the
Chickasaw because it is hardy and not liable to have its blossoms
injured by a late spring, like many fruits. He named the Newman and Wild
Goose among other so-called seedlings that were very good. He expressed
the opinion that there was but one distinct species of plum in the
United States.


FLORICULTURE.

Mrs. Mary J. Barnard, of Manteno, from the committee on floriculture,
strongly urged the cultivation of house-plants, not only as beautifiers,
but to give the most pleasant occupation to every lady of the family.
She referred to the earlier flowers of summer especially--the crocus,
snow-drop, lily of the valley, tulips. Next to these came the annuals;
with little trouble these could be had for months. The wild flowers of
the prairies were spoken of, and she suggested that we should obtain
seed of the flowers and raise such as we wish. The paper was a good one
and was well received. Mr. Baller, a florist of Bloomington, said that
of late the demand for plants had fallen off. The reason given was that
there was an increased general knowledge among the people. At the
present, the chief demands are for hot-house, cut flowers, and
monthlies. The reason given for the falling off of the demand for plants
was the fact that plants were more easily raised since the introduction
of base-burners. This, he thought, could be still further increased by
having a double sash, and the building of bay windows on the south and
east of the houses. He reported, however, that there was still a good
market for hot-house flowers among the rich for decorating purposes,
funerals, etc.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER will, from time to time, consider other
papers and discussions at this meeting, for there was much more of
interest said and done than can be condensed into a simple running
report. We advise farmers to send one dollar to the Secretary and
receive therefor a copy of the Transactions when issued.




A SHORT SERMON ON A LONG TEXT.


The text will be found in Leviticus 16: 21-22-23; but whether its
application can be found is uncertain. Horticulturists are prone to find
scape-goats to carry their sins of omission and commission; and they
load these--a great burden--upon them, and send them off to be lost in
the wilderness. Providence is most usually chosen by them for this
purpose. Most of their mistakes and failures--sins, let us call
them--are ascribed to Providence; and He is expected to carry the
burden. But I strongly urge they remain our own after all.

I am led to these conclusions by the fact that among the many failures
in fruit culture there are some splendid successes; and that these
successes occur with those, as a rule, who are guiltless of these sins;
and that just in proportion to the magnitude of the guilt is the success
insured. In other words--that almost invariably are our failures to be
attributed to our own want of skill and our neglect--most generally the
latter. Here and there we note cases of marked success--of heavy crops
and large returns for care and labor invested. These are mostly on a
small scale; as for instance, one man produces from at the rate of 200
to 300 bushels of strawberries per acre, on a few rods of ground.
Another, his neighbor, gets about as many quarts. The conditions of soil
and climate are about the same. Now is Providence to be charged with
this disparity? Certainly not. The same care, the same intelligent
management, and the same amount of labor bestowed, would have produced
as favorable results in the one case as in the other.

And so, as to larger tracts. I hold that what my neighbor can do on a
dozen square rods, he and I both ought to be equally able to do on five
or ten, or twenty times as large a tract. But, you say, these large
yields are the results of extraordinary care. True, they are; and that
proves my theory--that extraordinary care will produce extraordinary
results. What one man can do once, he can do again and all the time; and
we all can do the same. Extraordinary care may be defined as the care
necessary to produce good results, and if that care were always applied
it would cease to be extraordinary.

I myself saw in my neighbor's field a crop of strawberries, on two rows,
which at the safest and closest calculation I could make, yielded at the
rate of over 300 bushels per acre. He had but the two rows; had given
them extraordinary care--had kept them clear of grass and weeds--and the
ground mellow--and had mulched them with forest leaves. Those two rows
were in a field of several acres in size. The same care in planting, in
cultivating, in mulching, and the whole tract would have produced
corresponding results. That same year, my crop, on soil equally as good,
reached a yield of less than one-fifth in amount. Why this difference?
Providence favored him and didn't favor me, I might say, if I felt
disposed to make a scape-goat of Providence for my misdeeds. But I do
not believe that Providence did anything of the sort. The fault was my
own; and I have no right to attempt to shift the responsibility. And it
was not want of knowledge either. We, none of us, do as well as we know
how. Our failures are mostly the results of sheer neglect. Mistakes, we
incline to call them. Let us call them sins, and repent of them; and not
endeavor to do as Aaron did, pack them off into the wilderness. When we
bring ourselves to thus correct our mistakes, our crops will be
increased threefold, and Providence will no longer be made a scape-goat
for us.

T.G.




PRUNINGS.


The strawberry was introduced into England from Flanders in 1530.

Gardeners in London, England, are always ready to buy toads. The regular
market price for them ranges from $15 to $25 per hundred.

Soap-suds are a valuable fertilizer for all forms of vegetation;
especially serviceable for small fruits, and in the fruit garden proper
will never be wasted.

An Italian claims to have discovered that by drenching the foliage of
grapevines with a solution of soda the filaments of the mildew fungus
will be shriveled, while the leaves will remain uninjured. A Wisconsin
nurseryman, however, advises the use of flowers of sulphur, which he
believes a good remedy, also, when applied to the vines and when added
to the soil surrounding them.

A correspondent of the Germantown Telegraph says that he has found salt
a valuable remedy for rust on blackberry vines, and concludes: "I have
applied two or three handfuls on the surface of the ground, immediately
over the roots, when the plants were badly rusted; in two or three weeks
the disease had disappeared, and the plants had made a good growth. I
believe moderate applications of salt, sown broadcast over a blackberry
patch, would be of great benefit as a fertilizer and health renewer."

Gardener's Monthly: In the discussions on forest culture, little is said
of the willow, which forms a very interesting department. The white
willow, Salix Candida, is often used for coarse work. S. Vinnunatis and
S. Russelliana, are the most commonly used in the Eastern United States,
under the name of Osier, or basket willow, and S. Forbyana, a variety of
S. rubra, or the red willow is often used for fine work. In the Editor's
recent visit to the Northwest a number of fine species were noted which
would evidently be worth introducing for basket-making purposes.

The Germantown Telegraph says: "To grow good crops of blackberries the
soil should be good and especially deep, for the roots run down
wonderfully when possible for them to do so; and as the growing fruit
requires its greatest nourishment in the usually dry month of August, it
is an advantage to have deep soil for the roots to draw a supply from. A
deep, sandy soil will generally grow the best crop of berries, while a
clay soil tends to produce rust. Good cultivation, good soil, and a
judicious use of manure make stout and vigorous canes, with a crop of
berries in increased ratio."

Indiana correspondent Orange County Farmer: I have had a good deal of
experience in propagating currants. I always plant my currant cuttings
in the fall as soon as the leaves fall off. They will make durable roots
two to four inches long the same fall, while the buds remain dormant.
They will make double the growth the next season if set in the fall, and
they should be set in ground that will not heave them out by the effects
of frost and should be covered just before winter sets in with coarse
litter. Remove the covering early in the spring and examine the cuttings
to see if any of them hove, and if so, press them down again. Should
they heave up an inch or more, if well pressed down, they will start and
make better growth than cuttings set in the spring. In either case,
however, the cuttings should always be made in the fall.

A Rural New Yorker correspondent gets down to the real art of grape
eating. Hear him tell how to manipulate the fruit: No! the man who holds
the grape between his thumb and dexter finger and squeezes or shoots the
pulp into his throat, does not know how to enjoy the fruit, and is not
likely to appreciate the good qualities of a fine grape. Let the berries
follow each other into the mouth in rapid succession until three or four
are taken, while with each insertion the teeth are brought together upon
the seeds without breaking them. The acid of the pulp is thus freed to
mingle with the saccharine juice next the skin, and a slight
manipulation by the tongue separates the seeds and skins from the
delicious winey juices; after this has tickled the palate, skins and
seeds may be ejected together. Close to the skin lies a large part of
the good flavor of the grape.

On the subject of protecting trees from mice, R.W. Rogers, in Ohio
Farmer says: "As the season is near at hand when farmers will have to
look to the protection of their young fruit trees from ground mice, I
send you my method if you deem it worthy of publishing. It is as
follows: Take old tin fruit cans, put them on the fire until the parts
that are soldered have become heated, when they will come apart. Take
the body of the can and encircle it around the tree, letting the sides
lap each other, and press firmly in the ground before it has become
frozen. The mice coming in contact with the tin will turn them in
another direction. It is far better than mounding up or tramping snow
about them. Most any farmer can gather up enough for a good sized
orchard, and make them pay compound interest, which otherwise would be a
nuisance or pitched out of the back window."




FLORICULTURE.

Gleanings by an Old Florist.


ARTIFICIAL MANURES AND OTHER MATTERS.

The successful raisers of many kinds of flowers use, more or less, some
kind of what might be called artificial stimulants other than the
ordinary manuring of the soil at the time the plant is set out, whether
it be in pot culture or in the open benches. This is no new thing under
the sun; not a few who have been in the habit, and found great results,
have tried to keep a monopoly, and have been more or less close-mouthed
in the matter. Perhaps one of the oldest forms of this feeding extra
stimulants to their pets was in the form of liquid manure made from
various materials, as horse, sheep, cow, and other manures. They are
sometimes prepared with ever so much mystery in the matter of quantity,
time of preparation, quantity given, etc., all of which was supposed to
have its influence. Of one thing, however, there was certain, tangible
evidence that many of these persons managed, if for exhibition, to carry
off the best premiums; and if for the market were pretty sure to command
the best prices, and what is more, obtain the greater results
financially.

Soot, guano, ammonia, and in later years, material obtained from the
immense slaughter-houses, such as blood and other offal in a highly
concentrated form, find, perhaps, nowadays, more advocates; principally
because the first-mentioned list contains articles that give off very
offensive odors while being applied, so that the more fastidious are
loath to use them. What may not be very offensive to the plodding
florist would be highly so to the more refined, or when the general
public comes more into contact with the crops while being so applied. In
almost all of the cases where the ingredients mentioned are used they
are diluted with a large quantity of water, except in the case of the
droppings of the animals; the latter are often used by florists in the
form of a very heavy mulch, depending upon the ordinary watering to
carry down to the roots such parts of the dressing as would dissolve in
the water, and thus give extra stimulant, and at a time when it would do
the most good, because, ordinarily, the more water necessary the greater
the growth going on, and vice versa, if plants are in a state of rest,
either from a finished growth or from lowness of temperature, but little
water would be needed, and but little benefit from the mulch, except
such as undoubtedly arises from the ammonia itself in the manure
permeating the atmosphere, which again, however, would be the most
active when heavy watering was necessary, simply because of the high and
humid temperature.

For obvious reasons the votaries of window gardening will use those
giving off little or no unpleasant odors. Others again make the soil so
rich in the first instance that much less of what may be called
artificial manures are required during growth. But without some skill in
this matter it is not safe, for if much of the material is not
thoroughly decayed (which, however, has then lost most of its volatile
ingredients) it is, in the common vernacular of the gardener, too rank
to give good growth and results, whether it be in fruits, flowers, or
foliage. For example, in Henderson's horticulture he recommends, as the
best soil for potting, loam and hops. He says, "Not the least simple of
these operations is the preparation of our potting soil. We have, we may
say, only one heap--a big one it is--but it contains only two
ingredients, rotted sods, from a loamy pasture, and rotted refuse hops
from the breweries, in about the proportion of two of the sods to one of
hop. One-year-old rotted manure, if the hops cannot be obtained." It is
evident upon its face that so large a proportion as one-third of a fresh
manure or hops would be disastrous; but well rotted, and with care
otherwise in temperature and other desiderata, it would be a highly
stimulating soil. This was in 1869. We well recollect the commotion the
hop business caused in the horticultural world at the time, as Henderson
recommended it for plunging pots in, setting pots on mulching outdoors,
and almost every purpose. And did he not grow the best of stuff and
himself practice what he preached. Spent hops in this city were eagerly
sought after and used, apparently with great success, in almost every
florist's establishment as well as market garden. What before was a
nuisance to the breweries was eagerly sought after; like most things,
however, it had its day, and is now seldom seen again. We might,
however, say that its decline undoubtedly arose from its unpleasant
features, as it drew myriads of insects in its train and often emitted a
very unpleasant odor. Its great value consists in that it is the seed of
the hop plant, all seeds contributing by far the greatest value in
manures.

In the green-house the object aimed at, is the greatest possible results
from limited area. Of the atmosphere the gardener has almost absolute
control--no siroccos, biting frost, or destructive winds interfere. He
can beat nature all to pieces in growing plants faultless in shape and
in quantity of flowers, but his soil is of limited extent for the roots
to wander in. To counteract this, he can give in other forms just as
much and no more nutrition as is necessary to effect his purpose, and
here comes in this artificial supply of manurial agents.

Mr. DeVrey, the successful superintendent of Lincoln Park, uses horn
shavings. This is the cleanest and most pleasant material that we ever
recollect to have seen used for the purpose, it is the refuse in the
factories where the horns from the slaughterhouse are steamed and
manipulated into the numerous objects they are applied to, not the least
being into knife and fork handles, and the like. It is in the form of
thin shaving of half an inch to an inch in length, quite dry and light,
entirely free from odor. He takes all they make, and this year has a ton
of the material for which he pays at the rate of three cents per pound.
The method of using is simply to mix with the soil at the time of
potting, giving it, to the common eye, as oil specked all through with a
white flaky substance. Its effect is very visible in a clear, healthy
growth, given off gradually, and as it is quite common where vast
quantities of plants are required to be grown in small pots, when there
appears to be a necessity of some new stimulant, it should be given by
the amateur in a larger pot. This is done by shaking nearly all the soil
from the roots and re-potting again if possible in the same sized pots,
thus doing away with all artificial watering, and yet having healthy,
luxuriant growth all the time.

A pound of the material, which is light, will be enough for a
wheelbarrow of potting soil. After all, the question is not so much the
exact material employed of a number of similar agents, as it is with the
intelligence brought to bear so as to apply at the right time the right
quantity, and under the best possible circumstances.

EDGAR SANDERS.




SCIENTIFIC.


AM I A SCOT, OR AM I NOT?

  If I should bring a wagon o'er
  From Scotland to Columbia's shore,
  And by successive wear and tear
  The wagon soon should need repair:
  Thus, when the tires are worn through,
  Columbia's iron doth renew;
  Likewise the fellies, hubs, and spokes
  Should be replaced by Western oaks;
  In course of time down goes the bed,
  But here's one like it in its stead.
  So bit by bit, in seven years,
  All things are changed in bed and gears,
  And still it seems as though it ought
  To be the one from Scotland brought;
  But when I think the matter o'er,
  It ne'er was on a foreign shore,
  And all that came across the sea
  Is only its identity.

  I came, a Scotchman, understand,
  By choice, to live in this free land,
  Wherein I've dwelt, from day to day,
  'Till sixteen years have passed away.
  If physiology be true,
  My body has been changing too;
  And though at first it did seem strange,
  Yet science doth confirm the change;
  And since I have the truth been taught,
  I wonder If I'm now a Scot?
  Since all that came across the sea
  Is only my identity.

--_Wm. Taylor, in Scientific American._




PRIMITIVE NORTHWEST.


Mr. C.W. Butterfield contributes an article on the Primitive Northwest,
to last number of the American Antiquarian. He says that early in the
seventeenth century French settlements, few in number, were scattered
along the wooded shores of the river St. Lawrence in Canada. To the
westward, upon the Ottowa river, and the Georgian bay, were the homes of
Indian nations with whom these settlers had commercial relations, and
among some of whom were located Jesuit missionaries. In the year 1615,
Lake Huron was discovered. To it was given the name of the Fresh Sea
(Mer Douce). But, as yet, no white man had set foot upon any portion of
what now constitutes the States of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan,
Wisconsin, and Eastern Minnesota. And thereafter, for nearly a score of
years this whole region remained, so far as the visitation of white men
was concerned, an undiscovered country; and such it continued down to
the year 1684. However, previous to this date, something had been
learned by the French settlers upon the St. Lawrence, of this (to them)
far off land; but the information has been obtained wholly from the
Indians. This knowledge was of necessity crude and, to a considerable
extent, uncertain. Such of it as has been preserved is properly treated
of under the following heads: First, as to what had been gleaned
concerning the physical aspects of the country; second, as to what had
been brought to light relative to the various tribes inhabiting this
region.

Previous to 1634, nothing had been learned of Lake Erie, Lake St. Clair,
or Lake Michigan although it was understood there was some kind of a
water-way connecting the Fresh Sea (Lake Huron) with Ontario. A little
knowledge had been gained of a great body of fresh water lying beyond
the "Mer Douce," "a grand lac," so called by the French--now known as
Lake Superior. The length of this superior lake with that of the Fresh
Sea (Lake Huron), the Indians declared was a journey of full thirty days
in canoes. At the outlet of the great lake was what was described by the
savages, as a considerable rapid, to which the French gave the name of
"Sault de Gaston," the present Sault St. Marie, in the St. Mary's river,
the stream, which, it is well known, flows from Lake Superior into Lake
Huron.

Accounts also had been received from the Indians prior to the year last
mentioned, of a lake of no great size, through which flowed a river
discharging its waters into the Fresh Sea (Lake Huron). These were
reports of Lake Winnebago and Fox river, in what is now the State of
Wisconsin. As the French upon the St. Lawrence had no knowledge as yet
of Lake Michigan, they imagined the location of this small lake, and its
river was beyond, and to the northwest of Lake Huron and that they
emptied into it; Green Bay into the head of which Fox river really
flows, being (like Lake Michigan) wholly unknown to them.

It had further been reported by the Indians before this date that there
was a mine of copper on an island in what has been mentioned as probably
Lake Winnebago; doubtless, however, this island should have been located
in Lake Superior. A specimen of native copper had as early as 1610, been
exhibited by an Indian to an interested Frenchman upon the St. Lawrence,
and an account given by him as to the rude method employed by the
savages in melting that metal. But other islands besides the one
containing the copper mine had been brought to the knowledge of the
French settlers. A large one southeast of the "Sault de Gaston" being
described, and two smaller ones, to the south of it. These islands were,
it is suggested, the Great Manitoulin, Drummond, and Little Manitoulin,
of the present day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Leeds has said that spices were adulterated to a great extent, but
only such substances were added as were purely non-poisonous. Mustards
were never found to be pure. Vinegars were also highly adulterated.
Competent officers, who shall be specialists, should be appointed in
each State to examine manufactured and natural foods to detect
adulteration. So far these examinations have been made by college
professors. The State Boards of Health should take the matter in hand
and see that it has the proper attention.

       *       *       *       *       *

A French periodical, La Culture, gives the following simple method for
testing the purity of water. In an ordinary quart bottle three parts
filled with water dissolve a spoonful of pure white sugar, cork it well
and put it in a warm place. If at the end of forty-eight hours the water
becomes turbid and milky there can be no doubt of its impurity, but if
it remains limpid it may be considered safely drinkable.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB. CO.,
150 Monroe Street Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

Political talk is generally very eloquent, but it lacks the
insignificant element of truthfulness. A great deal of the buncombe of
politics reminds us of the lines of Lord Neaves, not long since
deceased:

[Transcriber's note: This is where the article ends in the original and
the lines in question are not to be found in the rest of the
periodical.]



PUBLISHERS' NOTICE.


_THE PRAIRIE FARMER is printed and published by The Prairie Farmer
Publishing Company, every Saturday, at No. 150 Monroe Street._

_Subscription, $2.00 per year, in advance, postage prepaid. Subscribers
wishing their addresses changed should give their old as well as new
addresses._

_Advertising, 25 cents per line on inside pages; 30 cents per line on
last page--agate measure; 14 lines to the inch. No less charge than
$2.00._

_All Communications, Remittances, etc., should be addressed to_ THE
PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY, _Chicago, Ill._

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prairie Farmer

ENTERED AT THE CHICAGO OFFICE AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER.

CHICAGO, JANUARY 5, 1884.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber's Note: Original location of Table of Contents.]

       *       *       *       *       *

RENEW! RENEW!!

Remember that every yearly subscriber, either new or renewing, sending
us $2, receives a splendid new map of the United States and Canada--58 x
41 inches--FREE. Or, if preferred, one of the books offered in another
column. It is not necessary to wait until a subscription expires before
renewing.

       *       *       *       *       *

1841.     1884.

The Prairie Farmer

PROSPECTUS FOR 1884.

SEE INDUCEMENTS OFFERED

SUBSCRIBE NOW.

For forty-three years THE PRAIRIE FARMER has stood at the front
in agricultural journalism. It has kept pace with the progress and
development of the country, holding its steady course through all these
forty-three years, encouraging, counseling, and educating its thousands
of readers. It has labored earnestly in the interest of all who are
engaged in the rural industries of the country, and that it has labored
successfully is abundantly shown by the prominence and prestige it has
achieved, and the hold it has upon the agricultural classes.

Its managers are conscious from comparison with other journals of its
class, and from the uniform testimony of its readers, that it is
foremost among the farm and home papers of the country. It will not be
permitted to lose this proud position; we shall spare no efforts to
maintain its usefulness and make it indispensable to farmers,
stock-raisers, feeders, dairymen, horticulturalists, gardeners, and all
others engaged in rural pursuits. It will enter upon its forty-fourth
year under auspices, in every point of view, more encouraging than ever
before in its history. Its mission has always been, and will continue to
be--

To discuss the most approved practices in all agricultural and
horticultural pursuits.

To set forth the merits of the best breeds of domestic animals, and to
elucidate the principles of correct breeding and management.

To further the work of agricultural and horticultural organization.

To advocate industrial education in the correct sense of the term.

To lead the van in the great contest of the people against monopolies
and the unjust encroachments of capital.

To discuss the events and questions of the day without fear or favor.

To provide information concerning the public domain, Western soil,
climate, water, railroads, schools, churches, and society.

To answer inquiries on all manner of subjects coming within its sphere.

To furnish the latest and most important industrial news at home and
abroad.

To give full and reliable crop, weather, and market reports.

To present the family with pure, choice, and interesting literature.

To amuse and instruct the young folks.

To gather and condense the general news of the day.

To be, in brief, an indispensable and unexceptionable farm and home
companion for the people of the whole country.

The style and form of the paper are now exactly what they should be. The
paper used is of superior quality. The type is bold and clear. The
illustrations are superb. The departments are varied and carefully
arranged. The editorial force is large and capable. The list of
contributors is greatly increased, and embraces a stronger array of
talent than is employed on any similar paper in this country. We
challenge comparison with any agricultural journal in the land.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER is designed for all sections of the country.
In entering upon the campaign of 1884, we urge all patrons and friends
to continue their good works in extending the circulation of our paper.
On our part we promise to leave nothing undone that it is possible for
faithful, earnest work--aided by money and every needed mechanical
facility--to do to make the paper in every respect still better than it
has ever been before.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPECIAL NOTICE

To each Subscriber who will remit us $2.00 between now and February 1st,
1884, we will mail a copy of THE PRAIRIE FARMER FOR ONE YEAR, AND ONE
OF OUR NEW STANDARD TIME COMMERCIAL MAPS OF THE UNITED STATES AND
CANADA--showing all the Counties, Railroads, and Principal Towns up to
date. This comprehensive map embraces all the country from the Pacific
Coast to Eastern New Brunswick, and as far north as the parallel of 52
deg., crossing Hudson's Bay. British Columbia; Manitoba, with its many
new settlements; and the line of the Canadian Pacific Railway, completed
and under construction, are accurately and distinctly delineated. It
extends so far south as to include Key West and more than half of the
Republic of Mexico. It is eminently adapted for home, school, and office
purposes. The retail price of the Map alone is $2.00. Size, 58 x 41
inches. Scale, about sixty miles to one inch.

       *       *       *       *       *


READ THIS.

Another Special Offer.

[Illustration]

"The Little Detective."

Weighs 1/4 oz. to 25 lbs.

Every housekeeper ought to have this very useful scale. The weight of
article bought or sold may readily be known. Required proportions in
culinary operations are accurately ascertained. We have furnished
hundreds of them to subscribers, and they give entire satisfaction.
During January, 1884, to any person sending us THREE SUBSCRIBERS, at
$2.00 each, we will give one of these scales, and to each of the three
subscribers Ropp's Calculator, No. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

A meeting of farmers interested in ensilage will be held at 55
Beekman street, New York, Wednesday, January 23, at 12 o'clock. All
interested in the subject are invited to attend.


The Iowa State Horticultural Society will hold its annual
meeting at Des Moines, January 15-18. Prof. J.L. Budd, Ames, will
forward programmes on application. The usual reductions in railway and
hotel fares are expected.


Professor S.R. Thompson, Superintendent of the Nebraska
Agricultural College farm, has been chosen to represent Nebraska at the
meeting to be held at Washington, D.C., next week, for the purpose of
taking action in regard to contagious diseases of cattle. He requests
stock men and all others interested in the cattle industries of his
State to correspond with him, and make such suggestions as they may
think proper for guidance at the meeting.


Since its organization in 1853 to 1882 inclusive, the managers
of the Illinois State Fair have offered the following amounts in
premiums for live stock: Cattle, $70,406; horses and mules, $81,825;
sheep, $24,450; swine, $25,320; poultry, $8,214;--total $210,215, which
must be considered pretty substantial encouragement. The total offered
in premiums for all classes of exhibits has been $303,961. Thus a little
more than two thirds of the entire amount has been given to the breeders
and importers of stock.


The officers of the Northwestern Dairymen's Association say
that every indication warrants the conclusion that the coming convention
at Mankato, Minn., commencing February 12, will prove the grandest
success in the history of the association. A full array of the best
dairy talent of the entire Northwest will be present. The purpose is
both in the arrangement of the programme and in the conduct of the
discussions, to make of the coming convention an institute for study and
instruction which no intelligent and progressive farmer can afford to
miss.


The Missouri State Board of Agriculture asks the aid of one
competent man in every township in the State to give it estimates of
crops, etc., in his vicinity. The aim is to give as full and reliable
statistics for crop reports as it is possible to collect. The State
provides but $1,250 for the general expenses of the Board, and it is
thus dependent upon voluntary aid in the matter. The Board will defray
all expenses of postage and stationery. Competent persons willing to
undertake this work for the public good should address J.W. Sanborn,
Secretary, Columbus, Mo. Such persons will receive, free, the monthly
and annual reports of the Board.


In March of last year Secretary Fisher, of the Illinois State
Board of Agriculture, submitted his report for 1882 to Gov. Hamilton.
This report has just made its appearance. It has taken the State printer
ten months to get the volume printed and bound for distribution, a work
that any respectable job office in Chicago would have turned out in four
weeks without any extra exertion. The report is valuable, of course, but
it would have been worth a deal more had it appeared last April. Such
papers as the report of Prof. Forbes, State Entomologist, for instance,
might have been of immense benefit to the people of the State if the
information it contains regarding noxious insects had reached them in
early spring.




SEED SAMPLES.


We have letters from several parties desiring us to publish an offer
they make to send packages of seed corn and other seeds to any one
applying and inclosing stamps to pay for trouble and postage. Some of
these parties also send samples of the seed. There is one great
difficulty in the way of publishing this class of communications. Once
we begin, the door is open to the practice of petty frauds upon our
readers which we have no right to encourage or allow. Now we are almost
certain that all these writers, thus far, are honorable men, who wish to
confer a favor upon their brother farmers, and who do not wish to gain a
farthing in the transaction. But some of them are personally unknown to
us, and we do not feel like vouching for their responsibility, still
less so because it is difficult to tell who will next propose a similar
scheme. There is to be a brisk trade in seed corn during the next four
months, and parties having a well tested article will find no difficulty
in disposing of it at good prices, providing they can convince people
they have exactly what they claim. The way to do is to advertise the
seed corn in the regular way, giving as references such men as the
postmaster, justice of the peace, banker, etc., as may be most
convincing and convenient. We are as anxious as any one can be to see
the people supplied with well ripened and well cared-for corn grown in
the proper latitude, and we are equally anxious to guard them against
imposition.




THE PORK QUESTION IN EUROPE.


The question of admitting American pork into France is not yet settled.
The Corps Legislatif is again "all tore up" by rash statements made by
member M. Paul Bert, who has published a letter at Paris in which he
argues that the use of our pork must result in disease, and that a
general outbreak may be feared at any moment, so long as the products of
diseased swine are offered in French markets. He endeavors to strengthen
his position by pretending to quote from Dr. Detmers, Department of
Agriculture Inspector at the Chicago Stock Yards. He alleges that
Detmers has reported that diseased and dying hogs are sold daily in
Chicago, and then shipped as pork, bacon, and lard to Havre and
Bordeaux. To this audacious or mendacious charge Dr. Detmers replies as
follows:

    The statement made by M. Paul Bert, as contained in a cable
    dispatch from Paris, is not only a perversion of facts, but a
    falsehood cut from whole cloth. I never certified, wrote, or
    said that dead hogs are shipped to packing-houses, or that
    these carcasses are shipped abroad. All I ever said in regard
    to transportation of diseased or dead hogs is contained in my
    official reports to the Commissioner of Agriculture,
    Washington, and can be found in his annual reports of 1878
    and 1879, on pages 355 and 418 respectively, where it is
    accessible to everyone. I simply called attention to the
    transportation of diseased and dead hogs to the rendering
    tanks--entirely distinct from packing houses--as affording a
    means of spreading the then prevailing disease--swine plague,
    or so-called hog cholera.

    M. Paul Bert seems to be a true demagogue, otherwise he would
    not resort to a falsehood to please his constituents. I never
    in any manner, directly or indirectly, stated or intimated
    that packers are or ever were in collusion with dealers in
    diseased live stock. Moreover, the laws and regulations of
    the Chicago Stock Yards are such as to render it absolutely
    impossible that a dead hog should be smuggled into them, and
    if an animal should die while in the yards it is at once
    delivered to a soap-grease rendering establishment outside of
    the Stock Yards, and can not possibly get into a
    packing-house.

This reply came too late to have any effect upon French legislation, and
the decree of prohibition has been re-enacted. So far we notice no
marked effect upon the prices of pork products in this country, but
later it must result in depression. We notice the leading papers of the
United States are advocating the retaliatory measures proposed months
ago by THE PRAIRIE FARMER against European States interdicting
the importation of our meat products. We refer to the prohibition of
French and German adulterated and poisonous wines and liquors, and dry
goods and silk goods colored with poisonous dyes. It must come to this
at last if such totally unreasonable legislation against American
products is to continue in those countries.




CORN, WHEAT, AND COTTON.


The preliminary crop estimates by the Statistician of the Department of
Agriculture have been completed. He says the average yield of corn per
acre for 1883 was within a fraction of twenty-three bushels, which is 12
per cent less than the average for a series of several years past. The
quality is another thing.

It is doubtless true, Mr. Dodge says, that the quality of the corn north
of parallel forty is worse than for many years, increasing practically
the amount of shortage indicated by the number of bushels. As the whole
corn grown in 1883 in Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Dakota, added
to half that grown in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, and Nebraska, would
make 400,000,000 bushels only--a fourth of the whole crop--so that the
possible depreciation of 40 per cent in all of it would be equivalent to
a 10 per cent reduction in the value of the entire crop. The Illinois
Department agents make the quality 31 per cent less than the average in
this State. An effort will be made later, after the worst of the crop
has been fed, to ascertain the feeding value of the year's product. It
is not proposed, however, to reduce the product to the equivalent of
merchantable corn, or "sound" corn, as no crop ever is free from
immaturity or imperfection. There always are some Northern fields caught
by frost, some neglected acres, some choked with weeds or flooded by
over-flows, and so on--corn, which is mainly "nubbins." What is intended
without reference to panic or exaggeration is to find out the exact
truth and then tell it. There is nothing gained, be it to farmers or
consumers, the Statistician adds, in suppressing truth on the one hand
or exaggerating the losses on the other. One feature of corn-growing in
1883 should prove a lesson to the farmers of the country; that is, the
general use of seed corn in the West, grown in lower latitudes. The
planting of Nebraska seed in Minnesota and Kansas seed in Illinois, has
demonstrated the folly of attempting to acclimatize the Southern maize
in the more Northern districts. Much loss from frost would have been
avoided had the seed been carefully selected from the best corn grown in
the immediate neighborhood.

The wheat crop is estimated, as before, slightly in excess of
400,000,000 bushels.

The cotton product, as shown by the December returns, is about 6,000,000
bales. There will be another investigation after the close of the cotton
harvest and the shipment of a large portion of the crop, when precise
results will be approached more nearly than has been possible hitherto.

The Department evidently feels a little "nettled" over the criticisms
that have been made upon its estimates of the last two corn crops. Again
we must protest that the amount of harvested corn in the West will fall
considerably below Mr. Dodge's figures. Whether or not the Department
sees fit to "reduce the product to the equivalent of merchantable corn"
such an estimate would be of interest, and when it gives the result of
the feeding quality of the corn, there will be something of a basis
furnished for such a calculation, especially as we shall have by that
time a pretty accurate account of the exported corn of the crop of 1883
and the amount "in sight," as the grain merchants say. It is true that
there is nothing gained to consumers by "suppressing truth on the one
hand or exaggerating losses on the other" but there is something lost to
consumers by overestimating yields at about the time the harvest is
ready and when speculators can use Government estimates to force down
prices.

The statistical machinery of the Department of Agriculture is far from
perfect, but it is the best the Government has supplied it with, and it
is not wise or fair to criticise its estimates too severely, based, as
they often must be, upon inadequate returns. The most that can be said
is that the Department should be exceedingly careful not to err on the
side that may result in injury to the producers, for, as we understand
it, it was created solely to advance their interests.




CHICAGO IN 1883.


Compared with the other great cities of the Union, and even with
previous years in her own history, Chicago had a prosperous business
year in 1883. The total trade of the year foots up $1,050,000,000, which
is a slight gain over that of 1882. The receipts of flour were 4,403,982
barrels; wheat, 20,312,065 bushels; corn, 74,459,948 bushels; oats,
37,750,442 bushels; rye, 5,662,420; barley, 10,591,619. Of cattle there
were received 1,878,944 head; hogs, 5,640,625; sheep, 749,917; horses,
15,255; dead hogs, 55,656. Of seeds, 122,582 tons; broom corn, 15,038
tons; butter, 53,987 tons; hides, 34,404 tons; wool, 20,122 tons;
potatoes, 13,000,000 bushels; coal, 4,042,356 tons; hay, 50,000 tons;
lumber, 1,848,817,000 ft.; shingles, 1,154,149 M.; salt, 1,096,587
barrels; cheese 23,590 tons. The total value of farm products of all
kinds is estimated at $402,000,000, which is $20,000,000 above the
valuation of that of 1882. The products of Chicago manufactures are
valued at $325,000,000. In 1881 the receipts of hogs amounted to
6,474,844 head, and in 1882, 5,817,504 head. The wholesale mercantile
trade has fallen off somewhat, as it has all over the country, owing to
depression that seems to be universal. In manufactures the city is
making wonderful development. In growth she is still unchecked and
without a rival in the world among large cities and business centres.




STRONG DRINK.


We often see in the papers the amount in dollars and cents, that strong
drink costs the people of this country. Some one has been making out
similar statistics for Great Britain, and finds that if the total house
rent is added to the rent of farms in the three divisions of the Kingdom
the total is $30,000,000 less than is usually spent for drink. Add
together the cost of the linen goods, cotton goods, coal, tea, coffee,
sugar, milk, butter and cheese and the total is only $45,000,000 in
excess of the sum spent in drink. And this is only the direct cost. The
indirect expense of drink--the crime and misery entailed, the cost of
prisons and almshouses, criminal courts and trials, the loss from
idleness, incapacity, blunders, sickness--towers above these figures in
colossal magnitude. Counting all these things it may be said of both
countries that strong drink costs more than sufficient to supply the
personal needs--food, clothing, and homes--of all the people. It is
indeed a fearful showing.




ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.


CHARLES DE LONG, Artesia, Miss.--THE PRAIRIE FARMER has the reputation
of knowing all about the prairies, north and south, and, therefore, I
appeal to it to tell me whether the Japan persimmon will be likely to be
hardy in this section, some portions of which is, as you probably know,
a prairie country?

ANSWER.--The Japan persimmon, Diospyros kaki, is, as we understand it,
an evergreen of sub-tropical origin, and will not be likely to fruit
satisfactorily far north of the region of the orange. Like the fig, in
your latitude, it may stand what frosts you have and, like it, attain
considerable growth, but you will seldom get a crop. We know
enterprising nurserymen are telling us it will grow and fruit as far
north as Washington; but we were told the same story about the
eucalyptus, which proved to be no more hardy than the orange. Our
authorities for these opinions may be regarded as first-class--no less
than LeBon Jardinier, who says it can not be grown and successfully
fruited outside the region of the orange. Recently, at a horticultural
exhibition at Nice, France, there was a fine show of the kakis
contributed by a gardener in the vicinity of Toulon, of which the
official report gives this account: "Among the newer exotics were the
kakis, of Japan, grown at Toulon. The fruit is about the size of an
average apple, a bright, orange-red in color, and the tree is very
productive. The Japanese make a great account of it, both as a fruit,
when ripe, and as a source for obtaining tannin, in its green state. It
appears to accommodate itself remarkably well to the climate of
Provence, and especially merits to be introduced into Algeria, where it
will even do better in all reasonable probability.". In respect to the
appearance of the fruit, it more nearly resembles in shape and size a
bell pepper, than an apple, but the color is orange-red, as described.
It is pretty sure to cut a great figure among the fruit products of
Florida, where its successful cultivation will lend additional
attractions to that already seductive State.

MRS. SARAH Y. STAPLES, DALLAS, TEXAS.--I do not ask you for a remedy for
the roup, with which my fowls have been recently affected; but for a
course of treatment to follow to prevent its return?

ANSWER--The roup may be brought upon healthy fowls if they are shut up
in narrow and unventilated quarters at night, and of days turned out in
cold or wet weather. And it will almost certainly follow if they are
confined under glass, as they sometimes are in winter, in abandoned
green-houses. In the first place, see fowls have a dry and airy roosting
place, but where they will be out of a draft or cold currents. Feed once
daily in the morning, the following compounded rations. Raw onions one
part, pork-cracklins one part, and bread or boiled potatoes one part,
chopped tolerably fine, but do not wet the mixture before feeding. If
you can substitute a few bits of garlic for twice the measure of onions,
it will be all the better for the health of the fowls, but they might
taint the taste of the eggs. If fowls are fed this mixture once daily,
it don't matter much what the other food is, whether corn or small
grain, though for laying mill-screenings or shrunken wheat is best.

ASA GRAY, ROCKFORD, ILL.--I have seen it stated the daily rations of the
cowboys of the Southwest, in certain sections and during some months,
was confined to raw beef, rock salt, and red peppers. How is it?

ANSWER.--We don't know. Will someone familiar with cowboys and their
manner of living report. However, all things considered, the ration is
not a bad one, for the reason that raw beef digests in half the time of
beef well cooked, and the large, sweet pepper of the Southwest deprived
of its seeds is not near as hot in the mouth as it is commonly
represented.

R. ROOT, CLARKSVILLE, IOWA. 1. Does the basket willow have to be
cultivated like a field crop? 2. Is there more than one kind, and if so
which is best? 3. What kind of soil is best adapted to its cultivation?

ANSWER.--1. In some respects, yes; the land having to be given over to
them exclusively. In France the cuttings are planted from twelve to
fifteen inches apart in order to obtain long and slender shoots. 2.
There are half a dozen cultivated in Europe, the best two being the
Salix rubra or red Osier, and the Salix vitellina or yellow Osier. But a
hardier variety, Salix viminalis, is commonly preferred in this country
where the cultivation, though often undertaken, has never been very
successful, from the fact that American labor can not compete with the
labor of women and children in Europe. 3. In cool climates having a
moist atmosphere the Osier willow is successfully grown where ordinary
crops thrive, but in warmer and drier sections low and moist land must
be chosen. Indeed the whole tribe of willows love cool, moist
situations, and the richer the soil the stronger and quicker the growth.
We should be glad to hear from correspondents who cultivate, or who live
where the Osier is grown and prepared for market, the details of the
whole industry.

B.F.J.




WAYSIDE NOTES.

BY A MAN OF THE PRAIRIE.


I don't know that I really ought to take any credit to myself for it,
but I hope I have done something toward increasing the number of farmer
correspondents for the hale old PRAIRIE FARMER. I can't help
noticing, as I do with pleasure, that the number is increasing.
Furthermore, the correspondents all write well, I mean, simply; they
seem to have something to say, and say it in a manner that can be
readily understood. Their writings are instructive, too. Well, I hope
this writing fever, like most others, will prove highly contagious, and
have a run through the entire PRAIRIE FARMER family. I know
from experience the malady is not a dangerous one. At least it don't do
the writers any harm; if the readers can stand what I say, I am
satisfied. The editor may boil down our communications, or chop them up
and serve them in any style he chooses, so that he presents all the good
we mean to say, and we will be satisfied. Will we not,
fellow-contributors?

       *       *       *       *       *

Rufus Blanchard, for many years a leading map publisher of Chicago, told
me the other day, that in 1838 he was farming in Union county, Ohio.
That year he grew about 1,000 bushels of oats, some 250 bushels of
wheat, and raised 100 hogs. He sold his oats for eleven cents per
bushel, his wheat for twenty-five cents, and his hogs for one cent and a
quarter per pound. He hauled his grain to Columbus, forty miles, to
market, and took his pay in salt. I remarked that this was pretty rough
farming. "On the contrary," said he, "in those days we were happy as
clams. We had all the pork we wanted without cost, for our hogs fattened
themselves on the mast of the woods. We paid by toll for grinding our
wheat into flour. The woods supplied us with deer, turkeys, and many
other kinds of game. Our clothing was homespun. We had plenty of corn
meal and cheaply grown vegetables, and helped each other in sickness or
accident. If a neighbor's log house burned down, we all joined together
in putting him up a better one than he had before. We had pretty good
schools and interesting religious meetings without expensive pew rents
or style in dress. We visited each other and had plenty of sound
amusement. I never was so happy or so well contented in my life," he
added, and I believe him, for his face is wrinkled with care and
saddened by misfortune. It don't do, you see, to get too far removed
from this simple, natural life.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am looking out for a little colder weather. The pond is not yet frozen
sufficiently for us to cut ice as we want it. But both my neighbor and
myself have gotten all things in readiness for the harvest. I like an
open winter pretty well, but I do want ice.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seems to me that Dr. Detmers is always going off "half-cocked." He
once did the foreign cattle shipping interest great harm by an
ill-advised and unwarranted dispatch concerning the prevalence of
pleuro-pneumonia at the Chicago Stock Yards, and now I notice that his
alleged statements regarding diseased hogs and the disposal of them at
the same point have furnished the French Corps Legislatif an excuse for
enacting the decree prohibiting the introduction of American pork
products into France. Isn't it about time the Department of Agriculture
at Washington sat a little down on this man who writes too much with his
pen? Not that I would silence any man who sticks to facts, no matter
whose soap-bubble he pricks; but a simple alarmist who rushes into print
mainly for the pleasure it gives him to see his name in print, and to
know that he is talked about, deserves to be squelched. For aught I
know, though, Dr. Detmers has been misrepresented by the wily Frenchmen.
What has Dr. Loring to say on the subject?

       *       *       *       *       *

But, after all, as I think the editor of THE PRAIRIE FARMER
himself said some months ago, this foreign agitation of the live stock
question may result in great good, inasmuch as it must lead to proper
legislation in this country against the introduction and spread of
contagious diseases among animals. It is without doubt the basis of the
proceedings at the Chicago cattle-growers' convention in November last,
and of the present movement for immediate Congressional action upon the
matter. The difficulty abroad will, I believe, prove short-lived.




LETTER FROM CHAMPAIGN.

With the exception of two days, the 22d and 23d, which were stormy and
gave us ten to twelve inches of snow, followed by a little sleet and
rain, the latter half of December has been as delightful as the first
half was, though a good deal colder. The sleighing since the 17th has
never been better; and as there is ten inches to a foot of solid snow
now lying on the ground, it is likely to last some time longer. The
sleet and rain formed a crust an inch and a half thick, and though it is
not very strong, it, together with the compact snow, makes getting down
to the grass beneath quite out of the question, and stock have to depend
on the stalk fields or be fed hay and corn.

       *       *       *       *       *

This will make a heavier draft upon the grain and hay in reserve than
has been anticipated by those who depend on carrying their stock through
mostly on grass, and be sure to lessen the surplus and raise the price
of corn, oats, and hay accordingly. Corn in the field is drying out so
fast under the influence of the dry, cold weather, stock do not refuse
soft corn as they did after the first sharp frost in November and
December. It is now seen that it would have been better to have left all
the soft and some of the immature corn in the field, than to have husked
and cribbed it as many did and lost more than would be believed, if
reported, by mould and rot.

       *       *       *       *       *

At any rate the fall wheat is safe so long as the present covering of
snow lasts, and this more than compensates for the loss of winter
pasture. The snow, as near as I can learn, covers all Illinois, except a
few counties on the west, and as usual, is quite as heavy in the
timbered regions of which Vandalia is near the center, as in Northern
Illinois. So far the cold season considerably resembles the winter of
1878-79, and let us hope it will continue to the end, that we may have
light snows and many of them, good sleighing and moderate temperature
through January and February.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has mystified me, as I have do doubt it has many others, why European
Governments have had so much to say about trichinae in the hog, of which
we have had scarcely any, and so little of hog cholera, of which we have
had a good deal. But the mystery is now cleared up. The sickness and
losses from hog cholera, have either by error or intention been reported
to the several European Governments as results of almost universal
trichiniasis, and they have acted accordingly. That it should be so,
seems surprising, but that it is so, we have the proof in the following
paragraph from a late number of the Journal D'Agriculteur Pratique. The
writer, Dr. Hector George, one of the regular contributors, in a long
article opposing rescinding the order prohibiting the importation of
American pork products into France, first quotes the report of the
Chicago Board of Health, that 8 per cent of hogs slaughtered in Chicago
are afflicted with trichinae, goes on to say: "This per cent, however
considerable it may be, is far inferior to the reality if we judge from
an official dispatch addressed to Earl Granville by Mr. Crump, English
Consul at Philadelphia." in 1880 trichiniasis destroyed 700,000 hogs in
Illinois alone. According to an official report by Dr. Detmers to the
Government of the United States, the hogs sick or dead from trichiniasis
are hurried to the packing houses and are thereafter prepared and
immediately sent off to Europe.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. Paul Bert, from whom we have recently heard on the same subject and
in the same strain, no doubt got his inspiration from the article in the
Journal D'Agriculteur Pratique after which he probably read the official
report of Dr. Detmers, to whom he refers, and like Dr. George, either
did not understand or intentionally misconstrued it for political
purposes. Perhaps what Dr. Detmers did report was bad enough and
extravagant enough, but it had exclusive reference to hog cholera then
prevalent, as any one can satisfy himself who will turn to the reports
or the Department of Agriculture for the several years 1879, 1880, and
1881. B.F.J.

       *       *       *       *       *


A RECORD OF UNFASHIONABLE CROSSES IN SHORT-HORN CATTLE PEDIGREES; a book
of 240 pages; the only work of the kind in existence. Send for a
circular. F.P. & O.M. HEALY, Bedford, Taylor Co., Iowa.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _from this
date to January 1, 1885; For $2.00 you get it for one year and a copy
of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED STATES, FREE!
_This is the most liberal offer ever made by any first-class weekly
agricultural paper in this country._


       *       *       *       *       *




POULTRY NOTES

Poultry-Raisers. Write for Your Paper.


CHAT WITH CORRESPONDENTS.


Notwithstanding the fact that I have repeatedly said I would not answer
questions unless they came through THE PRAIRIE FARMER the
people who, by ways and means best known to themselves, have managed to
obtain my address, keep right on asking questions by mail at a rate that
would drive me frantic if anything could. But nothing ever troubles me
long at a time, so I take your disregard of my wishes good naturedly, as
I take everything else that I can't help, and in the future I will
answer all questions whether they come through THE PRAIRIE
FARMER or not, sometime. To be sure "sometime" is not very
definite, but it is the best I can do. My poultry letters are "too
numerous to mention" and it requires no small amount of time to answer
them all; but I won't growl about that if you will only be patient and
not grumble if you don't get an answer "by return mail," or "in the next
paper." All questions of general interest will be answered in these
columns as soon as possible, while those that require an immediate
answer will be attended to by mail. Poultry raisers who desire
information that I can give, and who have not my address, can address
THE PRAIRIE FARMER. However, let me ask you not to write except
when necessary, and then please put your questions as plainly as
possible, and "be as brief as the nature of the subject will permit."

And when you are writing to me don't use postal cards. Postal cards are
only intended for the briefest of business messages, but lots of people
use them for nearly all their correspondence. I know one man who writes
love letters on postal cards. Most women and some men manage to make one
side of a 5 x 3 inch postal card do duty for four pages of commercial
note. They will write up and down and across lots and on the bias until
the whole thing is so hopelessly mixed and tangled up that if the
mystery of a woman's ways, or the fate of Charlie Ross were solved upon
one of these cards all the "experts" in the world could not unravel it.
A penny saved may be as good as a penny earned, and I have no objections
to your saving it in a legitimate way, but when it comes to saving it at
the expense of my time, patience, and eye-sight, I object most
decidedly. Hereafter I will not answer postals; I will not even read
them.

An Iowa woman writes: "If it is true that vaccination prevents chicken
cholera, how does it happen that fowls which had the genuine chicken
cholera last season took the disease again this season and died from the
effects of it? This happened on our place." I have puzzled my brains on
the same thing but I am not scientific enough to explain things that I
don't know anything about, so I leave that conundrum to be answered by
some of the learned people who have the whole theory of chicken cholera
at their tongues' end.

Several correspondents want to know how to get rid of rats in
poultry-houses. One man says that he firmly believes that there are more
rats than chickens in his poultry-house, and although he has tried half
a dozen different kinds of rat-traps he rarely catches anything in them.

I never found rat-traps much good; some of them would catch one or two,
but after that the rest of the tribe would fight shy of all such devices
for their undoing. A well trained rat terrier proved to be the best
rat-trap we ever had on the premises, and for the poultry raiser who
likes dogs a good ratter would be a good investment. Or you can use some
one of the "exterminators" that may be obtained at the drug stores.
Remove your fowls to some other building, prepare the poison according
to directions, and place it in the poultry-house. The best kinds to use
are those that make the rats thirsty and cause them to die immediately
after drinking; water can then be left in the hen house and the dead
rats will be found close by. When you have rat poison in the house see
that it is properly marked and put out of reach of children and careless
hired girls; and always see that all remnants of bait are taken care of.

A Nebraska man wants to know why his hens don't lay. Says they are
mostly early pullets, have a fairly comfortable poultry house, all the
grain they will eat twice a day, and plenty of fresh water at all times.

It seems to me that "all the grain they will eat twice a day" is rather
overdoing the grain business. Have some of that grain ground, mix with
boiled vegetables and feed warm every morning; also give green food and
raw bone, and my word for it your hens will soon "lay like sixty."

FANNY FIELD.




FEATHER ENDS.


Plymouth Rock pullets are not always early layers, for they
often grow for ten or twelve months before laying, though some say as
early as six months after being hatched. The best plan the keep Plymouth
Rocks is to get the pullets hatched as early as possible. April is as
late as should be desired, but a Plymouth Rock cock crossed on common
hens will produce pullets that may be hatched later.

N.Y. Times: A poultry-house should be large enough to be airy,
but if it is kept strictly clean and sweet it will do no harm to be
somewhat crowded. A house 24 feet long, 10 feet wide, 5 feet high behind
and 8 feet in front, and having four roosting poles, all on a level and
only a foot from the floor, will hold 60 to 80 fowls. This manner of
arranging the roosts prevents a good deal of quarreling to get on the
top perch.

Poultry-rearing for export appears to be largely on the increase in
Germany; and Rummelsburg, near Berlin, boasts of the largest goose
market probably in the world. There arrive daily at that station on an
average forty cars with geese and ducks. Every car contains about 1,500,
thus making about 400,000 birds shipped every week, or an annual total
of 20,000,000. The largest portion of these birds are reared and
fattened in the surrounding provinces, and thence dispatched to all
parts of Germany, England, Belgium, France, Switzerland, and other
European countries.

Farmers' Call: Turkeys do not require as warm quarters in
winter as do other fowls. They will rest on a cherry tree when the
mercury is frozen solid in the thermometer bulb, and then fly down in
the morning and wade through the snow to cool off. This is a hint to the
turkey raiser. Do not confine the turkeys in quarters too warm and
close, and be sure that they have three or four hours' exercise each day
in the open air. The turkey is really a hardy fowl and easily wintered
if you do not pet it too much. Be a little unkind to it in cold weather.
About all the shelter they will need is a wind-break. Give them plenty
of highly nutritious food.

Mr. Harrison Weir writes: "What the farmers should do is
this--they should produce their poultry of the finest quality, poultry
of the stamp of the old Dorking--plump birds, thick-skinned birds,
small-boned birds, and birds with little offal--fat them well, truss
them well, and send them to market. The white-legged beauties would take
the highest price, and, if well seen to, would very soon drive the
foreign fowls from our markets, and English gold would gladden the home
of the English henwife. I may mention that a neighboring farmer intends
rearing 3,000 chickens next spring, all to be off his ground before the
beginning of May, when the cattle will come out. He expects to get 75c.
a head, and I believe he will, and it will pay him if he does."

Poultry houses should be whitewashed inside and out. For the
inside we add two tablespoonfuls of carbolic acid or a pound of sulphur
to a pailful of the wash (to kill vermin); do not be afraid of putting
on too much, but apply the wash to every corner and crevice in the
building. If you have plank floors, clean them off nicely and put on
three or four inches of fresh earth. Dirt floors should be dug up the
depth of one foot. Wash your windows (if you have any in your house, and
if not you ought to have them), so that the fowls can see daylight, and
in bad weather they will enjoy the confinement of the poultry houses
much better. Wash off the roosts with kerosene oil at least once a week.
Take every nest box and wash inside and out, and put in clean straw,
sprinkling upon it some sulphur or loose tobacco. Observe these rules,
and your fowls will do better and keep healthier. We find this good
advice floating about and do not know its source. The hints are worth
remembering.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE THROAT.--"_Brown's Bronchial Troches_" act directly on the organs
of the voice. They have an extraordinary effect in all disorders of the
throat.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE APIARY

[Illustration]


KEEP BEES.


The beginning of the new year is a general time of settling accounts and
making resolutions for the future. The head of many a family is overcast
with gloom as he ascertains the true state of his affairs, and perceives
how little he has to show from the past year of toil. His family may
have been industrious in a general way, and yet been consumers only, and
not producers. We knew a farmer's family where there were three
daughters just budding into womanhood. On inquiring of the mother what
she had to sell to clothe her daughters with, she answered, Not a thing.
Have you no butter, eggs, fowls, honey, or bees-wax to sell from this
good farm? No, nothing. These girls were not idle! Oh no. They pounded
the organ, and the result was music as sweet as filing a saw; crocheted,
darned lace, and helped mother. When their father went to town they
asked him to bring them a pair of shoes, a bustle, or a necktie, with no
thought or care. And all the while the neighbors said "he was hard run."

There are few farmers' families that are so situated that they can not
care for a few colonies of bees. They not only need the sweets they
gather, but these industrious insects help to fertilize the bloom of
their orchards and meadows. Nature has appointed this insect, and it
alone, to do this work for her.

Honey can be used in many ways as a substitute for sugar--in canning
fruit, making cookies, and for other culinary purposes.

We would advise all those contemplating bee-keeping to start on a small
scale, if they have had no previous training. Two colonies are plenty,
and then let their knowledge increase in the same ratio as do their
bees. The next thing in order, after purchasing bees, should be a good
standard work on apiculture; and study it well. A person should be full
of theory, and then they are ready for practice. Those who are
energetic, willing to work, intelligent and willing, eager to learn,
observing, persevering, and attentive to their work, will rarely ever
fail in apiculture.

We have heard farmers say that bees will not flourish with the same care
given to other farm stock, and that they have not time to attend to
them. We would recommend to all such to try the experiment of procuring
a colony or two of beautiful Italians, in some good movable frame hive,
and present them to the family, with abundance of bee literature, and
see if they are not taken care of, especially if the almighty dollar
puts in an appearance.

MRS. L. HARRISON.




THE NEW BEES.


Prof. Cook, at the late Michigan Convention of Bee-keepers, spoke in
this wise on the topic of the New Bees:

"I have had no experience with the Cyprian bees, but I think more and
more of the Syrian. I find no trouble to handle them, and take my large
class of students, new to the business, right into the apiary. These
thirty or forty students daily manipulate the bees, doing everything
that the bee-keeper ever needs to do, and rarely ever get stung. I find
that the comb honey of the Syrians is excellent, that the bees go
readily into the sections. We did not get all our sections so that they
could be crated without the use of the separators; but I am not sure but
that it was more our fault than the fault of the bees. They are very
prolific, breeding even when there is no nectar to gather, and they
often gather when other bees are idle. I have this fall secured from Mr.
Frank Benton a Carniolan queen, and shall try crossing the Carniolans
with the Syrians. Perhaps we can thus secure a strain with the
amiability of the Carniolan, and the business of the Syrians."




HIVE AND HONEY HINTS.


Mr. Willingford, of Carlingford, Ontario, who had a crop of
several tons of honey this year, has taken it to England for sale.

Manufacturers of tobacco, of pickles, of cakes and cookies,
confectioners, and pork-packers are now using honey more extensively
than ever in the preparation of their specialties.

A singular instance of bee-swarming occurred a short time ago
in Singapore harbor, on board the British steamer Antonio, which at the
time was lying entirely outside the shipping in the roads. A swarm of
wild bees from the shore suddenly located themselves directly under the
sternpost of a boat lying above the deck, and all attempts to drive them
away proved unavailing, the chief officer being very severely stung in
endeavoring to get rid of them. They held to their position for several
days, and were eventually destroyed after the steamer had hauled
alongside the wharf.

Rev. L.L. Langstroth recently said: When I commenced
bee-keeping, a sting caused much swelling, but in time this trouble
passed away. Several years passed, during which I handled no bees, and
when I again attempted it, I found myself more susceptible to the poison
than ever, but by continuing to work with the bees, disregarding the
stings, my former indifference returned.

Ohio bee-keepers will discuss the following questions at the
Columbus meeting on the 14-16: How to winter bees successfully. How many
brood-frames are necessary in one hive? What can be done to prevent
adulteration of honey? How to create a home market for honey. How many
colonies can be kept in one locality? Can we do without separators? What
shall we do with second swarms? Which is the most salable
section--one-half, one, or two pounds? Which are best--deep or shallow
frames? Is it advisable to have a standard-size frame for all
bee-keepers?

Many are inquiring the proper way to let bees out on shares, so
as to have both parties satisfied. I do not know any such way, for the
most I have known in regard to letting bees out on shares resulted in
both parties being dissatisfied. But it all depends on what the
agreement is; and perhaps you had better have it down in writing. One
case I have recently heard of, the agreement was to divide the profits.
Well, it so happened that there was no profit, but there was a pretty
big loss; and as no provision had been made for this state of affairs,
each one felt disposed to put the loss on to the shoulders of the other.
I decided it would be about fair to divide the loss; but very likely
circumstances might make this not the right way after all. So says the
editor of Gleanings. It strikes us that he is all right, but if he had
said to bee-keepers "use the same common sense as to contracts that
people do in other kinds of business," he would have covered the whole
ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB. CO.,
150 Monroe Street, Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

RAILROADS.

[Illustration]

A MAN WHO IS UNACQUAINTED WITH THE GEOGRAPHY OF THIS COUNTRY WILL SEE BY
EXAMINING THIS MAP THAT THE

CHICAGO, ROCK ISLAND & PACIFIC R'Y

By the central position of its line, connects the East and the West by
the shortest route, and carries passengers, without change of cars,
between Chicago and Kansas City, Council Bluffs, Leavenworth, Atchison,
Minneapolis and St. Paul. It connects in Union Depots with all the
principal lines of road between the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans. Its
equipment is unrivaled and magnificent, being composed of Most
Comfortable and Beautiful Day Coaches, Magnificent Horton Reclining
Chair Cars, Pullman's Prettiest Palace Sleeping Cars, and the Best Line
of Dining Cars in the World. Three Trains between Chicago and Missouri
River Points. Two Trains between Chicago and Minneapolis and St. Paul,
via the Famous

"ALBERT LEA ROUTE."

A New and Direct Line, via Seneca and Kankakee, has recently been opened
between Richmond Norfolk, Newport News, Chattanooga, Atlanta, Augusta,
Nashville, Louisville, Lexington, Cincinnati Indianapolis and Lafayette,
and Omaha, Minneapolis and St. Paul and intermediate points.

All Through Passengers Travel on Fast Express Trains.

Tickets for sale at all principal Ticket Offices in the United States
and Canada.

Baggage checked through and rates of fare always as low as competitors
that offer less advantages.

For detailed information, get the Maps and Folders of the

GREAT ROCK ISLAND ROUTE,

At your nearest Ticket Office, or address

R.R. CABLE,
Vice-Pres. & Gen'l M'g'r,

E. ST. JOHN,
Gen'l Tkt. & Pass. Agt.

CHICAGO.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER
_from this date to January 1, 1885: For $2.00 you get it for one year
and a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED STATES,
FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any first-class
weekly agricultural paper in this country._

       *       *       *       *       *




SILK CULTURE.


WOMEN IN SILK CULTURE.


The feminine portion of our population is getting to be mighty
independent. Instead of waiting, Micawber-like, for something (a man) to
turn up they are going to work to turn it up themselves. They would
rather make a living for themselves than have a man to make it for them.
They are teaching schools, operating telegraph instruments and
telephones, clerking, keeping books of account, type-writing, doing
short-hand reporting, lecturing, preaching, practicing law, and some
have so far fallen from grace as to be editing papers. But many of these
occupations present closed doors to our country girls and women. Many of
these can not leave their country homes, and these occupations, with the
exception of school teaching, can not be carried on in the country.
Others, who could leave home, are chary of braving the wiles and
temptations of the city, and their friends are still more loth to have
them go. The great need is some work, light, respectable, and yet fairly
remunerative, which our country lassies can carry on at home. School
teaching is possible, but teaching country district schools is the most
thankless of all drudgery, and, besides, a majority of our young women
are not able to endure the worry and close confinement. If it can be
made successful, sericulture offers by far the best opportunity to
country girls to earn their own pin money, or even their own living. It
can be engaged in at home; it is light, pleasant, and interesting work;
and there is no doubt that American silk can be produced of such a
quality that there will be a brisk demand for it at good prices. But if
all this be true the question at once presents itself, Why have not
American women engaged largely in sericulture?

The answer is that they have been appalled at the very outset by the
alleged expense of the undertaking. The promoters of the enterprise took
to writing books. There was an excuse for this amounting almost to a
necessity. To engage in silk culture, a person must be possessed of some
special knowledge. It is no harder than poultry or bee-keeping, but a
person to succeed at these must have some expert knowledge, and as
sericulture was a new thing, beginners must have books containing what
they needed. But these authors made the business much more difficult and
expensive than it should be. First of all, they laid it down as one of
the Medes and Persian laws of sericulture, that the worms must have
mulberry leaves to subsist upon. Mulberry sprouts are costly to begin
with; then the trees must grow at least two years, and should grow five
years, before the leaves are used. This, of itself, was enough to deter
but a very few from silk culture. But they made it appear, also, that
very expensive appliances for a cocoonery were necessary, and only the
most costly breeds of worms should be used, entailing greater expense
and difficulty. The books were, and for that matter are, filled with dry
scientific details of the internal construction of the worm and of its
habits--details which only confused the learner and which, though giving
an author material from which to deduce rules of instruction, should
have been omitted from the book and their place supplied with the rules
deduced. In short, it seemed to be the prime object to make sericulture
as hard and forbidding as possible, and to deter the people from it
rather than to induce them to engage in the work. For this very reason
there has been considerable popular indifference to it, and from the
agricultural press it has not received that attention which so promising
an industry deserves. I would not be so unjust as to leave the reader to
infer that all authors on sericulture have been thus guilty. There have
been some very few who from the very start have presented it in as easy
and practicable a light as was consistent with successful work. Nor
would I be ready to assert that those who have said it could not be made
financially profitable without mulberry groves, fancy priced worms, and
expensive appliances, have done so from base motives. Yet it would
appear as if not a few could be justly indicted of this; for they have
mulberry sprouts, fancy priced worms, and costly appliances to sell. And
perhaps it occurred to them that if they deterred the people generally
from taking hold of it, they would have less opposition and competition.

But be this as it may, the fact is that it is not necessary to have
mulberry groves, costly appliances, or even fancy priced worms (though
good worms only should be reared), in order to profitably engage in
sericulture. I know of no business presenting so promising an opening
that requires less capital. And I say this, having no axe to grind in
any way, simply for the sake of those girls and women who might make
money by it, and who would do so if they only knew the facts. I have no
book, no sprouts, no worms, nothing whatever, to sell.

I have said that the leaves of the mulberry are not essential to silk
growing. If this be true the greatest obstacle in the way of sericulture
becoming a great national industry will have been removed. And that it
is true is proven by the experience of not a few practical silk-growers.
Without exception those who have tested the matter say that the leaves
of the Osage-orange are equal to those of the mulberry, and some say
they are better. My position brings me into correspondence with the
leading specialists in agricultural pursuits, and among others with many
practical silk-growers. To-day I received letters from three
silk-growers, one in Illinois, one in Kansas, and one in California.
Each had fed the leaves of the Osage-orange exclusively for the last two
years, and with the best results. One said there was no doubt that they
were at least equal to the leaves of the mulberry, and the other two
pronounced them superior. One of our best authorities on sericulture,
Prof. Barricelli, has shown by means of chemical analyses and other
scientific data, that as nourishment for silk-worms the Osage is
superior to the mulberry. In fact, nine-tenths of the practical
silk-growers of the West, those who are making it not only practicable
but profitable, are now feeding Osage leaves exclusively. This should be
known by the people at large. There can be no monopoly of the
Osage-orange. No one can demand of the expectant silk culturist
exorbitant prices for Osage sprouts. In very few localities will it be
necessary to plant the Osage even. We have an abundance of Osage hedges,
particularly in the West. In such localities the silk culturist will be
at no expense whatever for food for the worms, and will not be under
even the necessity of waiting a couple of years for it to grow. When
this is more fully understood by the girls and women of the country, we
may expect silk culture to assume the importance of a profitable
national industry.

JOHN M. STAHL.

       *       *       *       *       *

MEDICAL.

Weak Nervous Men

[Illustration:]

Whose DEBILITY, EXHAUSTED POWERS, premature decay and failure to
perform LIFE'S DUTIES properly are caused by excesses, errors of
youth, etc., will find a perfect and lasting restoration to ROBUST
HEALTH and VIGOROUS MANHOOD in

THE MARSTON BOLUS.

Neither stomach drugging nor instruments. This treatment of NERVOUS
DEBILITY and PHYSICAL DECAY is uniformly successful because based on
perfect diagnosis, NEW AND DIRECT METHODS and absolute THOROUGHNESS.
Full information and Treatise free.

Address Consulting Physician of
MARSTON REMEDY CO., 46W. 14th St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

TWO LADIES MET ONE DAY.

One said to the other "By the way how is that Catarrh of yours?" "Why
it's simply horrid, getting worse every day." "Well, why don't you try
'DR. SYKES' SURE CURE,' I know it will cure you!" "Well, then I will,
for I've tried everything else."

Just six weeks afterward they met again and No. 1 said. "Why, how much
better you look, what's up! Going to get married, or what?" "Well, yes,
and it's all owing to 'DR. SYKES' SURE CURE FOR CATARRH;' oh, why
didn't I know of it before? it's simply wonderful."

Send 10 cents to Dr. C.R. Sykes, 181 Monroe street, Chicago, for
valuable book of full information, and mention the "Two Ladies."

       *       *       *       *       *

30 DAYS' TRIAL

DR. DYE'S

[Illustration]

ELECTRO VOLTAIC BELT, and other ELECTRIC APPLIANCES. We will send on
Thirty Days' Trial, TO MEN, YOUNG OR OLD, who are suffering from NERVOUS
DEBILITY, LOST VITALITY, and those diseases of a PERSONAL NATURE
resulting from ABUSES and OTHER CAUSES. Speedy relief and complete
restoration to HEALTH, VIGOR and MANHOOD GUARANTEED. Send at once for
Illustrated Pamphlet free. Address

VOLTAIC BELT CO., MARSHALL, MICH.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSUMPTION.

I have a positive remedy for the above disease; by its use thousands of
cases of the worst kind and of long standing have been cured. In deed,
so strong is my faith in its efficacy, that I will send TWO BOTTLES
FREE, together with a VALUABLE TREATISE on this disease, to any
sufferer. Give Express & P.O. address. DR. T.A. SLOCUM, 181 Pearl St.,
N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




PUBLICATIONS

THE YOUTH'S COMPANION

FOR 1884.

THE COMPANION presents below the Announcement of its Fifty-Seventh
Volume. Its unusual character, both in the range of its topics, and its
remarkably brilliant list of Contributors, will, we trust, be accepted
as a grateful recognition of the favor with which the paper has been
received by more than 300,000 subscribers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustrated Serial Stories.

A Story of English Rustic Life, by Thomas Hardy.
The Foundling of Paris, by Alphonse Daudet.
A Boys' Story, by J.T. Trowbridge.
The Covenanter's Daughter, by Mrs. Oliphant.
A Story of Adventure, by C.A. Stephens.
My School at Orange Grove, by Marie B. Williams.

       *       *       *       *       *

Science and Natural History.

Eccentricities of Insanity, by Dr. W.A. Butler.
Common Adulterations of Food, by Dr. J.C. Draper.
The Home Life of Oysters, and other Natural History Papers, by
    Arabella B. Buckley.
Wonders in Ourselves; or the Curiosities of the Human Body, by Dr.
    Austin Flint, Jr.
Insect Enemies of the Garden, the Orchard and the Wheat-Field, by
    A.S. Packard, Jr.
Demons of the Air and Water. A fascinating Series of Papers on
    Sanitary Science, by R. Ogden Doremus.
The Youth Of the Brain, "Speech in Man," "Animal Poisons and their
    Effects," and Other Papers, by Dr. W.A. Hammond.
Strange Ways Of Curing People. A Description of Curious
    Sanitaria,--the Peat, Mud, Sand, Whey, and Grape Cures, by William
    H. Rideing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Encouragement and Advice.

Hints for Poor Farmers, by C.E. Winder.
The Failures of Great Men, by James Parton.
A Dietary for Nervous People, by Dr. W.A. Hammond.
Hints for Country House-Builders, by Calvert Vaux.
The Gift Of Memory, and Other Papers, giving Instances of Self-Help,
    by Samuel Smiles.
A New Profession for Young Men. The Opportunities for Young Men as
    Electrical Engineers, by Thomas A. Edison.
At the Age Of Twenty-One. A Series of Papers showing what Great Men
    had accomplished, and what they proposed doing, at that period of
    their lives, by Edwin P. Whipple.

       *       *       *       *       *

Original Poems.

BY ALFRED TENNYSON,
VICTOR HUGO,
THE EARL OF LYTTON,
J.C. WHITTIER,
T.B. ALDRICH,
DR. CHARLES MACKAY,
And Many Others.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustrated Adventure and Travel.

Shark-Hunting, by T.B. Luce.
Four Amusing Stories, by C.A. Stephens.
Outwitted. An Indian Adventure, by Lieut. A. Chapin.
A Honeymoon in the Jungle, by Phil. Robinson.
Wrecked Upon a Volcanic Island, by Richard Heath.
Stories of the Cabins in the West, by E.J. Marston.
Adventures in the Mining Districts, by H. Fillmore.
The Capture of Some Infernal Machines, by William Howson.
Breaking in the Reindeer, and Other Sketches of Polar Adventure, by
    W.H. Gilder.
An American in Persia, by the American Minister Resident, Teheran,
    S.G.W. Benjamin.
China as Seen by a Chinaman, by the Editor of the Chinese American,
    Wong Chin Foo.
Stories Of Menageries. Incidents connected with Menagerie Life, and
    the Capture and Taming of Wild Beasts for Exhibition, by S.S. Cairns.
Boys Afoot in Italy and Switzerland. The Adventures of two English
    boys travelling abroad at an expense of one dollar a day, by Nugent
    Robinson.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reminiscences and Anecdotes.

Stage-Driver Stories, by Rose Terry Cooke.
Stories of Saddle-Bag Preachers, by H.L. Winckley.
My First Visit to a Newspaper Office, by Murat Halstead.
Queen Victoria's Household and Drawing-Rooms, by H.W. Lucy.
Child Friendships of Charles Dickens, by his Daughter, Mamie
    Dickens.
Our Herbariums; Adventures in Collecting Them, by A Young Lady.
My Pine-Apple Farm, with incidents of Florida Life, by C.H. Pattee.
Bigwigs of the English Bench and Bar, by a London Barrister, W.L.
    Woodroffe.
At School with Sir Garnet Wolseley, and the Life of a Page of Honor in
    the Vice-Regal Court of Dublin, by Nugent Robinson.
Student Waiters. Some Humorous Incidents of a Summer Vacation in the
    White Mountains, by Child McPherson.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE EDITORIALS OF THE COMPANION, without having any bias, will give
clear views of current events at home and abroad. THE CHILDREN'S PAGE
will sustain its reputation for charming pictures, poems, and stories
for the little ones.

ISSUED WEEKLY. SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.75. SPECIMEN COPIES FREE.

SPECIAL OFFER.--To any one who subscribes now, and sends us $1.75, we
will send the Companion free to January 1st, 1884, and a full year's
subscription from that date.

Address,

PERRY MASON & CO.,
41 TEMPLE PLACE, BOSTON, MASS.

_Please mention where you read this Advertisement._

       *       *       *       *       *




HOUSEHOLD.

    For nothing lovelier can be found
    In woman than to study _household_ good.--_Milton._


THE SCHOOL-MARM'S STORY.

    A frosty chill was in the air--
      How plainly I remember--
    The bright autumnal fires had paled,
      Save here and there an ember;
    The sky looked hard, the hills were bare,
    And there were tokens everywhere
      That it had come--November.

    I locked the time-worn school-house door,
      The village seat of learning.
    Across the smooth, well trodden path
      My homeward footstep turning;
    My heart a troubled question bore,
    And in my mind, as oft before,
      A vexing thought was burning.

    "Why is it up hill all the way?"
      Thus ran my meditations:
    The lessons had gone wrong that day
      And I had lost my patience.
    "Is there no way to soften care,
    And make it easier to bear
      Life's sorrows and vexations?"

    Across my pathway through the wood
      A fallen tree was lying;
    On this there sat two little girls,
      And one of them was crying.
    I heard her sob: "And if I could,
    I'd get my lessons awful good,
      But what's the use of trying?"

    And then the little hooded head
      Sank on the other's shoulder.
    The little weeper sought the arms
      That opened to enfold her.
    Against the young heart, kind and true,
    She nestled close, and neither knew
      That I was a beholder.

    And then I heard--ah! ne'er was known
      Such judgment without malice,
    Nor queenlier council ever heard
      In senate, house or palace!--
    "I should have failed there, I am sure,
    Don't be discouraged; try once more,
      And I will help you, Alice."

    "And I will help you." This is how
      To soften care and grieving;
    Life is made easier to bear
      By helping and by giving.
    Here was the answer I had sought,
    And I, the teacher, being taught
      The secret of true living.

    If "I will help you" were the rule.
      How changed beyond all measure
    Life would become! Each heavy load
      Would be a golden treasure;
    Pain and vexation be forgot;
    Hope would prevail in every lot,
      And life be only pleasure.

--_Wolstan Dixey._




A CHAT ABOUT THE FASHIONS.


Although the lady readers of THE PRAIRIE FARMER have probably
by this time made up the heavier part of their winter wardrobe, still a
few suggestions may not be out of place, for the "fashions" is a subject
of which we seldom tire.

In discussing the subject of silk and silk-culture at the late Woman's
Congress, Mrs Julia Ward Howe said that "although silk is said to be
depreciating in value, and is not quite as popular as formerly, yet we
must confess it lies very near the feminine heart," at which statement
an audible smile passed over the audience, as each one acknowledged to
herself its truth.

We are glad to see that wrappers are becoming quite "the thing" for
afternoon home wear, and a lady now need not feel at all out of place
receiving her callers in a pretty, gracefully made wrapper. The Watteau
wrapper is made of either silk or brocaded woolen goods, conveniently
short, the back cut square at the neck, and folded in a handsome Watteau
plait at the center, with a full ruche effect. A yolk portion of silk
fills in the open neck and is sewed flatly underneath to the back. The
side seams are curved so that a clinging effect is produced at the
sides. Jabbots of lace extending down the front, and a prettily bowed
ribbon at the right shoulder, with a standing collar at the neck, and a
linen choker collar give the finishing touches to the toilette.

Velvets and velveteens seem to be taking the place of silk, and are
really quite as cheap. In fact, velveteens are cheaper, as they are so
much wider. A suit of velveteen is fashionable for any occasion--for
receptions, church or street costume. The redingote or polonaise is very
stylish and pretty, especially for a tall, rather slight person. For a
young miss the close-fitting frock coat, with pointed vest effectively
disclosed between the cut-away edges of the coat fronts, is much worn.
The latter curve away from the shoulders and are nicely rounded off at
their lower front corners. An underarm dart gives a smooth adjustment
over each hip, and in these darts are inserted the back edges of the
vest. Buttons and buttonholes close the vest, but the coat fronts do not
meet at all. The coat and long-pointed overskirt can be made of any
heavy material, but the vest should be of silk; a deep box-plait on the
bottom of the underskirt made of silk to match the vest will make the
suit very stylish and pretty.

There ought to be great satisfaction among the wearers of bonnets and
hats this season, because they can so easily have what they want--big or
little, plain or decorated, as they please. For a person with dark hair,
gold braid loosely put around the edge of a velvet capote is very
becoming. Bunches of tips are worn much more than the long, drooping
plumes, though both are fashionable; while birds--sometimes as many as
three on a hat--are often preferred to either. We notice upon the street
a great many elegantly dressed ladies with but a single band of wide
velvet ribbon fastened somewhat carelessly around the bonnet and tied in
a bow under the chin. Unique it may be, but undoubtedly the taste of the
wearer, would be the verdict of the passer by. In fact, one can scarcely
be out of the fashion in the choice of a bonnet or hat, but care should
be taken that it be just the thing for the wearer, and that it be
properly put on.

I firmly believe in the doctrine that "good clothes tendeth toward
grace." What woman can not talk better when she knows she looks well?
She can then forget herself and lose all self-consciousness, which is a
state most devoutly to be desired by all women--particularly our young
women. So, girls, study your costumes, especially the "superfluities,"
or "furbelows," as they are wont to be called; make yourselves look as
pretty as you possibly can--and then forget yourselves.

I wish all our lady readers might have been here the holiday week, for
the stores were perfect bowers of beauty. It was a pretty sight in
itself to watch the crowds of happy-faced children, with their little
pocket-books in their hands, at the various counters buying presents for
father, mother, brothers, and sisters. Children always enjoy Christmas
more when they can make, as well as receive, presents. So I hope all our
little readers were made happy by both giving and receiving.

I am sorry I could not give you a more satisfactory talk on the
fashions, but our space is limited this week. I hope the ladies will not
forget that our "Household" department is open to them, and that they
will contribute anything that may be of interest to the others.

MARY HOWE.




A KITCHEN SILO.


The farmer's wife in the Netherlands has long been using a sort of a
silo. Probably she had been doing so for long years before M. Geoffrey
began experimenting with preserved stock food in France. The Netherland
housewife's silo consists of an earthenware jar about two feet tall.
Into one of these jars in summer time she places the kidney bean; in
another shelled green peas; in another broad beans, and so on. Making a
layer about six inches deep in each. She sprinkles a little salt on top
and presses the whole firmly down. Then she adds another layer and more
salt. She leaves a light weight on top to keep all well pressed down and
exclude the air, in the intervals between pickings for often the harvest
of a single day will not fill the jar. When full, she puts on a heavier
weight, and covers all with brown paper. She thus has green vegetables
preserved for winter. The ensilage is said to be "more or less good,
according to taste."

       *       *       *       *       *

CHICKEN SALAD: Two common sized fowls, one teacup of good salad
oil, half a jar of French sweet mustard, the hard-boiled yolks of ten
eggs, half a pint of vinegar, one teaspoonful of cayenne pepper, eight
heads of celery, one teaspoon of salt or a little more if required. Cut
and mix the chicken and celery and set away in a cool place. Mash the
eggs to a paste with the oil, then add the vinegar and other things, mix
thoroughly, but do not pour it over the salad until about half an hour
before serving, as the celery may become wilted.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOFT GINGERBREAD: One cup butter and two cups sugar well worked
together, three eggs well beaten in, one cup New Orleans molasses, one
cup good sweet milk and five cups of flour into which has been stirred
one teaspoonful baking powder, not heaped, two tablespoonfuls ground
cinnamon and one tablespoonful ground ginger. Bake in small dripping
pans not too full, as they will rise.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mixture of two parts of glycerine, one part ammonia, and a
little rose water whitens and softens the hands.


       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKS.


BOOKS FREE!


Good books are valued by intelligent men and women more than silver and
gold. They are treasures in every home. They are to the mind what light
and heat are to plants. They

_STORE THE MIND WITH USEFUL KNOWLEDGE_;

the mind directs the hands. An intelligent man has an advantage over one
who is ignorant, whether he is a farmer, or mechanic, or merchant, and
is surer of success in his occupation. Think how

_LOSSES OF TIME AND MONEY MAY BE SAVED_

by having some book at hand containing just the information desired in
some line of the rural industries. We offer an excellent opportunity for
any one to obtain BOOKS FREE for himself or family, and also for
societies, farmers' clubs, and associations to make additions to a
library, or to start one.

These books comprise standard works, and the latest and best books for

Farmers,    Stockmen,
  Dairymen,   Fruit-Growers,
    Gardeners,   Florists,
      Poultrymen,  Apiarists,
        Silk-Culturists,  Housekeepers,
          Architects,    Etc., Etc.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY will give to any person,
association, or club, who will obtain and send subscribers to THE
PRAIRIE FARMER (including both new subscribers and renewals), at the
regular price of the paper ($2) each, any of the books contained in our
Book List on the following terms:

For THREE subscribers, books to the amount of $1.50.

For FOUR subscribers, books to the amount of $2.00.

For FIVE subscribers, books to the amount of $2.50.

For SIX subscribers, books to the amount of $3.00.

For SEVEN subscribers, books to the amount of $3.50.

For EIGHT subscribers, books to the amount of $4.00

For TEN subscribers, books to the amount of $5.00.

_FOR TWELVE SUBSCRIPTIONS AND UPWARD_,

A DOLLAR'S WORTH OF BOOKS FOR EVERY TWO SUBSCRIPTIONS SENT AT $2.00
EACH.

All books given under these offers will be delivered at our office, No.
150 Monroe street.

If it is desired that they shall be forwarded by express, they will be
packed and delivered at the express office by us, the receiver to pay
cost of carriage.

Sent by mail to any part of the United States or Canada, the postage
will be seven cents on each dollar's worth of books.

It is necessary that parties to whom the books are given shall remit us
the postage before the books are sent.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Dictionary Free!

This is no catchpenny affair, but a valuable lexicon. It is the popular

AMERICAN DICTIONARY,

on the basis of Webster, Worcester, Johnson, and other eminent American
and English authorities. It contains over 32,000 words, with accurate
definitions, proper spelling, and exact pronunciation; to which is added
a mass of valuable information. It is enriched with 400 illustrations.

REMEMBER,

every subscriber at the regular price of THE PRAIRIE FARMER
gets this Dictionary FREE, if preferred to our commercial map.

       *       *       *       *       *

HERE IS ANOTHER.

ROPP'S CALCULATOR
And Account Book for 1884.

This is the most useful thing in the way of a memorandum book and
calculator ever issued. It is a work of nearly 80 pages of printed
matter and an equal number of blank leaves, ruled, for keeping accounts.
The contents include a vast array of practical calculations, 100,000 or
more in number, arranged for reference like a dictionary, so that a
farmer or business man may turn to the figures, and find the answer to
any problem in business.

There are three kinds. We use No. 3. Full leather; assorted colors, with
flap, slate pocket, and a renewable account book, ruled with divisions
or headings especially adapted to farmers' use. The retail price of
this book in leather is $1. We will send it FREE to every
subscriber to THE PRAIRIE FARMER who sends us $2. Or we will
send THREE copies of No. 1, the cheaper issue.

       *       *       *       *       *

AND YET ANOTHER.

AMERICAN ETIQUETTE AND RULES OF POLITENESS.

It is the latest and best standard work recommended and endorsed by all
who have read it. The acknowledged authority. Beautifully and
appropriately illustrated; handsomely and substantially bound. It
contains 38 chapters, treating on all subjects relating to etiquette. We
send this book--plain edition, to any subscriber desiring it who sends
$2.00 for THE PRAIRIE FARMER year, or for two subscribers to
THE PRAIRIE FARMER at $2 each, we will send American Etiquette
bound in English cloth, burnished edges.

Our large and varied premium list will be issued in a few days. Send for
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.

TO PRESERVE THE HEALTH

Use the Magneton Appliance Co.'s

MAGNETIC LUNG PROTECTOR!

PRICE ONLY $5.

They are priceless to LADIES, GENTLEMEN, and CHILDREN with WEAK LUNGS;
no case of PNEUMONIA OR CROUP is ever known where these garments are
worn. They also prevent and cure HEART DIFFICULTIES, COLDS, RHEUMATISM,
NEURALGIA, THROAT TROUBLES, DIPHTHERIA, CATARRH, AND ALL KINDRED
DISEASES. Will WEAR any service for THREE YEARS. Are worn over the
under-clothing.

CATARRH, It is needless to describe the symptoms of this nauseous
disease that is sapping the life and strength of only too many of the
fairest and best of both sexes. Labor, study, and research in America,
Europe, and Eastern lands, have resulted in the Magnetic Lung Protector,
affording cure for Catarrh, a remedy which contains No Drugging of the
System, and with the continuous stream of Magnetism permeating through
the afflicted organs; MUST RESTORE THEM TO A HEALTHY ACTION. WE PLACE
OUR PRICE for this Appliance at less than one-twentieth of the price
asked by others for remedies upon which you take all the chances, and WE
ESPECIALLY INVITE the patronage of the MANY PERSONS who have tried
DRUGGING THE STOMACHS WITHOUT EFFECT.

HOW TO OBTAIN This Appliance. Go to your druggist and ask for them. If
they have not got them, write to the proprietors, enclosing the price,
in letter at our risk, and they will be sent to you at once by mail,
post paid.

Send stamp for the "New Departure in Medical Treatment WITHOUT
MEDICINE," with thousands of testimonials,

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO.,
218 State Street, Chicago, Ill.

NOTE.--Send one dollar in postage stamps or currency (in letter
at our risk) with size of shoe usually worn, and try a pair of our
Magnetic Insoles, and be convinced of the power residing in our Magnetic
Appliances. Positively _no cold feet where they are worn, or money
refunded._

       *       *       *       *       *

CLUB RATES.

To Our Readers.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER is the OLDEST, MOST RELIABLE, and the LEADING
AGRICULTURAL JOURNAL OF THE GREAT NORTHWEST, devoted exclusively to the
interests of the Farmer, Gardener, Florist, Stock Breeder, Dairyman,
Etc., and every species of Industry connected with that great portion of
the People of the World, the Producers. Now in the Forty-Second Year of
its existence, and never, during more than two score years, having
missed the regular visit to its patrons, it will continue to maintain
supremacy as a STANDARD AUTHORITY ON MATTERS PERTAINING TO AGRICULTURE
AND KINDRED PRODUCTIVE INDUSTRIES, and as a FRESH AND READABLE FAMILY
AND FIRESIDE JOURNAL. It will from time to time add new features of
interest, securing for each department the ablest writers of practical
experience.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER will discuss, without fear or favor, all topics of
interest properly belonging to a Farm and Fireside Paper, treat of the
most approved practices in AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE, BREEDING, ETC.;
the varied Machinery, Implements, and improvements in same, for use both
in Field and House; and, in fact, everything of interest to the
Agricultural community, whether in FIELD, MARKET, OR HOME CIRCLE.

IT WILL GIVE INFORMATION UPON THE PUBLIC DOMAIN, WESTERN SOILS,
CLIMATE, ETC.; ANSWER INQUIRIES on all manner of subjects which come
within its sphere; GIVE each week, full and RELIABLE MARKET, CROP,
AND WEATHER REPORTS; PRESENT the family with choice and INTERESTING
LITERATURE; amuse and INSTRUCT THE YOUNG FOLKS: AND, in a word, aim
to be, in every respect, AN INDISPENSABLE AND UNEXCEPTIONABLE FARM and
fireside COMPANION.

Terms of Subscription and 'Club Rates':

ONE COPY, 1 YEAR, postage paid      $ 2.00

TWO COPIES, "   "  "                  3.75

FIVE  "  "   sent at one time         8.75

TEN   "  "   sent at one time, and
        one to Club getter           16.00

TWENTY "  "   sent at one time, and
               one to Club getter    30.00

Address

The Prairie Farmer Publishing Co.,
Chicago. Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

SELF CURE FREE

Nervous   Lost      Weakness
Debility  Manhood   and Decay

A favorite prescription of a noted specialist (now retired.)
Druggists can fill it. Address

DR. WARD & CO., LOUISIANA, MO.

       *       *       *       *       *




OUR YOUNG FOLKS


A TALK ABOUT THE LION.


We wonder how many of THE PRAIRIE FARMER boys and girls have
seen the lion, "king of beasts," as he is called. Perhaps not all of you
as yet, though many of you doubtless will as the years roll on--and, by
the way, you will find that the older you grow the more quickly will
they speed away. So be careful in this, the beautiful springtime of your
lives, to so cultivate and make ready the garden of your minds that the
coming manhood and womanhood may not only find you with well developed
arms and limbs and muscles, ready to face the world and to help lift
some of its burdens, but also with a mind that has kept even pace with
the body--because of constant _growth_.

We think we will have to depart from our usual natural history articles
some day, and have a talk with the boys and girls on this subject of
growth--growth in its largest, broadest sense, the mind, soul, and body
all growing together into the stature of a perfect man.

But to return to the lion. This animal is the largest of the cat family
and is found, only in Asia and Africa. The Asiatic lion is not so large
nor so fierce as the African, and has a much smaller mane. The mane of
the African lion is long and thick, and gives the animal a very noble
appearance; the female, however, has no mane. The lion is always of one
color, that is, without spots or stripes, generally tawny, though the
mane is dark sometimes nearly black. The lion gets its full growth when
seven or eight years old, and lives usually about twenty-five years,
though some have been known to live much longer in menageries.

These animals see much better in the night than in the day, so they
generally hide away during the day and search for food in the gray dawn
of the morning. They feed chiefly on antelopes, zebras, giraffes, and
wild cattle. It is said that the lion rarely attacks man, only in cases
of extreme hunger; indeed, they seem somewhat afraid of man. Dr.
Livingstone says that when the lion meets a man in daylight it will stop
two or three seconds to stare at him, then turn slowly round and walk
off a few steps, looking over its shoulder, then begin to trot, and when
at last he thinks he is no longer seen will bound away like a hare. The
Doctor says also, that the roar of the lion is very like the cry of the
ostrich, but the former roars only at night, however, while the latter
cries only by day.

Did you not think it wonderful when you saw for the first time, perhaps,
a keeper walk boldly into the lions' cage, when in their natural state
they are so very fierce and wild? Well, we think it is wonderful,
although the keepers tell us that they are easily tamed.

In ancient times they were used in many more ways than they are now.
Hanno, the Carthaginian general, had a lion to carry his baggage, and
Mark Antony often rode through the streets of Rome in a chariot drawn by
lions. A short time ago we read a story of a slave named Androclus, who,
while hiding away from his master in the deserts of Africa, cured a lion
of lameness by pulling a thorn out of its foot. The slave was afterward
caught, carried to Rome, and condemned to be eaten by the wild beasts.
He was thrown into a lion's den, but the beast, instead of killing him
fawned upon him and showed the greatest delight at seeing him; Androclus
was surprised to find that it was the same lion whose foot he had cured
in the desert. The Emperor, it is said, was so much pleased at the sight
that he gave the slave his pardon, and presented him also with the lion,
after which he used to lead the great beast tamely through the streets,
held simply by a little chain.

In modern times, also, lions have been known to exhibit strong
friendship for man. In 799, two lions in the Jardin des Plantes (Garden
of Plants), at Paris, became so fond of their keeper that when he was
taken sick they gave signs of the greatest sorrow, and when he recovered
and came back to them they rushed to meet him, roaring with joy,
meanwhile licking his hands and face.

Perhaps you have read of Theodorus, King of Abyssinia (he killed himself
in 1868), who used to keep several tame lions in his palace and treated
them almost like dogs.

Travelers tell us, too, that these great animals often show fondness for
other animals, as, for instance, an old lioness belonging to the Dublin
Zoological Gardens was taken sick, and was greatly annoyed by the rats.
At last a little terrier dog was put into the cage, but was received by
the lioness with a surly growl; finally when the old animal saw the
little dog could kill her enemies, the rats, she coaxed him to her, and
petted and fondled him, so that they soon became great friends.

The lion is a mammal of the order carnivora, or flesh-eating animals.

The word lion comes from the Latin leo, Greek leon, lion.

Would you like me to tell you next week about a bear I saw upon the
hills of Nova Scotia, near the scene of Longfellow's beautiful
Evangeline, a few months ago?

MARY HOWE.




A JACK-KNIFE GENIUS.


St. Louis Post-Dispatch: William Yohe claims to be the champion
jack-knife artist of the day, although he was born in St. Louis and not
Yankeedom. A reporter heard of this professional lacerator of pine
sticks and sought him out. It was not until the inside of an unused
Methodist church at Kirkwood, this county, was reached that Mr. Yohe and
his knife was cornered. The knife was slashing cigar-boxes to pieces at
railway speed when the reporter opened up with: "Are you the man who
makes an automatic world's fair and St. Louis Exposition with a knife?"

"No, that isn't what I call it. I am making what I call the Missouri
Pacific and Strasburg Cathedral Automatic Wonder, with the Golden Ark of
the Covenant. It will contain over 180,000 pieces and will have 1,100
moving and working figures."

All around the gaunt and dismantled church were piles of cigar-boxes and
laths and myriads of nicely-carved pieces of wood, apparently portions
of models of buildings. The whittler was a small man, with keen eyes and
ready tongue and about thirty-six years of age. In the course of an
hour's conversation he said in substance: "I didn't know that I was
anything extra of a whittler until about 1869, when, in a small way, I
made some models. I was in Texas working at millwrighting. The first
large piece I ever made was a model of a Bermuda castle. Afterward I
made Balmoral Castle, Bingen Castle, Miramar Castle, and the Texas State
Capitol at Austin. Solomon's Temple contained 12,268 pieces and had
1,369 windows. It is now on exhibition in Texas. The Austin Capitol
Building has 62,844 pieces and 561 moving people. Every room and
department in the building was given, with all the officers and
legislators. Everybody was represented, down to the man sawing wood in
the basement for the furnaces. All the figures were moved by a wooden
engine, which was run by sand falling on an overshot wheel. I made this
piece at odd moments in 1881.

"I have just hired this church and begun steady work. I shall sleep and
eat in this church until about May 1, next. The material? Yes, it does
take considerable. I have already used up 967 cigar boxes and 300 laths.
It will take in all 1,800 cigar boxes, 500 laths, and 500 feet of
lumber. The cigar boxes I get for one cent each. I used no tools except
my knife."

       *       *       *       *       *

Little Johnny Botts found a garter snake in the park the other
day and he brought it home and hid it in the piano. When his sister's
young man opened the instrument that evening to play "For Goodness Sake"
he thought he had 'em and yelled like a Piute on the war-hath. They
won't believe in Johnny's innocence somehow, and his father said that
after dinner he'd attend to his case. When the family sat down to table
Johnny solemnly entered the room in his stocking feet and carrying a
pillow which he placed on his chair before sitting down. "What new
monkey shine is that?" growled old Botts. "S-s-s-h, pa," said Johnny
anxiously; "I was playing fireworks with Billy Simson this afternoon and
I swallowed a torpedo." "Did, eh?" "Yes, and if anything should touch me
kinder hard I might go off and all bust up."

       *       *       *       *       *

THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS

in prizes is offered by the YOUTH'S COMPANION for the best
short stories either for boys, for girls, humorous stories, or stories
of adventure, to be sent them before May 20th, 1884. The terms and
conditions of the competition are issued in a circular--for which all
who desire to compete are invited to send.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sin is very much like the ordinary North American mule. It may
be very tame and docile at the front, but in the rear there is always a
sly kick hidden away and you'd better be on your guard.




OUR BOOK TABLE

BOOKS RECEIVED.


ARIUS THE LIBYAN: AN IDYL OF THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH. Author unknown. NEW
YORK: D. Appleton & Co. CHICAGO: Jansen, McClurg & Co. 12mo. Cloth.
Price, $1.50.

This is a romance of the church in the latter part of the third and the
beginning of the fourth centuries. The scene is laid near Cyrene, A.D.
265. It is an exquisitely written idyl of primitive Christian life, and
can not fail to attract a great deal of attention, especially now that
the public mind is being turned in the direction of early church
history. It deals in a powerful, yet simple, manner with that subtle
question, the Trinity of the Godhead, and gives the reader many new
thoughts in connection with it. The characters portrayed awaken an
unusual degree of interest, being as they are, persons eminent in
history, both secular and religious. As one follows the story to its
close he can not but agree with the author, that Arius, the hero and
arch-heretic of the Nicene age, was "one of the grandest, purest, least
understood, and most systematically misrepresented characters in human
history." The latter portion of the book brings out, prominently, the
real character of Constantine, stigmatized by Arius as "that unbaptised
pagan, the flamen of Jupiter." The noble plan of the book and the grave
importance of the questions that agitate the characters, combine to make
it a valuable production to both believer and skeptic.


THE ORGANS OF SPEECH. By G.H. Von Meyer, Professor In Ordinary of
Anatomy at the University of Zurich. NEW YORK: D. Appleton &
Co. CHICAGO: Jansen, McClurg & Co. 12 mo. Cloth. Price $1.75.

This book is the forty-sixth volume in the international scientific
series, and needs no better introduction than the well-known name of the
author. The subject of the organs of speech and their application in the
formation of articulate sounds is treated in a masterly and exhaustive
manner. The object of the author has been not merely "to enter into the
field of discussion upon the various modifications of sounds, * * but to
bring forward a sufficient number of examples in confirmation of the
laws explained," in which purpose he has most admirably succeeded. The
work contains forty-seven wood cuts, and will be a valuable addition to
any library. We would recommend it especially to teachers of vocal music
and declamation.


FIFTY YEARS' RECOLLECTIONS. By Jeriah Bonham PEORIA, ILL.: J.W.
Franks & Sons. Sold by subscription.

This is a carefully compiled work, giving the author's observations and
reflections on the historical events of Illinois for the past fifty
years, it also gives very interesting and full biographical sketches of
many of the prominent men who have, during this time, figured in the
affairs of the State, so far as Mr. Bonham's personal acquaintanceship
and recollections extend. The sketches, condensed, yet complete, of the
sixteen Governors of Illinois, from Shadrach Bond, the first Governor,
down to the present time are especially interesting. The book will be
enjoyed by the old settlers of the State on account of its personal
reminiscences, which are all true, not drawn from the imagination.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Youth's Companion, Boston, is another famous, and deservedly so,
American juvenile publication. It has attained an immense circulation.
Among its contributors are a score or more of the most talented American
authors. It is edited with great care and ability. See advertisement on
another page.

       *       *       *       *       *

From W.D. Hoard, a report of the proceedings of the eleventh annual
Dairymen's Association of Wisconsin, held at Elk Horn, January 31 and
February 1-2, 1883. The pamphlet was compiled by D.W. Curtis, Secretary
of the association, Fort Atkinson, Wis.

The second edition of Bee-Keeping for Profit: A New System of Bee
Management, by Mrs. Lizzie E. Cotton, West Gorham, Me. Illustrated.
Price, $1.00.

Seventeenth annual report of the Northwestern Dairymen's Association,
with addresses and discussions delivered at the meeting held at Mankato,
Minn., February 14-16, 1883. R.P. McGlincy, Secretary, Elgin, Ill.

The Florida Annual. Edited by C.K. Munroe, 140 Nassau st., New Fork.
Price, 50 cts.

How to Become a Good Mechanic. The Industrial Publication Co., New York.
Price, 15 cents.

Tennessee Crop Report for November, 1883, with the report of the
Tennessee Weather Service. 49 South Market st., Nashville, Tenn.

From C.V. Riley, Bulletin No. 3 of U.S. Department of Agriculture:
Division of Entomology. Contains reports of observations and experiments
in the practical work of the Division, made under the direction of the
entomologist. With plates.

Landreth's Rural Register and Almanac. Philadelphia, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

BREEDERS DIRECTORY.

The following list embraces the names of responsible and reliable
Breeders in their line, and parties wishing to purchase or obtain
information can feel assured that they will be honorably dealt with:

CATTLE.

Jersey.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

HORSES.

Clydesdales.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

SWINE.

Berkshire.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

Chester Whites.

W.A. Gilbert......................Wauwatosa Wis.

SHEEP.

Cotswold.

Mills, Charles F. ............. Springfield, Illinois

       *       *       *       *       *

LIVE STOCK, Etc.

DR. W.A. PRATT.

IMPORTER AND BREEDER OF

THOROUGHBRED HOLSTEIN CATTLE

100 head on hand Oct. 1st.

DR. W.A. PRATT, Elgin, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCOTCH COLLIE

SHEPHERD PUPS,

--FROM--

IMPORTED AND TRAINED STOCK

--ALSO--

NEWFOUNDLAND PUPS AND RAT TERRIER PUPS.

Concise and practical printed instruction in Training young Shepherd
Dogs, is given to buyers of Shepherd Puppies; or will be sent on receipt
of 25 cents in postage stamps.

For Printed Circular, giving full particulars about Shepherd Dogs,
enclose a 3-cent stamp, and address

N.H. PAAREN,

P.O. Box 326, CHICAGO. ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.

I CURE FITS!

When I say cure I do not mean merely to stop them for a time and then
have them return again, I mean a radical cure. I have made the disease
of FITS, EPILEPSY or FALLING SICKNESS a life-long study. I warrant my
remedy to cure the worst cases. Because others have failed is no reason
for not now receiving a cure. Send at once for a treatise and a Free
Bottle of my infallible remedy. Give Express and Post Office. It costs
you nothing for a trial, and I will cure you. Address Dr. H.G. ROOT, 183
Pearl St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

80 CARDS

BEST QUALITY.

New designs in Satin and Gold finish, with name, 10 cts. We offer $100
for a pack of cards any nicer work, or prettier styles.

_Samples free._ Eagle Card Works, New Haven, Ct.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.

SEEDS FOR THE GARDEN, FARM & FIELD.

ESTABLISHED 1845.

Our Annual Catalogue, mailed free on application, published first of
every January, contains full description and prices of RELIABLE
VEGETABLE, TREE, FIELD AND FLOWER SEED, SEED GRAIN, SEED CORN, SEED
POTATOES, ONION SETS, ETC; ALSO GARDEN DRILLS, CULTIVATORS, FERTILIZERS,
ETC., with full information for growing and how to get our Seeds.

Address PLANT SEED COMPANY,
Nos. 812 & 814 N. 4th St.,    ST. LOUIS, MO.

       *       *       *       *       *

FAY GRAPES

CURRANT

HEADQUARTERS

ALL BEST NEW AND OLD.

SMALL FRUITS AND TREES. LOW TO DEALERS AND PLANTERS.
STOCK First-Class. Free Catalogues. GEO. S. JOSSELYN, Fredonia, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




LITERATURE

[Illustration]


ROBIN, DEAR ROBIN!


    Robin, dear Robin, could you come back to me,
      Back to the hame you'll never mair see,
    Could you sit down at evening and crack wi' me,
      Oh, what a proud, happy woman I'd be!
    On the white hearth the fire should burn clearly,
      Nothing of comfort or rest you should lack,
    And I would always be kindly and cheery,
      Could you come back to me--could you come back.

    Oh, Robin, Robin, I've miss'd you fu' sairly,
      Morning, and evening, and a' the day long;
    Many have treated me unca unfairly:
      O for your arm so tender and strong:
    If once again in your love I could hide me,
      Little I'd care though all else I should lack
    Sairly I'm needing your wisdom to guide me,
      Oh, my lost darling, if you could come back!

    Never again with frowns would I greet you;
      Never again to your love be unkind;
    Ever with kisses and smiles I would meet you;
      Oh, in the days that are gone I was blind!
    Oh, I was selfish, and foolish, and fretful,
      Now I remember--remember in vain;
    But I would never be cross or forgetful,
      Could you come back to me, darling, again!

    No, you will never come back to me--never!
      But I shall come to you, Robin, some day.
    Then you will ken a' my loving endeavor,
      Just to grow better since you went away.
    Yes, you will ken, in that happy to-morrow,
      I hae been true to you, darling--sae true!
    Asked my heart always, in joy or in sorrow,
      "Will it please Robin, the thing that I do?"

    Oh, in that wonderfu', wonderfu' meeting,
      What shall I say to him? what will he say?
    We shallna weary life's story repeating,
      Seeing the end o' the sorrowfu' way.
    With such a hope, then, how could I say truly,
      "Robin, dear Robin, come back unto me!"
    Heart, answer the thought sae wild and unruly,
      "Robin, dear Robin, I shall come unto thee!"

--_Harper's Weekly._




MRS. WIMBUSH'S REVENGE.

(_Concluded from last week._)


It was a large picnic party. Mr. Charles Brookshank had drawn Mrs.
Wimbush's arm through his own, and strolled away from the rest.

"How delightful it would be if one could know the language of birds, as
folks did in the old Hindu fairy tales! Would it not, Mr. Brookshank?"

"My dear Mrs. Wimbush, they do nothing the whole day long but make love
and cry 'Sweet, sweet!' I would I were a bird, to make love in music."

The widow sighed, but it was more like a purr of pleasure.

"What did I know of love till you came here?" continued Mr. Charles.
"Absolutely nothing--except," he added, with reservation, "in a
professional way. And then we lawyers generally see the dark side of the
picture--the damages and the decrees nisi. But your visit has brightened
my whole life. O Mrs. Wimbush, you can not have been blind to my secret!
You have seen it written legibly in my face, and have not interposed to
check its development. I see you understand me, just as by intuitive
fine feeling you can penetrate the meaning of Mendelssohn's Songs
without Words. Mrs. Wimbush, you have already far advanced toward
learning the birds' language. I may rely upon your consent?"

"Charles, this happiness is indeed too much," ejaculated the widow.

"You need never be separated from your daughter Carry. A home for one is
a home for both; and I will cherish her while I live."

"But, Charles dear, she may marry."

"Marry, ma'am? Bless my soul, of course she will! She will marry me! She
has said so, don't you see?"

Mrs. Wimbush never said another word, but fell flat down upon the grass.

"What on earth has got the woman?" thought Mr. Charles. "She couldn't
have taken it worse if I had proposed to murder her daughter."

In their walk they had strayed through the trees close to the outskirts
of another picnic party. Mr. Charles immediately ran to ask some fair
volunteer to come to the assistance of Mrs. Wimbush, who had fainted. At
hearing the name, an active middle-aged lady sprang up and followed him.
It was Mrs. Marrables. The sight of her mother brought Mrs. Wimbush
round quicker than any smelling bottle could have done. She sat up.

"Mother, Mr. Brookshank; Mr. Brookshank, my mother, Mrs. Marrables."
They bowed. "Have the goodness to leave us together, Mr. Charles." He
bowed and obeyed. "Mother," said Mrs. Wimbush, "what on earth brought
you here? I thought you were at Taunton."

"No, dear. I have been at Bournemouth three weeks, I came merely for
change. Only last week I heard of your being here, and should have
called, but have been so much occupied, and I felt sure of meeting you
somewhere, and thought the surprise might be the more agreeable. We've
had a most delightful picnic with the Mount Stewart folks. But what was
all this fainting about? One would think Mr. Brookshank had been
proposing to you."

"He certainly made me a proposal mother, but I was quite unprepared for
it, and was overcome."

"What an imaginative and sensitive-minded girl you must be, Matilda! You
make me feel quite young. When will you be old enough to attend to
business? You will accept him, of course? Well, do as you please; you
may reckon on my consent, you know. But I must get back to my party, and
perhaps you had better rejoin yours. Ta-ta."

Jilted for her daughter! It wasn't pleasant. When Mrs. Wimbush got home,
she blew up Carry for being so sly.

"Well, mamma," said Carry, "of course I thought you knew all about it. I
never made any secret of the affair. I knew very well that you had
rejected Mr. Tom, but I could not possibly suppose that was any reason
why I should refuse Charles. Of course he is older than I am, but he is
only five-and-thirty, and has a good position; and I am sure we shall
always give you a welcome; Charles said so."

"Well," thought Mrs. Wimbush, "he has money, and it will be all in the
family; that's at least a comfort."

The effect of the little episode of the last chapter was that the
brothers were made friends, and Tom recovered his spirits, and could
laugh heartily at what he had before supposed was his brother's rivalry.

Mrs. Wimbush repented her that she had rejected Mr. Tom. Her repentance
produced a salutary desire on her part to make atonement for the past.
She would have him yet. When a widow says so much as that about a man,
let him 'ware hawk.

A month went by, and behold Mrs Wimbush and Mr. Tom Brookshank seated
tete-a-tete at an evening party, where the music which was going on was
sufficiently loud to render private conversation inaudible save to those
to whom it was addressed.

"I fear," said the widow, affecting an absent manner, "I treated you
very unkindly, Mr. Tom. You took me so entirely by surprise, that,
really, I--hardly know what I said. I have been very unhappy about
it--very."

"Forgotten and forgiven," whispered Mr. Tom.

"How generous of you! you make me so glad! because now that your brother
Charles is going to marry my daughter, we shall be in some sort related,
and I could not bear you to think unkindly of me."

"No," said Mr. Tom, fidgeting a little, "I shall never do that."

"How droll!" said the widow. "Let me see, what will the relationship be?
You will be my son-in-law's brother, and consequently I shall be your
mother-in-law once removed. You will have a mother younger than
yourself, Mr. Tom. I hope you will not presume upon her youth to be a
bad boy."

"All this is very true," he answered; "but I see the relationship in a
far different light. I shall be your father-in-law, and consequently my
own brother's grandfather-in-law."

"You mistake, Mr. Tom. Don't you see that Carry--"

"No mistake at all about it, ma'am, for I've promised to marry your
mother, Mrs. Marrables!"

"Monster!" cried Mrs. Wimbush aloud, and went off shrieking.

The music stopped, and there was a great fuss. But above all the others
was heard the voice of Mrs. Marrables. "Don't be alarmed, pray. She is
subject to it; she went off just like that the other day at a picnic.
Poor young thing, a very little upsets her. Let me come to my little
gu-url, then."

They moved her into another room. Presently Mrs. Wimbush opened her
eyes. "Mother! how dare you come near me! Go away, do! You ought to be
ashamed of yourself, at your time of life!"

"My time of life! Why, I'm only fifty-four--about ten years older than
Tom. How can you talk so to your mother!"

"Mother, if you don't leave the room, I will. It's really disreputable
to have you for a mother. You've never done me any credit."

"My dear, I am so glad to think you feel well enough to leave the room
that I will remain."

Mrs. Wimbush got up and went home.

Jilted, first for her daughter, and next for her mother! This was too
much. Mrs. Wimbush went to church as regularly as any one, but revenge,
after all, is very sweet.

Six weeks afterward Mrs. Wimbush recovered sufficient fortitude to go
and call on her mother.

"Well, child, I'm glad you are going to be friendly; there is nothing
like harmony in a family circle. Let us consider the relationships into
which we are about to enter, that we may rightly judge of our
responsibilities and duties. I and my granddaughter are going to marry
two brothers--the consequence is, she and I will be sisters-in-law. But
as you are mother of my sister-in-law, you will nearly be my
mother-in-law, which is a very singular relationship for a daughter to
sustain toward her mother, especially when she is not the wife of one's
father-in-law. Now, as"--

"Wait a moment, dear mamma; I've news for you; I'm going to marry old
Unguent! Old Mr. Brookshank has asked me to be his wife, and I've
consented. The consequence is, I shall be head of the family, and
bona-fide mother-in-law to you all. I don't think we need trouble about
harmony, for we shall be a united family, more so than any I know of."

Before her marriage, Mrs. Marrables set to work to draw up a table of
the relationships involved by the three weddings. It is an extensive
work in three volumes, and when our readers see The Brookshank Family
advertised, they will know what it means.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR
New Clubbing List
FOR 1884.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER
IN CONNECTION
WITH OTHER JOURNALS.

We offer more liberal terms than ever before to those who desire to
take, in connection with THE PRAIRIE FARMER, either of the
following weekly or monthly periodicals. In all cases the order for
THE PRAIRIE FARMER and either of the following named journals
must be sent together, accompanied by the money; but we do not require
both papers to be sent to the same person or to the same post-office.

We send specimen copies only of THE PRAIRIE FARMER.

Our responsibility for other publications ceases on the receipt of the
first number; when such journals are not received within a reasonable
time, notify us, giving date of your order, also full name and address
of subscriber.

WEEKLIES.
                                    Price of   The two
                                    the two.     for

Harper's Weekly                         $6 00  $4 60
Harper's Bazar                           6 00   4 60
Harper's Young People                    3 50   2 55
New York Tribune                         4 00   2 50
Toledo Blade                             4 00   2 20
Chicago Times                            3 25   2 50
Chicago Tribune                          3 50   2 50
Chicago Inter-Ocean                      3 15   2 50
Chicago Journal                          3 25   2 50
Peck's Sun                               3 75   3 00
Milwaukee Sentinel                       3 00   2 50
Western Farmer (Madison, Wis.)           3 00   2 00
Burlington Hawkeye                       4 00   3 00
The Continent (Weekly Magazine)          6 00   4 00
Detroit Free Press, with Supplement      4 00   2 50
Detroit Free Press, State edition        3 50   2 20
Louisville Courier-Journal               3 75   3 00
St. Louis Globe-Democrat                 3 00   2 15
St. Louis Republican                     3 00   2 15
Scientific American                      5 20   4 15
Interior (Presbyterian)                  4 50   3 60
Standard (Baptist)                       4 70   3 60
Advance (Congregational)                 5 00   3 35
Alliance                                 4 00   3 00
New York Independent                     5 00   4 00
Christian Union                          5 00   4 00
Boston Pilot (Catholic)                  4 50   3 50
American Bee Journal                     4 00   3 00
Florida Agriculturist                    4 00   2 75
Breeder's Gazette                        5 00   3 50
Witness (N.Y.)                           3 50   3 00
Methodist (N.Y.)                         4 00   3 50
Chicago News                             3 00   2 50
Globe (Boston)                           3 00   2 75
Youth's Companion                        3 75   3 00
Weekly Novelist                          5 00   4 25
Ledger (Chicago)                         3 00   2 90


MONTHLIES.

Harper's Monthly                        $6 00  $4 50
Atlantic Monthly                         6 00   4 50
Appleton's Journal                       5 00   4 25
The Century                              6 00   4 50
North American Review                    7 00   5 50
Popular Science Monthly                  7 00   5 50
Lippincott's Magazine                    6 00   4 50
Godey's Lady's Book                      4 00   3 00
St. Nicholas                             5 00   3 50
Vick's Illustrated Magazine              3 25   2 25
Am. Poultry Journal (Chicago)            3 25   2 75
Gardener's Monthly                       4 00   3 00
Wide Awake                               4 50   3 00
Phrenological Journal                    4 00   3 00
American Agriculturist                   3 50   2 50
Poultry World                            3 25   2 75
Arthur's Home Magazine                   4 00   3 00
Andrews' Bazar                           3 00   2 40
Frank Leslie's Popular Monthly           5 00   4 00
Frank Leslie's Sunday Magazine           5 00   4 00
Frank Leslie's Ladies' Magazine          4 50   4 00
Our Little Ones                          3 50   3 00
Peterson's Magazine                      4 00   3 30
Art Amateur                              6 00   5 00
Demorest's Magazine                      4 00   3 00
Dio Lewis' Monthly                       4 50   3 50

For clubbing price with any publication in the United States not
included in the above list send us inquiry on postal card.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOW Is the time to Subscribe for THE PRAIRIE FARMER. Price only
$2.00 per year. It is worth double the money.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLICATIONS.

MARSHALL M. KIRKMAN'S BOOKS ON RAILROAD TOPICS.

DO YOU WANT TO BECOME A RAILROAD MAN

IF YOU DO, THE BOOKS DESCRIBED BELOW POINT THE WAY.


The most promising field for men of talent and ambition at the present
day is the railroad service. The pay is large in many instances, while
the service is continuous and honorable. Most of our railroad men began
life on the farm. Of this class is the author of the accompanying books
descriptive of railway operations, who has been connected continuously
with railroads as a subordinate and officer for 27 years. He was brought
up on a farm, and began railroading as a lad at $7 per month. He has
written a number of standard books on various topics connected with the
organization, construction, management and policy of railroads. These
books are of interest not only to railroad men but to the general reader
as well. They are indispensable to the student. They present every phase
of railroad life, and are written in an easy and simple style that both
interests and instructs. The books are as follows:

"RAILWAY EXPENDITURES--THEIR EXTENT,
OBJECT AND ECONOMY."--A Practical
Treatise on Construction and Operation.
In Two Volumes, 850 pages.                         $4.00

"HAND BOOK OF RAILWAY EXPENDITURES."--Practical
Directions for Keeping
the Expenditure Accounts.                           2.00

"RAILWAY REVENUE AND ITS COLLECTION."--And
Explaining the Organization of
Railroads.                                          2.50

"THE BAGGAGE PARCEL AND MAIL TRAFFIC
OF RAILROADS."--An interesting work
on this important service; 425 pages.               2.00

"TRAIN AND STATION SERVICE"--Giving
The Principal Rules and Regulations governing
Trains; 280 pages.                                  2.00

"THE TRACK ACCOUNTS OF RAILROADS."--And
how they should be kept. Pamphlet.                  1.00

"THE FREIGHT TRAFFIC WAY-BILL."--Its
Uses Illustrated and Described. Pamphlet.            .50

"MUTUAL GUARANTEE."--A Treatise on Mutual
Suretyship. Pamphlet.                                .50

Any of the above books will be sent post paid on receipt
of price, by

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
150 Monroe St.          CHICAGO, ILL.

Money should be remitted by express, or by draft check or post office
order.

       *       *       *       *       *

FREE! FREE!!
TO ANY ADDRESS IN THE WORLD!

"THE RED RIVER VALLEY" "ILLUSTRATED."

AN ELEGANT EIGHT-PAGE PAPER

Full of the Most Desirable Information.
Send for "Publication P" to

JAMES B. POWER, LAND COM'R
St. Paul, Minneapolis & Manitoba Ry.,
St. PAUL. MINNESOTA

       *       *       *       *       *

MAPS.

RAND, McNALLY & CO.'S
NEW RAILROAD
--AND--
COUNTY MAP
--OF THE--
UNITED STATES
--AND--
DOMINION OF CANADA.

Size, 4 x 2-1/2 feet, mounted on rollers to hang on the wall. This is an

ENTIRELY NEW MAP,

Constructed from the most recent and authentic sources.

--IT SHOWS--
_ALL THE RAILROADS,_
--AND--
EVERY COUNTY AND PRINCIPAL TOWN
--IN THE--
UNITED STATES AND CANADA.

A useful Map in every one's home, and place of business. PRICE, $2.00.

Agents wanted, to whom liberal inducements will be given. Address

RAND, McNALLY & CO.,
Chicago, Ill.

By arrangements with the publishers of this Map we are enabled to make
the following liberal offer: To each person who will remit us $2.25 we
will send copy of THE PRAIRIE FARMER One Year and THIS MAP
POSTPAID. Address

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
CHICAGO, ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

DRAINAGE.

PRACTICAL FARM DRAINAGE.

WHY, WHEN, and HOW TO TILE-DRAIN
--AND THE--
MANUFACTURE OF DRAIN-TILE.

By C.G. ELLOITT and J.J.W. BILLINGSLEY

PRICE, ONE DOLLAR.

For sale by

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
150 Monroe St., Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SHEPHERD'S MANUAL
A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE SHEEP.

Designed Especially for American Shepherds
BY HENRY STEWART.

Finely Illustrated

PRICE, $1.50, by mail, postpaid. Address

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *




HUMOUROUS

[Illustration]


THE CARPENTER'S WOOING.

    "Oh, beam my life, my awl to me!"
      He cried, his flame addressing--
    "If I 'adze such a love as yours,
      I'd ask no other blessing!"
    "I am rejoist to hear you speak,"
      The maiden said with laughter--
    "For tho' I hammer guileless girl,
      It's plane what you are rafter.
    Now if file love you just a bit,
      What further can you ax me?
    Can--will you be content with that,
      Or will you further tacks me?"
    He looked handsaw her words were square--
      "No rival can displace me--
    Yes, one more favor I implore,
      And that is, dear Em, brace me!"

    She came full chisel to his arms;
      It really made him stair
    To have her make a bolt for him
      Before he could prepare.
    He tried to screw his courage up,
      And did his level best
    To nail the matter then and there,
      While clasped unto her breast.
    Says he: "It augers well for me,
      All seems to hinge on this;
    And, what is mortise plane to see
      The porch child wants a kiss."
    He kissed her lip, he kissed her cheek,
      And called her his adoored--
    He dons his claw-hammer next week,
      And she will share his board.

_--Detroit Free Press._




WHERE THE OLD MAIDS COME IN.


"Do you know, sir," inquired an American tourist of his companion, while
doing England, "can you inform me the reason for the fresh, healthful
appearance of the English people? Their complexion is far superior to
ours, or our countrymen over the herring pond."

"Well, I know what Prof. Huxley says."

"And what reason does he advance?"

"Well, Huxley says it is owing to the old maids."

"Owing to old maids! You surprise me."

"Fact. Huxley figures it out this way. Now, you know the English are
very fond of roast beef."

"But what has that to do with old maids?"

"Go slow. This genuine English beef is the best and most nutritious beef
in the world, and it imparts a beautiful complexion."

"Well, about the old maids?"

"Yes, you see the excellence of this English beef is due exclusively to
red clover. Do you see the point?"

"All but the old maids. They are still hovering in the shadows."

"Why, don't you see? This red clover is enriched, sweetened, and
fructified by bumble bees."

"But where do the old maids come in?" said the inquisitive American,
wiping his brow wearily.

"Why, it is as plain as the nose on your face. The only enemy of the
bumble bee is the field-mouse."

"But what have roast beef, red clover, bumble-bees, and field-mice got
to do with old maids?"

"Why, you must be very obtuse. Don't you perceive that the bumble-bees
would soon become exterminated by the field-mice if it were not for--"

"Old maids?"

"No, if it were not for cats, the old maids of Old England keep the
country thoroughly stocked up with cats, and so we can directly trace
the effects of the rosy English complexions to the benign cause of
English old maids, at least that's what Huxley says about it, and that's
just where the old maids come in. Science makes clear many mysterious
things."

       *       *       *       *       *


"Those picture cards I brought back from Boston," remarked Mrs.
Partington, in a pensive mood. "They are momentums of the Art Loan
Imposition."

Don't give up in despair, girls. Naomi didn't marry until she was five
hundred and eighty years old--and then she was sorry she hadn't waited a
century longer.

"Is you gwine to get an overcoat this winter?" asked a darkey of a
companion. "Well I dunno how dat's gwine to be," was the reply. "I'se
done got my eye on a coat, but de fellah dat owns it keeps his eye on it
too."

Her nephew had just come home from his day school. "What have you been
learning this morning?" asked Mrs. Ramsbottom. "Mythology, aunt,"
answered the little man, "all about the heathen gods and goddesses."
"Then I must brush up my memory," said Mrs. Ramsbottom, "and ask you a
question or two. Now, first, who was Juniper?"

"What is a limited monarchy, Johnny?" "Well, my idea of a
limited monarchy is, where the ruler don't have much to rule." "Give an
example?" "An example! Lemme see! Well, if you was bossin' yourself, for
instance."

It was at the close of the wedding breakfast. One of the guests
arose, and, glass in hand, said: "I drink to the health of the
bridegroom. May he see many days like this." The intention was good, but
the bride looked as though something had displeased her.

       *       *       *       *       *

ILLINOIS CENTRAL RAILROAD.

The elegant equipment of coaches and sleepers being added to its various
through routes is gaining it many friends. Its patrons fear no
accidents. Its perfect track of steel, and solid road-bed, are a
guarantee against them.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

One year, $3 for the two.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB CO.,
150 Monroe Street. Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.


ONE CENT

invested in a postal card and addressed as below

WILL

give to the writer full information as to the best lands in the United
States now for sale; how he can

BUY

them on the lowest and best terms, also the full text of the U.S. land
laws and how to secure

320 ACRES

of Government Lands in Northwestern Minnesota and Northeastern Dakota.

ADDRESS:

JAMES B. POWER,
Land and Emigration Commissioner,
ST. PAUL, MINN.

       *       *       *       *       *

AGENTS WANTED, Male and Female, for Spence's Blue Book, a most
fascinating and salable novelty. Every family needs from one to a dozen.
Immense profits and exclusive territory. Sample mailed for 25 cts in
postage stamps. Address J.H. CLARSON, P.O. Box 2296, Philadelphia, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *


MEDICAL.

DISEASE CURED
Without Medicine.

_A Valuable Discovery for supplying Magnetism to the Human System.
Electricity and Magnetism utilized as never before for Healing the
Sick._


THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO.'s

MAGNETIC KIDNEY BELT!

FOR MEN IS

WARRANTED TO CURE
_Or Money refunded_, the following diseases without medicine:--_Pain in
the Back, Hips, Head, or Limbs, Nervous Debility, Lumbago, General
Debility, Rheumatism, Paralysis, Neuralgia, Sciatica, Diseases of the
Kidneys, Spinal Diseases, Torpid Liver_, GOUT SEMINAL EMISSIONS,
IMPOTENCY, ASTHMA, HEART DISEASE, DYSPEPSIA, CONSTIPATION, ERYSIPELAS,
INDIGESTION, HERNIA OR RUPTURE, CATARRH, PILES, EPILEPSY, DUMB AGUE,
ETC.

When any debility of the GENERATIVE ORGANS occurs, LOST VITALITY,
LACK OF NERVE FORCE AND VIGOR, WASTING WEAKNESS, and all those Diseases
of a personal nature, from whatever cause, the continuous stream of
Magnetism permeating through the parts, must restore them to a healthy
action. There is no mistake about this appliance.

TO THE LADIES:--If you are afflicted with LAME BACK, WEAKNESS OF THE
SPINE, FALLING OF THE WOMB, LEUCORRHOEA, CHRONIC INFLAMMATION AND
ULCERATION OF THE WOMB, INCIDENTAL HEMORRHAGE OR FLOODING, PAINFUL,
SUPPRESSED, AND IRREGULAR MENSTRUATION, BARRENNESS, AND CHANGE OF LIFE,
THIS IS THE BEST APPLIANCE AND CURATIVE AGENT KNOWN.

For all forms of FEMALE DIFFICULTIES it is unsurpassed by anything
before invented, both as a curative agent and as a source of power and
vitalization.

Price of either Belt with Magnetic Insoles, $10, sent by express C.O.D.,
and examination allowed, or by mail on receipt of price. In ordering
send measure of waist, and size of shoe. Remittance can be made in
currency, sent in letter at our risk.

The Magneton Garments are adapted to all ages, are worn over the
under-clothing (NOT NEXT TO THE BODY LIKE THE MANY GALVANIC AND
ELECTRIC HUMBUGS ADVERTISED SO EXTENSIVELY), and should be taken off at
night. They hold their POWER FOREVER, and are worn at all seasons of the
year.

Send stamp for the "New Departure in Medical treatment WITHOUT
MEDICINE," with thousands of testimonials.

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO.,
218 STATE STREET. CHICAGO, ILL.

NOTE.--Send one dollar in postage stamps or currency (in letter
at our risk) with size of shoe usually worn, and try a pair of our
Magnetic Insoles, and be convinced of the power residing in our other
Magnetic Appliances. Positively no cold feet when they are worn, or
money refunded.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRAIRIE FARMER is the Cheapest and Best Agricultural Paper
published. Only $2.00 per year.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCALES.

U.S. STANDARD SCALES,
MANUFACTURED EXPRESSLY FOR
THE PRAIRIE FARMER

_Every Scale Guaranteed by the Manufacturers, and by Us, to be Perfect,
and to give the Purchaser Satisfaction._

The PRAIRIE FARMER Sent Two Years Free

To any person ordering either size Wagon Scale at prices given below.

[Illustration]

2-Ton Wagon or Farm Scale (Platform 6 x 12 feet), $35; 3-Ton (7 x 13),
$45; 5-Ton (8 x 14), $55. Beam Box, Brass Beam, Iron Levers, Steel
Bearings, and full directions for setting up.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER SENT 1 YEAR FREE!

To any person ordering either of the following Scales, at prices named
below.

[Illustration]

The Housekeeper's Scale--$4.00

Weighing accurately from 1/4 oz. to 25 lbs. This is also a valuable
Scale for Offices for Weighing Mail Matter. Tin Scoop, 50c. extra; Brass
75c. extra.

[Illustration]

The Family Scale--$7.00.

Weighs from 1/4 oz. to 240 lbs. Small articles weighed in Scoop, large
ones on Platform. Size of Platform, 10-1/2 x 13-1/2 in.

[Illustration]

The Prairie Farmer Scale--$10.00

Weighs from 2 oz. to 320 lbs. Size of Platform 14 x 19 inches. A
convenient Scale for Small Farmers, Dairymen, etc.

[Illustration]

Platform Scales--4 Sizes.
400 lbs., $15; 600 lbs., $20; 900 lbs., $24; 1,200 lbs., $28; Wheels and
Axles, $2 extra.

In ordering, give the Price and Description given above. All Scales
Boxed and Delivered at Depot in Chicago. Give full shipping directions.
Send money by Draft on Chicago or New York Post Office Order or
Registered Letter. Address

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY, CHICAGO, ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS

[Illustration]

THE STANDARD REMINGTON TYPE-WRITER is acknowledged to be the only
rapid and reliable writing machine. It has no rival. These machines are
used for transcribing and general correspondence in every part of the
globe, doing their work in almost every language. Any young man or woman
of ordinary ability, having a practical knowledge of the use of this
machine may find constant and remunerative employment. All machines and
supplies, furnished by us, warranted. Satisfaction guaranteed or money
refunded. Send for circulars. WYCKOFF, SEAMANS & BENEDICT, 38 East
Madison St, Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

GIVEN AWAY $10,000 IN PREMIUMS TO AGENTS Ladies or Gentlemen, selling
our NEW BOOK For particulars write for Circular C. RAND, McNALLY & CO.,
CHICAGO.

       *       *       *       *       *

SEEDS

ALBERT DICKINSON,

Dealer in Timothy, Clover, Flax, Hungarian, Millet, Red Top, Blue
Grass, Lawn Grass, Orchard Grass, Bird Seeds, &c.

POP CORN.

Warehouses  {115, 117 & 119 Kinzie St.
            {104, 106, 108 & 110 Michigan St.
OFFICE.      115 Kinzie St.
CHICAGO, ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *




GENERAL NEWS.


The Emma Bond case has been given to the jury.

Queen Victoria will go to Baden Baden in February.

The war feeling in France against China is increasing.

Four colored men were lynched at Yazoo, Miss., on Saturday
last.

Serious trouble is threatened between the Orangemen and the
Catholics of Ireland.

The works of the Lambert & Smith Wire Fence Company, at Joliet,
Ill., burned last week.

Mr. Villard is sick from nervous prostration. Rumor says he is
financially embarrassed.

It is expected that the Directors of the Suez Canal Company
will pay a dividend of 18 per cent this year.

John D. Leslie, a grain-dealer of Elkhart, Indiana, was ruined
by handling corn which failed to pass inspection.

Gen. Grant fell upon the sidewalk in New York, the other day,
and hurt his hip severely. He is recovering.

N.G. Ordway, Governor of Dakota, is charged with accepting
bribes in making appointments of County Commissioners.

Holloway, the great pill man of England, is said to be worth
$25,000,000. He spends $250,000 per year in advertising.

The extensive sewerage system which Boston has been several
years in constructing is at last finished, at a cost of $4,500,000.

Bradner Smith & Co, and the National Printing Company, Chicago,
were partially burned out on Sunday. Loss about $200,000.

Among the distinguished dead of the year may be mentioned
Chambord, Gambetta, Gortschakoff, Alexander H. Stephens, Karl Marx,
Schultze-Delitzsche, Turgeneff, and Prof. Anthon.

It is reported that the Salters' Company, one of the largest
and most successful of the London guilds, has decided to dispose of its
Irish lands, and is now offering them to tenants on twenty years' time.

During the year 1883, up to the close of business Saturday
night, 7,243,969 gallons of spirits were produced in the Chicago
distilleries. The total receipts of internal revenue in the first
district of Illinois for the year were $8,774,890.

The outcry over the houses of the poor has spread to Paris.
Alarming statistics are published of the increase of overcrowding and
the consequent spread of disease, and no less than 650 schemes of reform
have been presented to the Municipal Council. The deaths between 1870
and 1883 have increased per 100,000 inhabitants from 48 to 96 in
typhoid-fever, from 53 to 101 in diphtheria, from 11 to 74 in small-pox,
from 30 to 43 in measles, and from 7 to 18 in scarlet-fever.

Alarm has been created in French commercial circles by rumors
that the American Congress will make reprisals for the prohibition by
France of the importation of American salted meats by passing a law
increasing the duties on French wines or providing for the seizure of
French adulterations. The National, of Paris, says: "France must expect
that the Reprisals bill now before Congress, which was first directed
against Germany, will now be turned against France."

P.T. Barnum has just made his will. In order that there might
be no question as to his sanity upon which to ground contests after his
death, he had eminent physicians examine him, and secured their
attestation that he was of sound mind. The will and its codicils cover
more than 700 pages of legal cap, closely written, and disposes of real
estate and personal property of the value of $10,000,000 to twenty-seven
heirs. The property is in New York, Brooklyn, Bridgeport, Colorado, and
several other places. Mr. Barnum values his interest in the Barnum and
London Shows at $3,500,000. He gives largely to charitable institutions.

The number of lives lost by the more noticeable accidents of
last year give a total of 125,000, or over 342 for each of the 365 days
of 1883. These colossal figures are attained principally through the
results of three calamities--Ischia, Java, and Syria. Aside from the
earthquakes the year was unequaled in shipwrecks, cyclones, fire-scenes,
and mining horrors. Over thirty people were killed for each day in
January, the Newhall fire, the Russian circus horror, and the Cimbria
shipwreck being the principal of thirty calamities during the month.
Three hundred and ninety-eight people went down in the Cimbria alone.
Two hundred and seventy people burned in the circus at Berditcheff. The
panic later on at Sunderland, England, caused the death of 197 children
and 150 workmen were drowned like rats in the tub called the Daphne on
the Clyde. There were 1,697 murders, 107 executions, 135 lynchings, and
727 suicides.




MARKETS

MARKET REPORTS.


OFFICE OF THE PRAIRIE FARMER,
CHICAGO. Jan. 2, 1884.


FINANCIAL AND COMMERCIAL.

The general bank business of Chicago last week was rather dull. But few
new business contracts were made as everyone was waiting for the New
Year to begin before extending business.

In the loan market money was quoted throughout the week at 6@7 per cent
interest.

Eastern exchange opened Saturday at 25c off between banks, but
subsequently sales were made at 25c per $1,000 premium. The market
closed at 25@30c per $1,000 premium.

Railway stocks in New York with the exception of Northern Pacific were
firm on Saturday.

Government securities remain unchanged at last week's quotations.

4's coupons. 1907              Q. Apr.      123
4's reg., 1907                 Q. Apr.      122
4-1/2's coupon, 1891           Q. Mar.      114
4-1/2's registered, 1891       Q. Mar.      114
3's registered                 Q. Mar.      100


GRAIN AND PROVISIONS.

More was done on the Board of Trade in corn and hog products at the
close of the week than in wheat and other grains. The bears had
decidedly the best of it on Saturday. Wheat receipts were liberal and
everybody seemed willing to sell. Outside orders to purchase were
exceedingly light. There were many transactions in corn but prices
showed a gradual decline.

FLOUR was quiet at about the following rates.

Choice to favorite white winters              $5 25@5 50
Fair to good brands of white winters           4 75@5 00
Good to choice red winters                     5 00@5 50
Prime to choice springs                        4 75@5 00
Good to choice export stock, in sacks, extras  4 25@4 50
Good to choice export stock, double extras     4 50@4 65
Fair to good Minnesota springs                 4 75@5 25
Choice to fancy Minnesota springs              5 50@5 75
Patent springs                                 6 50@7 00
Low grades                                     2 25@3 50

WHEAT.--Red winter, No. 2 99@95c: car lots of spring, No. 2, sold at
93-3/4@97-3/4c; No. 3, do, 77-1/2@81c.

CORN.--Fluctuating but active. Car lots No 2, 57-3/4@58c; rejected,
46-1/2; new mixed, 48@48-1/4c.

OATS.--No. 2 in store, closed 32@33.

RYE.--May, in store 54@59.

BARLEY.--No. 2, 66@67c; No. 3, 44c.

FLAX.--Closed at $1 41.

TIMOTHY.--$1 23 per bushel. Little doing.

CLOVER.--Quiet at $5 90@6 15 for prime.

PROVISIONS.--Mess pork, January $14 02-1/2 per bbl; May, $14 52. Green
hams, 8-3/8c. per lb. Short ribs, $7 40 per cwt.

LARD.--January, $8 75; February, $9 07-1/2.


LUMBER.

Lumber unchanged. Quotations for green are as follows:

Short dimension per M                    $ 9 50@10 00
Long dimension, per M                     10 00@11 50
Boards and strips, No. 2                  11 00@13 00
Boards and strips, medium                 13 00@16 00
Boards and strips, No. 1 choice           16 00@20 00
Shingles, standard                         2 10@ 2 20
Shingles, choice                           2 25@ 2 30
Shingles, extra                            2 40@ 2 60
Lath                                       1 65@ 1 70


COUNTRY PRODUCE.

NOTE.--The quotations for the articles named in the following list are
generally for commission lots of goods and from first hands. While our
prices are based as near as may be on the landing or wholesale rates,
allowance must be made for selections and the sorting up for store
distribution.

BEANS.--Hand picked mediums $2 10@2 15. Hand picked navies. $2 20@2 25.

BUTTER.--Dull and without change. Choice to extra creamery, 32@35c per
lb.; fair to good do 26@30c; fair to choice dairy, 25@30c; common to
choice packing stock fresh and sweet, 20@25c; ladle packed 10@13c; fresh
made, streaked butter, 9@11c.

BRAN.--Quoted at $11 87-1/2@13 50 per ton; extra choice $13.

CHEESE.--Choice full-cream cheddars 12-1/2@13c per lb; medium quality do
9@10c; good to prime full cream flats 13@13-3/4c; skimmed cheddars
9@10c; good skimmed flats 6@7c; hard-skimmed and common stock 3@4c.

EGGS.--In a small way the best brands are quotable at 26@27c per dozen;
24@25c for good ice house stock; 16@20c per pickled.

HAY.--No 1 timothy $8 50@9 50 per ton; No 2 do $7 50@8 00; mixed do
$6 50; upland prairie $8 00@9 50; No 1 prairie $5 50@6 50; No 2 do
$4 50@5. Small bales sell at 25@50c per ton more than large bales.

HIDES AND PELTS.--Green-cured light hides 8c per lb; do heavy cows 8c;
No 2 damaged green-salted hides 6c; green-salted calf 12@12-1/2 cents;
green-salted bull 6 c; dry-salted hides 11 cents; No. 2 two-thirds
price; No. 1 dry flint 14@14-1/2c. Sheep pelts salable at 28@32c for the
estimated amount of wash wool on each pelt. All branded and scratched
hides are discounted 15 per cent from the price of No. 1.

HOPS.--Prime to choice New York State hops 22@26c per lb; Pacific coast
of 23@26c; fair to good Wisconsin 15@20c: Wisconsin 1882's 8@12c.

POULTRY.--Prices for live lots were: Turkeys 12@13c per lb; chickens,
7@8c; ducks 8@10c per lb.; geese 8@10c per lb. for full feathered.
Dressed turkeys sell at 1@2c per lb more than live offerings.

POTATOES.--Good to choice 35@40c per bu. on track; common to fair
25@30c. Illinois sweet potatoes range at $3@3 50 per bbl for yellow.
Baltimore stock at $2 25@2 75, and Jerseys at $5. Red are dull and
nominal.

TALLOW AND GREASE.--No 1 country tallow 7@7-1/4c per lb; No 2 do
6-1/4@6-1/2c. Prime white grease 6@6-1/2c; yellow 5-1/4@5-3/4c; brown
4-1/2@5.

VEGETABLES.--Cabbage, $8@12 per 100; celery, 35@40c per per doz bunches;
onions, $1 00@1 25 per bbl for yellow, and $1 for red; turnips, $1 35@ 1
50 per bbl for rutabagas, and $1 00 for white flat.

WOOL.--from store range as follows for bright wools from Wisconsin,
Illinois, Michigan Indiana, and Eastern Iowa--dark Western lots
generally ranging at 1@2c per lb. less.

Coarse and dingy tub                          25@30
Good medium tub                               31@34
Unwashed bucks' fleeces                       14@15
Fine unwashed heavy fleeces                   18@22
Fine light unwashed heavy fleeces             22@23
Coarse unwashed fleeces                       21@22
Low medium unwashed fleeces                   24@25
Fine medium unwashed fleeces                  26@27
Fine washed fleeces                           32@33
Coarse washed fleeces                         26@28
Low medium washed fleeces                     30@32
Fine medium washed fleeces                    34@35

Colorado and territory wools range as follows:

Lowest grades                                 14@16
Low medium                                    18@22
Medium                                        22@26
Fine                                          16@24

Wools from New Mexico:

Lowest grades                                 14@16
Part improved                                 16@17
Best improved                                 19@23

Burry from 2c to 10c off; black 2c to 5c off.


LIVE STOCK MARKETS.

The total receipts and shipments for last week were as follows:

                               Received.    Shipped.
Cattle                            27,295     11,368
Hogs                              89,505     22,450
Sheep                              9,417      4,856

CATTLE.--The above figures show a falling off of 18,850 head from the
previous week's receipts. This contraction on the part of shippers is
said to have been on account of advice from the commission men who argue
that the unusual demand during Christmas week following the previous
large supply would not be very large. Dressed-beef operators bought
freely and there was a general advance in prices. The quality of the
beef was not first-class. The highest price paid for the best was $6 65
per cwt. Sales were principally at $5@6. Common lots brought $4 25@4 95.
Some poor ones went at $4. Cows for butchers sold at $3@4, and inferior
lots at $2@2 90. Bulls brought from $2 to $4 75. A few car loads of
Texans sold at $3 50@4 50 per cwt. Veal calves brought $4@7 for 100 lbs.
Milch cows were lower as the supply has been large. There was a falling
off of about $10 per head; they sold for $25 to 55 per head.

HOGS.--During the past week they formed a strong combination to break
the market, all the 20 packing houses doing business here agreeing to
buy only a stipulated number of hogs each day. The plan worked as was
anticipated, and although the receipts for the week dropped to 89,000
against 187,470 during the previous week, there was a steady decline
from day to day. Shippers were good buyers, taking on an average 5,500
hogs daily, but city packers bought only about 11,000 or 12,000, leaving
at times upwards of 28,000 or 30,000 unsold at the close of the day.
Choice hogs declined only moderately, but other descriptions were very
weak. Up to date there have been packed in the West this season about
100,000 head more than to same time last year. The market closed on
Saturday at $4 65@5 90 for heavy; $4 60@5 30 for light, and $3 25@4 60
for skips and culls.

Note.--All sales of hogs are made subject to a shrinkage of 40 lbs for
piggy sows and 80 lbs for stags. Dead hogs sell for 1-1/2c per lb for
weights of 200 and over and [Transcriber's Note: blank in original] for
weights of less than 100 lbs.

SHEEP.--The demand has been brisk and prices for good lots advanced
fully 25c per cwt. The receipts have fallen off greatly. Sales were made
of common to choice at $2 50@4 65. No fancy droves were received, and
they were nominal at $4 75@5.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMISSION MERCHANTS.

J.H. WHITE & CO.,
PRODUCE COMMISSION

106 S. Water St., Chicago.

Refers to this paper.



MISCELLANEOUS.


GOLD MEDAL, PARIS, 1878.

[Illustration]

BAKER'S
BREAKFAST COCOA.

Warranted _absolutely pure Cocoa_, from which the excess of Oil has been
removed. It has _three times the strength_ of Cocoa mixed with Starch,
Arrowroot or Sugar, and is therefore far more economical. It is
delicious, nourishing, strengthening, easily digested, and admirably
adapted for invalids as well as for persons in health.

SOLD BY GROCERS EVERYWHERE.

W. BAKER & CO., Dorchester, Mass.



CHEAP FARMS.

NEAR MARKETS.

The State of Michigan has more than 4,500 miles of railroad and 1,600
miles of Lake transportation, schools and churches in every county,
public buildings all paid for, and no debt. Its soil and climate combine
to produce large crops, and it is the best fruit State in the Northwest.
Several million acres of unoccupied and fertile lands are yet in the
market at low prices. The State has issued a NEW PAMPHLET containing a
map and descriptions of the soil, crops and general resources of _every
county_ in the State, which may be had free of charge by writing to the

COMM'R OF IMMIGRATION, Detroit. Mich.



MONEY TO LOAN TO FARMERS

in Illinois on Mortgage security at 6 per cent interest, with privilege
of yearly payments. Call on or address

BURNHAM, TREVETT & MATTIS,
Champaign, Ill.



PATENT Procured or no charge. 40 p. book patent-law free. Add.
W.T. FITZGERALD, 1006 F St., Washington, D.C.



EDUCATIONAL.


UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK
AMERICAN
VETERINARY COLLEGE,
141 WEST 54TH ST., NEW YORK CITY.

The regular course of lectures commences in October each year. Circular
and information can be had on application to

A. LIAUTARD, M.D.V.S.,
Dean of the Faculty.



SEWING SILK.


CORTICELLI SEWING SILK,

[Illustration]

LADIES, TRY IT!

THE BEST SEWING SILK MADE.

EVERY SPOOL WARRANTED.

FULL LENGTH, SMOOTH AND STRONG.

Ask your storekeeper for Corticelli Silk.



MISCELLANEOUS.

  BUIST'S
  SEEDS
  ARE THE BEST.

WARRANTED TO GIVE SATISFACTION OR MONEY RETURNED, SPECIAL-INDUCEMENTS
FOR MARKET GARDENERS. OUR VALUABLE CATALOGUE OF 192 PAGES FREE TO ALL.

  SEED GROWER
  ROBERT BUIST, JR.
  PHILADELPHIA, PA.



"FACTS ABOUT
Arkansas and Texas."

A handsome book, beautifully illustrated, with colored diagrams, giving
reliable information as to crops, population, religious denominations,
commerce, timber, Railroads, lands, etc., etc.

Sent free to any address on receipt of a 2-cent stamp. Address

H.C. TOWNSEND,
GEN. PASSENGER AGT., ST. LOUIS, MO.



[Illustration: FERRY'S SEED ANNUAL FOR 1884]

Will be mailed FREE TO ALL applicants and to customers of last year
without ordering it. It contains illustrations, prices, descriptions and
directions for planting all Vegetable and Flower Seeds, Plants, etc.
INVALUABLE TO ALL.

D.M. FERRY & CO.
DETROIT, Mich.



[Illustration]

LYON & HEALY
State & Monroe Sts., Chicago.

Will send prepaid to any address their

BAND CATALOGUE,

for 1883, 600 pages, 210 Engravings of Instruments, Suits, Caps, Belts,
Pompons, Epaulets, Cap-Lamps, Stands, Drum Major's Staffs, and Hats,
Sundry Band Outfits, Repairing Materials, also includes Instruction and
Exercises for Amateur Bands, and a Catalogue of Choice Band Music.



KNABE PIANOFORTES.

UNEQUALLED IN
Tone, Touch, Workmanship and Durability.

WILLIAM KNABE & CO.
Nos. 204 and 206 West Baltimore Street,
Baltimore. No. 112 Fifth Avenue, N.Y.



AGENTS make over ONE hundred per cent. profit selling the

REFLECTING SAFETY LAMP

which can be sold in every family. Gives more light than three ordinary
lamps. SAMPLE LAMP SENT FOR FIFTY CENTS IN STAMPS. We have other
household articles. Send for circulars.

FORSEE & MCMAKIN, CINCINNATI, O.



SEEDS! PLANTS--Catalogue Free.

A.E. SPALDING,
AINSWORTH, IOWA.



PIG EXTRICATOR

To aid animals in giving birth. Send for free circular to WM. DULIN,
Avoca, Pottawattamie Co., Ia.



FREE

_By return mail_, Full Description MOODY'S NEW TAILOR SYSTEM of Dress
Cutting MOODY & CO. CINCINNATI, O.



CARDS

50 SATIN FINISH CARDS, New Imported designs, name on and Present Free
for 10c. Cut this out. CLINTON BROS. & Co., Clintonville, Ct.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Prairie Farmer, Vol. 56: No. 1,
January 5, 1884., by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRAIRIE FARMER ***

***** This file should be named 17512.txt or 17512.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/5/1/17512/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
