Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Ann, by Mary E. Wilkins Freeman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Adventures of Ann
       Stories of Colonial Times

Author: Mary E. Wilkins Freeman

Release Date: January 21, 2006 [EBook #17560]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF ANN ***




Produced by Jeff Kaylin and Andrew Sly






THE ADVENTURES OF ANN

STORIES OF COLONIAL TIMES

BY
Mary E. Wilkins

FROM ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS AND
FAMILY TRADITIONS



BOSTON
D. LOTHROP AND COMPANY
FRANKLIN AND HAWLEY STREETS



Copyright, 1886, by D. Lothrop & Company.



CONTENTS.

  The Bound Girl
  Deacon Thomas Wales' Will
  The Adopted Daughter
  The "Horse-House" Deed



STORIES OF COLONIAL TIMES



I

The Bound Girl


This Indenture Wittnesseth, That I Margaret Burjust of Boston, in the
County of Suffolk and Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New
England. Have placed, and by these presents do place and bind out my
only Daughter whose name is Ann Ginnins to be an Apprentice unto
Samuel Wales and his wife of Braintree in the County afores:d,
Blacksmith. To them and their Heirs and with them the s:d Samuel
Wales, his wife and their Heirs, after the manner of an apprentice to
dwell and Serve from the day of the date hereof for and during the
full and Just Term of Sixteen years, three months and twenty-three
day's next ensueing and fully to be Compleat, during all which term
the s:d apprentice her s:d Master and Mistress faithfully Shall
Serve, Their Secrets keep close, and Lawful and reasonable Command
everywhere gladly do and perform.

Damage to her s:d Master and Mistress she shall not willingly do. Her
s:d Master's goods she shall not waste, Embezel, purloin or lend unto
Others nor suffer the same to be wasted or purloined. But to her
power Shall discover the Same to her s:d Master. Taverns or Ailhouss
she Shall not frequent, at any unlawful game She Shall not play,
Matrimony she Shall not Contract with any persons during s:d Term.
From her master's Service She Shall not at any time unlawfully absent
herself. But in all things as a good honest and faithful Servant and
apprentice Shall bear and behave herself, During the full term
afores:d Commencing from the third day of November Anno Dom: One
Thousand, Seven Hundred fifty and three. And the s:d Master for
himself, wife, and Heir's, Doth Covenant Promise Grant and Agree unto
and with the s:d apprentice and the s:d Margaret Burjust, in manner
and form following. That is to say, That they will teach the s:d
apprentice or Cause her to be taught in the Art of good housewifery,
and also to read and write well. And will find and provide for and
give unto s:d apprentice good and sufficient Meat Drink washing and
lodging both in Sickness and in health, and at the Expiration of S:d
term to Dismiss s:d apprentice with two Good Suits of Apparrel both
of woolen and linnin for all parts of her body (viz) One for
Lord-days and one for working days Suitable to her Quality. In
Testimony whereof I Samuel Wales and Margaret Burjust Have
Interchangably Sett their hands and Seals this Third day November
Anno Dom: 1753, and in the twenty Seventh year of the Reign of our
Soveraig'n Lord George the Second of great Britain the King.
 Signed Sealed & Delivered.
  In presence of
  Sam Vaughan                Margaret Burgis
  Mary Vaughan                  her X mark."

This quaint document was carefully locked up, with some old deeds and
other valuable papers, in his desk, by the "s:d Samuel Wales," one
hundred and thirty years ago. The desk was a rude, unpainted pine
affair, and it reared itself on its four stilt-like legs in a corner
of his kitchen, in his house in the South Precinct of Braintree. The
sharp eyes of the little "s:d apprentice" had noted it oftener and
more enviously than any other article of furniture in the house. On
the night of her arrival, after her journey of fourteen miles from
Boston, over a rough bridle-road, on a jolting horse, clinging
tremblingly to her new "Master," she peered through her little red
fingers at the desk swallowing up those precious papers which Samuel
Wales drew from his pocket with an important air. She was hardly five
years old, but she was an acute child; and she watched her master
draw forth the papers, show them to his wife, Polly, and lock them up
in the desk, with the full understanding that they had something to
do with her coming to this strange place; and, already, a shadowy
purpose began to form itself in her mind.

She sat on a cunning little wooden stool, close to the fireplace, and
kept her small chapped hands persistently over her face; she was
scared, and grieved, and, withal, a trifle sulky. Mrs. Polly Wales
cooked some Indian meal mush for supper in an iron pot swinging from
its trammel over the blazing logs, and cast scrutinizing glances at
the little stranger. She had welcomed her kindly, taken off her outer
garments, and established her on the little stool in the warmest
corner, but the child had given a very ungracious response. She would
not answer a word to Mrs. Wales' coaxing questions, but twitched
herself away with all her small might, and kept her hands tightly
over her eyes, only peering between her fingers when she thought no
one was noticing.

She had behaved after the same fashion all the way from Boston, as
Mr. Wales told his wife in a whisper. The two were a little dismayed,
at the whole appearance of the small apprentice; to tell the truth,
she was not in the least what they had expected. They had been
revolving this scheme of taking "a bound girl" for some time in their
minds; and, Samuel Wales' gossip in Boston, Sam Vaughan, had been
requested to keep a lookout for a suitable person.

So, when word came that one had been found, Mr. Wales had started at
once for the city. When he saw the child, he was dismayed. He had
expected to see a girl of ten; this one was hardly five, and she had
anything but the demure and decorous air which his Puritan mind
esteemed becoming and appropriate in a little maiden. Her hair was
black and curled tightly, instead of being brown and straight parted
in the middle, and combed smoothly over her ears as his taste
regulated; her eyes were black and flashing, instead of being blue,
and downcast. The minute he saw the child, he felt a disapproval of
her rise in his heart, and also something akin to terror. He dreaded
to take this odd-looking child home to his wife Polly; he foresaw
contention and mischief in their quiet household. But he felt as if
his word was rather pledged to his gossip, and there was the mother,
waiting and expectant. She was a red-cheeked English girl, who had
been in Sam Vaughan's employ; she had recently married one Burjust,
and he was unwilling to support the first husband's child, so this
chance to bind her out and secure a good home for her had been
eagerly caught at.

The small Ann seemed rather at Samuel Wales' mercy, and he had not
the courage to disappoint his friend or her mother; so the necessary
papers were made out, Sam Vaughan's and wife's signatures affixed,
and Margaret Burjust's mark, and he set out on his homeward journey
with the child.

The mother was coarse and illiterate, but she had some natural
affection; she "took on" sadly when the little girl was about to
leave her, and Ann clung to her frantically. It was a pitiful scene,
and Samuel Wales, who was a very tender-hearted man, was glad when it
was over, and he jogging along the bridle-path.

But he had had other troubles to encounter. All at once, as he rode
through Boston streets, with his little charge behind him, after
leaving his friend's house, he felt a vicious little twitch at his
hair, which he wore in a queue tied with a black ribbon after the
fashion of the period. Twitch, twitch, twitch! The water came into
Samuel Wales' eyes, and the blood to his cheeks, while the passers-by
began to hoot and laugh. His horse became alarmed at the hubbub, and
started up. For a few minutes the poor man could do nothing to free
himself. It was wonderful what strength the little creature had; she
clinched her tiny fingers in the braid, and pulled, and pulled. Then,
all at once, her grasp slackened, and off flew her master's
steeple-crowned hat into the dust, and the neat black ribbon on the
end of the queue followed it. Samuel Wales reined up his horse with a
jerk then, and turned round, and administered a sounding box on each
of his apprentice's ears. Then he dismounted, amid shouts of laughter
from the spectators, and got a man to hold the horse while he went
back and picked up his hat and ribbon.

He had no further trouble. The boxes seemed to have subdued Ann
effectually. But he pondered uneasily all the way home on the small
vessel of wrath which was perched up behind him, and there was a
tingling sensation at the roots of his queue. He wondered what Polly
would say. The first glance at her face, when he lifted Ann off the
horse at his own door, confirmed his fears. She expressed her mind,
in a womanly way, by whispering in his ear at the first opportunity,
_"She's as black as an Injun."_

After Ann had eaten her supper, and had been tucked away between some
tow sheets and homespun blankets in a trundle-bed, she heard the
whole story, and lifted up her hands with horror. Then the good
couple read a chapter, and prayed, solemnly vowing to do their duty
by this child which they had taken under their roof, and imploring
Divine assistance.

As time wore on, it became evident that they stood in sore need of
it. They had never had any children of their own, and Ann Ginnins was
the first child who had ever lived with them. But she seemed to have
the freaks of a dozen or more in herself, and they bade fair to have
the experience of bringing up a whole troop with this one. They tried
faithfully to do their duty by her, but they were not used to
children, and she was a very hard child to manage. A whole legion of
mischievous spirits seemed to dwell in her at times, and she became
in a small and comparatively innocent way, the scandal of the staid
Puritan neighborhood in which she lived. Yet, withal, she was so
affectionate, and seemed to be actuated by so little real malice in
any of her pranks, that people could not help having a sort of liking
for the child, in spite of them.

She was quick to learn, and smart to work, too, when she chose.
Sometimes she flew about with such alacrity that it seemed as if her
little limbs were hung on wires, and no little girl in the
neighborhood could do her daily tasks in the time she could, and they
were no inconsiderable tasks, either.

Very soon after her arrival she was set to "winding quills," so many
every day. Seated at Mrs. Polly's side, in her little homespun gown,
winding quills through sunny forenoons--how she hated it! She liked
feeding the hens and pigs better, and when she got promoted to
driving the cows, a couple of years later, she was in her element.
There were charming possibilities of nuts and checkerberries and
sassafras and sweet flag all the way between the house and the
pasture, and the chance to loiter, and have a romp.

She rarely showed any unwillingness to go for the cows; but once,
when there was a quilting at her mistress's house, she demurred. It
was right in the midst of the festivities; they were just preparing
for supper, in fact. Ann knew all about the good things in the
pantry, she was wild with delight at the unwonted stir, and anxious
not to lose a minute of it. She thought some one else might go for
the cows that night. She cried and sulked, but there was no help for
it. Go she had to. So she tucked up her gown--it was her best Sunday
one--took her stick, and trudged along. When she came to the pasture,
there were her master's cows waiting at the bars. So were Neighbor
Belcher's cows also, in the adjoining pasture. Ann had her hand on
the topmost of her own bars, when she happened to glance over at
Neighbor Belcher's, and a thought struck her. She burst into a peal
of laughter, and took a step towards the other bars. Then she went
back to her own. Finally, she let down the Belcher bars, and the
Belcher cows crowded out, to the great astonishment of the Wales
cows, who stared over their high rails and mooed uneasily.

Ann drove the Belcher cows home and ushered them into Samuel Wales'
barnyard with speed. Then she went demurely into the house. The table
looked beautiful. Ann was beginning to quake inwardly, though she
still was hugging herself, so to speak, in secret enjoyment of her
own mischief. She had one hope--that supper would be eaten before her
master milked. But the hope was vain. When she saw Mr. Wales come in,
glance her way, and then call his wife out, she knew at once what had
happened, and begun to tremble--she knew perfectly what Mr. Wales was
saying out there. It was this: "That little limb has driven home all
Neighbor Belcher's cows instead of ours; what's going to be done with
her?"

She knew what the answer would be, too. Mrs. Polly was a peremptory
woman.

Back Ann had to go with the Belcher cows, fasten them safely in their
pasture again, and drive her master's home. She was hustled off to
bed, then, without any of that beautiful supper. But she had just
crept into her bed in the small unfinished room up stairs where she
slept, and was lying there sobbing, when she heard a slow, fumbling
step on the stairs. Then the door opened, and Mrs. Deacon Thomas
Wales, Samuel Wales' mother, came in. She was a good old lady, and
had always taken a great fancy to her son's bound girl; and Ann, on
her part, minded her better than any one else. She hid her face in
the tow sheet, when she saw grandma. The old lady had on a long black
silk apron. She held something concealed under it, when she came in.
Presently she displayed it.

"There--child," said she, "here's a piece of sweet cake and a couple
of simballs, that I managed to save out for you. Jest set right up
and eat 'em, and don't ever be so dretful naughty again, or I don't
know what will become of you."

This reproof, tempered with sweetness, had a salutary effect on Ann.
She sat up, and ate her sweet cake and simballs, and sobbed out her
contrition to grandma, and there was a marked improvement in her
conduct for some days.

Mrs. Polly was a born driver. She worked hard herself, and she
expected everybody about her to. The tasks which Ann had set her did
not seem as much out of proportion, then, as they would now. Still,
her mistress, even then, allowed her less time for play than was
usual, though it was all done in good faith, and not from any
intentional severity. As time went on, she grew really quite fond of
the child, and she was honestly desirous of doing her whole duty by
her. If she had had a daughter of her own, it is doubtful if her
treatment of her would have been much different.

Still, Ann was too young to understand all this, and, sometimes,
though she was strong and healthy, and not naturally averse to work,
she would rebel, when her mistress set her stints so long, and kept
her at work when other children were playing.

Once in a while she would confide in grandma, when Mrs. Polly sent
her over there on an errand and she had felt unusually aggrieved
because she had had to wind quills, or hetchel, instead of going
berrying, or some like pleasant amusement.

"Poor little cosset," grandma would say, pityingly. Then she would
give her a simball, and tell her she must "be a good girl, and not
mind if she couldn't play jest like the others, for she'd got to airn
her own livin', when she grew up, and she must learn to work."

Ann would go away comforted, but grandma would be privately
indignant. She was, as is apt to be the case, rather critical with
her sons' wives, and she thought "Sam'l's kept that poor little gal
too stiddy at work," and wished and wished she could shelter her
under her own grandmotherly wing, and feed her with simballs to her
heart's content. She was too wise to say anything to influence the
child against her mistress, however. She was always cautious about
that, even while pitying her. Once in a while she would speak her
mind to her son, but _he_ was easy enough--Ann would not have found
him a hard task-master.

Still, Ann did not have to work hard enough to hurt her. The worst
consequences were that such a rigid rein on such a frisky little colt
perhaps had more to do with her "cutting up," as her mistress phrased
it, than she dreamed of. Moreover the thought of the indentures,
securely locked up in Mr. Wales' tall wooden desk, was forever in
Ann's mind. Half by dint of questioning various people, half by her
own natural logic she had settled it within herself, that at any time
the possession of these papers would set her free, and she could go
back to her own mother, whom she dimly remembered as being
loud-voiced, but merry, and very indulgent. However, Ann never
meditated in earnest, taking the indentures; indeed, the desk was
always locked--it held other documents more valuable than hers--and
Samuel Wales carried the key in his waistcoat-pocket.

She went to a dame's school, three months every year. Samuel Wales
carted half a cord of wood to pay for her schooling, and she learned
to write and read in the New England Primer. Next to her, on the
split log bench, sat a little girl named Hannah French. The two
became fast friends. Hannah was an only child, pretty and delicate,
and very much petted by her parents. No long hard tasks were set
those soft little fingers, even in those old days when children
worked as well as their elders. Ann admired and loved Hannah, because
she had what she, herself, had not; and Hannah loved and pitied Ann
because she had not what she had. It was a sweet little friendship,
and would not have been, if Ann had not been free from envy and
Hannah humble and pitying.

When Ann told her what a long stint she had to do before school,
Hannah would shed sympathizing tears.

Ann, after a solemn promise of secrecy, told her about the indentures
one day. Hannah listened with round, serious eyes; her brown hair was
combed smoothly down over her ears. She was a veritable little
Puritan damsel herself.

"If I could only get the papers, I wouldn't have to mind her, and
work so hard," said Ann.

Hannah's eyes grew rounder. "Why, it would be sinful to take them!"
said she.

Ann's cheeks blazed under her wondering gaze, and she said no more.

When she was about eleven years old, one icy January day, Hannah
wanted her to go out and play on the ice after school. They had no
skates, but it was rare fun to slide. Ann went home and asked Mrs.
Polly's permission with a beating heart; she promised to do a double
stint next day, if she would let her go. But her mistress was
inexorable--work before play, she said, always; and Ann must not
forget that she was to be brought up to work; it was different with
her from what it was with Hannah French. Even this she meant kindly
enough, but Ann saw Hannah go away, and sat down to her spinning with
more fierce defiance in her heart than had ever been there before.
She had been unusually good, too, lately. She always was, during the
three months' schooling, with sober, gentle little Hannah French.

She had been spinning sulkily a while, and it was almost dark, when a
messenger came for her master and mistress to go to Deacon Thomas
Wales', who had been suddenly taken very ill.

Ann would have felt sorry if she had not been so angry. Deacon Wales
was almost as much of a favorite of hers as his wife. As it was, the
principal thing she thought of, after Mr. Wales and his wife had
gone, was that _the key was in the desk_. However it had happened,
there it was. She hesitated a moment. She was all alone in the
kitchen, and her heart was in a tumult of anger, but she had learned
her lessons from the Bible and the New England Primer and she was
afraid of the _sin_. But, at last, she opened the desk, found the
indentures, and hid them in the little pocket which she wore tied
about her waist, under her petticoat.

Then she threw her blanket over her head, and got her poppet out of
the chest. The poppet was a little doll manufactured from a corn-cob,
dressed in an indigo-colored gown. Grandma had made it for her, and
it was her chief treasure. She clasped it tight to her bosom and ran
across lots to Hannah French's.

Hannah saw her coming, and met her at the door.

"I've brought you my poppet," whispered Ann, all breathless, "and you
must keep her always, and not let her work too hard. I'm going away!"

Hannah's eyes looked like two solemn moons. "Where are you going,
Ann?"

"I'm going to Boston to find my own mother." She said nothing about
the indentures to Hannah--somehow she could not.

Hannah could not say much, she was so astonished, but as soon as Ann
had gone, scudding across the fields, she went in with the poppet and
told her mother.

Deacon Thomas Wales was very sick. Mr. and Mrs. Samuel remained at
his house all night, but Ann was not left alone, for Mr. Wales had an
apprentice who slept in the house.

Ann did not sleep any that night. She got up very early, before any
one was stirring, and dressed herself in her Sunday clothes. Then she
tied up her working clothes in a bundle, crept softly down stairs,
and out doors.

It was bright moonlight and quite cold. She ran along as fast as she
could on the Boston road. Deacon Thomas Wales' house was on the way.
The windows were lit up. She thought of grandma and poor grandpa,
with a sob in her heart, but she sped along. Past the schoolhouse,
and meeting-house, too, she had to go, with big qualms of grief and
remorse. But she kept on. She was a fast traveller.

She had reached the North Precinct of Braintree by daylight. So far,
she had not encountered a single person. Now, she heard horse's hoofs
behind her. She began to run faster, but it was of no use. Soon
Captain Abraham French loomed up on his big gray horse, a few paces
from her. He was Hannah's father, but he was a tithing-man, and
looked quite stern, and Ann had always stood in great fear of him.

She ran on as fast as her little heels could fly, with a thumping
heart. But it was not long before she felt herself seized by a strong
arm and swung up behind Captain French on the gray horse. She was in
a panic of terror, and would have cried and begged for mercy if she
had not been in so much awe of her captor. She thought with awful
apprehension of these stolen indentures in her little pocket. What if
he should find that out!

Captain French whipped up his horse, however, and hastened along
without saying a word. His silence, if anything, caused more dread in
Ann than words would have. But his mind was occupied. Deacon Thomas
Wales was dead; he was one of his most beloved and honored friends,
and it was a great shock to him. Hannah had told him about Ann's
premeditated escape, and he had set out on her track, as soon as he
had found that she was really gone, that morning. But the news, which
he had heard on his way, had driven all thoughts of reprimand which
he might have entertained, out of his head. He only cared to get the
child safely back.

So, not a word spoke Captain French, but rode on in grim and
sorrowful silence, with Ann clinging to him, till he reached her
master's door. Then he set her down with a stern and solemn
injunction never to transgress again, and rode away.

Ann went into the kitchen with a quaking heart. It was empty and
still. Its very emptiness and stillness seemed to reproach her. There
stood the desk--she ran across to it, pulled the indentures from her
pocket, put them in their old place, and shut the lid down. There
they staid till the full and just time of her servitude had expired.
She never disturbed them again.

On account of the grief and confusion incident on Deacon Wales'
death, she escaped with very little censure. She never made an
attempt to run away again. Indeed she had no wish to, for after
Deacon Wales' death, grandma was lonely and wanted her, and she
lived, most of the time, with her. And, whether she was in reality,
treated any more kindly or not, she was certainly happier.



II

Deacon Thomas Wales' Will


In the Name of God Amen! the Thirteenth Day of September One Thousand
Seven Hundred Fifty & eight, I, Thomas Wales of Braintree, in the
County of Suffolk & Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
Gent--being in good health of Body and of Sound Disproving mind and
Memory, Thanks be given to God--Calling to mind my mortality, Do
therefore in my health make and ordain this my Last Will and
Testament. And First I Recommend my Soul into the hand of God who
gave it--Hoping through grace to obtain Salvation thro' the merits
and Mediation of Jesus Christ my only Lord and Dear Redeemer, and my
body to be Decently interd, at the Discretion of my Executer,
believing at the General Resurection to receive the Same again by the
mighty Power of God--And such worldly estate as God in his goodness
hath graciously given me after Debts, funeral Expenses &c, are Paid I
give & Dispose of the Same as Followeth--

_Imprimis_--I Give to my beloved Wife Sarah a good Sute of mourning
apparrel Such as she may Choose--also if she acquit my estate of
Dower and third-therin (as we have agreed) Then that my Executer
return all of Household movables she bought at our marriage & since
that are remaining, also to Pay to her or Her Heirs That Note of
Forty Pound I gave to her, when she acquited my estate and I hers.
Before Division to be made as herin exprest, also the Southwest
fire-Room in my House, a right in my Cellar, Halfe the Garden, also
the Privilege of water at the well & yard room and to bake in the
oven what she hath need of to improve her Life-time by her.

After this, followed a division of his property amongst his children,
five sons, and two daughters. The "Homeplace" was given to his sons
Ephraim and Atherton. Ephraim had a good house of his own, so he took
his share of the property in land, and Atherton went to live in the
old homestead. His quarters had been poor enough; he had not been so
successful as his brothers, and had been unable to live as well. It
had been a great cross to his wife, Dorcas, who was very high
spirited. She had compared, bitterly, the poverty of her household
arrangements, with the abundant comfort of her sisters-in-law.

Now, she seized eagerly at the opportunity of improving her style of
living. The old Wales house was quite a pretentious edifice for those
times. All the drawback to her delight was, that Grandma should have
the southwest fire-room. She wanted to set up her high-posted
bedstead, with its enormous feather-bed in that, and have it for her
fore-room. Properly, it was the fore room, being right across the
entry from the family sitting room. There was a tall chest of drawers
that would fit in so nicely between the windows, too. Take it
altogether, she was chagrined at having to give up the southwest
room; but there was no help for it--there it was in Deacon Wales'
will.

Mrs. Dorcas was the youngest of all the sons' wives, as her husband
was the latest born. She was quite a girl to some of them. Grandma
had never more than half approved of her. Dorcas was high-strung and
flighty, she said. She had her doubts about living happily with her.
But Atherton was anxious for this division of the property, and he
was her youngest darling, so she gave in. She felt lonely, and out of
her element, when everything was arranged, she established in the
southwest fire-room, and Atherton's family keeping house in the
others, though things started pleasantly and peaceably enough.

It occurred to her that her son Samuel might have her own "help," a
stout woman, who had worked in her kitchen for many years, and she
take in exchange his little bound girl, Ann Ginnins. She had always
taken a great fancy to the child. There was a large closet out of the
southwest room, where she could sleep, and she could be made very
useful, taking steps, and running "arrants" for her.

Mr. Samuel and his wife hesitated a little, when this plan was
proposed. In spite of the trouble she gave them, they were attached
to Ann, and did not like to part with her, and Mrs. Polly was just
getting her "larnt" her own ways, as she put it. Privately, she
feared Grandma would undo all the good she had done, in teaching Ann
to be smart and capable. Finally they gave in, with the understanding
that it was not to be considered necessarily a permanent arrangement,
and Ann went to live with the old lady.

Mrs. Dorcas did not relish this any more than she did the
appropriation of the southwest fire-room. She had never liked Ann
very well. Besides she had two little girls of her own, and she
fancied Ann rivaled them in Grandma's affection. So, soon after the
girl was established in the house, she began to _show out_ in various
little ways.

Thirsey, her youngest child, was a mere baby, a round fat dumpling of
a thing. She was sweet, and good-natured, and the pet of the whole
family. Ann was very fond of playing with her, and tending her, and
Mrs. Dorcas began to take advantage of it. The minute Ann was at
liberty she was called upon to take care of Thirsey. The constant
carrying about such a heavy child soon began to make her shoulders
stoop and ache. Then Grandma took up the cudgels. She was smart and
high-spirited, but she was a very peaceable old lady on her own
account, and fully resolved "to put up with everything from Dorcas,
rather than have strife in the family." She was not going to see this
helpless little girl imposed on, however. "The little gal ain't goin'
to get bent all over, tendin' that heavy baby, Dorcas," she
proclaimed. "You can jist make up your mind to it. She didn't come
here to do sech work."

So Dorcas had to make up her mind to it.

Ann's principal duties were scouring "the brasses" in Grandma's room,
taking steps for her, and spinning her stint every day. Grandma set
smaller stints than Mrs. Polly. As time went on, she helped about the
cooking. She and Grandma cooked their own victuals, and ate from a
little separate table in the common kitchen. It was a very large
room, and might have accommodated several families, if they could
have agreed. There was a big oven, and a roomy fire-place. Good
Deacon Wales had probably seen no reason at all why his "beloved
wife," should not have her right therein with the greatest peace and
concord.

But it soon came to pass that Mrs. Dorcas' pots and kettles were all
prepared to hang on the trammels when Grandma's were, and an army of
cakes and pies marshalled to go in the oven when Grandma had proposed
to do some baking. Grandma bore it patiently for a long time; but Ann
was with difficulty restrained from freeing her small mind, and her
black eyes snapped more dangerously, at every new offence.

One morning, Grandma had two loaves of "riz bread," and some election
cakes, rising, and was intending to bake them in about an hour, when
they should be sufficiently light. What should Mrs. Dorcas do, but
mix up sour milk bread, and some pies with the greatest speed, and
fill up the oven, before Grandma's cookery was ready!

Grandma sent Ann out into the kitchen to put the loaves in the oven
and lo and behold! the oven was full. Ann stood staring for a minute,
with a loaf of election cake in her hands; that and the bread would
be ruined if they were not baked immediately, as they were raised
enough. Mrs. Dorcas had taken Thirsey and stepped out somewhere, and
there was no one in the kitchen. Ann set the election cake back on
the table. Then, with the aid of the tongs, she reached into the
brick oven and took out every one of Mrs. Dorcas' pies and loaves.
Then she arranged them deliberately in a pitiful semicircle on the
hearth, and put Grandma's cookery in the oven.

She went back to the southwest room then, and sat quietly down to her
spinning. Grandma asked if she had put the things in, and she said
"Yes, ma'am," meekly. There was a bright red spot on each of her dark
cheeks.

When Mrs. Dorcas entered the kitchen, carrying Thirsey wrapped up in
an old homespun blanket, she nearly dropped as her gaze fell on the
fire-place and the hearth. There sat her bread and pies, in the most
lamentable half-baked, sticky, doughy condition imaginable. She
opened the oven, and peered in. There were Grandma's loaves, all a
lovely brown. Out they came, with a twitch. Luckily, they were done.
Her own went in, but they were irretrievable failures.

Of course, quite a commotion came from this. Dorcas raised her shrill
voice pretty high, and Grandma, though she had been innocent of the
whole transaction, was so blamed that she gave Dorcas a piece of her
mind at last. Ann surveyed the nice brown loaves, and listened to the
talk in secret satisfaction; but she had to suffer for it afterward.
Grandma punished her for the first time, and she discovered that that
kind old hand was pretty firm and strong. "No matter what you think
or whether you air in the rights on't, or not, a little gal mustn't
ever sass her elders," said Grandma.

But if Ann's interference was blamable, it was productive of one good
result--the matter came to Mr. Atherton's ears, and he had a stern
sense of justice when roused, and a great veneration for his mother.
His father's will should be carried out to the letter, he declared;
and it was. Grandma baked and boiled in peace, outwardly, at least,
after that.

Ann was a great comfort to her; she was outgrowing her wild,
mischievous ways, and she was so bright and quick. She promised to be
pretty, too. Grandma compared her favorably with her own
grandchildren, especially, Mrs. Dorcas' eldest daughter Martha, who
was nearly Ann's age. "Marthy's a pretty little gal enough," she used
to say, "but she ain't got the _snap_ to her that Ann has, though I
wouldn't tell Atherton's wife so, for the world."

She promised Ann her gold beads, when she should be done with them,
under strict injunctions not to say anything about it till the time
came; for the others might feel hard as she wasn't her own flesh and
blood. The gold beads were Ann's ideals of beauty, and richness,
though she did not like to hear Grandma talk about being "done with
them." Grandma always wore them around her fair, plump old neck; she
had never seen her without her string of beads.

As before said, Ann was now very seldom mischievous enough to make
herself serious trouble; but, once in a while, her natural
propensities would crop out. When they did, Mrs. Dorcas was
exceedingly bitter. Indeed, her dislike of Ann was, at all times,
smouldering, and needed only a slight fanning to break out.

One stormy winter day, Mrs. Dorcas had been working till dark, making
candle-wicks. When she came to get tea, she tied the white fleecy
rolls together, a great bundle of them, and hung them up in the
cellar-way, over the stairs, to be out of the way. They were extra
fine wicks, being made of flax for the company candles. "I've got a
good job done," said Mrs. Dorcas, surveying them complacently. Her
husband had gone to Boston, and was not coming home till the next
day, so she had had a nice chance to work at them, without as much
interruption as usual.

Ann, going down the cellar-stairs, with a lighted candle, after some
butter for tea, spied the beautiful rolls swinging overhead. What
possessed her to, she could not herself have told--she certainly had
no wish to injure Mrs. Dorcas' wicks--but she pinched up a little end
of the fluffy flax and touched her candle to it. She thought she
would see how that little bit would burn off. She soon found out. The
flame caught, and ran like lightning through the whole bundle. There
was a great puff of fire and smoke, and poor Mrs. Dorcas' fine
candle-wicks were gone. Ann screamed, and sprang downstairs. She
barely escaped the whole blaze coming in her face.

"What's that!" shrieked Mrs. Dorcas, rushing to the cellar-door.
Words can not describe her feeling when she saw that her nice
candle-wicks, the fruit of her day's toil, were burnt up.

If ever there was a wretched culprit that night, Ann was. She had not
meant to do wrong, but that, maybe, made it worse for her in one way.
She had not even gratified malice to sustain her. Grandma blamed her,
almost as severely as Mrs. Dorcas. She said she didn't know what
would "become of a little gal, that was so keerless," and decreed
that she must stay at home from school and work on candle-wicks till
Mrs. Dorcas' loss was made good to her. Ann listened ruefully. She
was scared and sorry, but that did not seem to help matters any. She
did not want any supper, and she went to bed early and cried herself
to sleep.

Somewhere about midnight, a strange sound woke her up. She called out
to Grandma in alarm. The same sound had awakened her. "Get up, an'
light a candle, child," said she; "I'm afeard the baby's sick."

Ann scarcely had the candle lighted, before the door opened, and Mrs.
Dorcas appeared in her nightdress--she was very pale, and trembling
all over. "Oh!" she gasped, "it's the baby. Thirsey's got the croup,
an' Atherton's away, and there ain't anybody to go for the doctor. O
what shall I do, what shall I do!" She fairly wrung her hands.

"_Hev_ you tried the skunk's oil," asked Grandma eagerly, preparing
to get up.

"Yes, I have, I have! It's a good hour since she woke up, an' I've
tried everything. It hasn't done any good. I thought I wouldn't call
you, if I could help it, but she's worse--only hear her! An'
Atherton's away! Oh! what shall I do, what shall I do?"

"Don't take on so, Dorcas," said Grandma, tremulously, but
cheeringly. "I'll come right along, an'--why, child, what air you
goin' to do?"

Ann had finished dressing herself, and now she was pinning a heavy
homespun blanket over her head, as if she were preparing to go out
doors.

"I'm going after the doctor for Thirsey," said Ann, her black eyes
flashing with determination.

"Oh, will you, will you!" cried Mrs. Dorcas, catching at this new
help.

"Hush, Dorcas," said Grandma, sternly. "It's an awful storm out--jist
hear the wind blow! It ain't fit fur her to go. Her life's jist as
precious as Thirsey's."

Ann said nothing more, but she went into her own little room with the
same determined look in her eyes. There was a door leading from this
room into the kitchen. Ann slipped through it hastily, lit a lantern
which was hanging beside the kitchen chimney, and was outdoors in a
minute.

The storm was one of sharp, driving sleet, which struck her face like
so many needles. The first blast, as she stepped outside the door,
seemed to almost force her back, but her heart did not fail her. The
snow was not so very deep, but it was hard walking. There was no
pretense of a path. The doctor lived half a mile away, and there was
not a house in the whole distance, save the Meeting House and
schoolhouse. It was very dark. Lucky it was that she had taken the
lantern; she could not have found her way without it.

On kept the little slender, erect figure, with the fierce
determination in its heart, through the snow and sleet, holding the
blanket close over its head, and swinging the feeble lantern bravely.

When she reached the doctor's house, he was gone. He had started for
the North Precinct early in the evening, his good wife said; he was
called down to Captain Isaac Lovejoy's, the house next the North
Precinct Meeting House. She'd been sitting up waiting for him, it was
such an awful storm, and such a lonely road. She was worried, but she
didn't think he'd start for home that night; she guessed he'd stay at
Captain Lovejoy's till morning.

The doctor's wife, holding her door open, as best she could, in the
violent wind, had hardly given this information to the little
snow-bedraggled object standing out there in the inky darkness,
through which the lantern made a faint circle of light, before she
had disappeared.

"She went like a speerit," said the good woman, staring out into the
blackness in amazement. She never dreamed of such a thing as Ann's
going to the North Precinct after the doctor, but that was what the
daring girl had determined to do. She had listened to the doctor's
wife in dismay, but with never one doubt as to her own course of
proceeding.

Straight along the road to the North Precinct she kept. It would have
been an awful journey that night for a strong man. It seemed
incredible that a little girl could have the strength or courage to
accomplish it. There were four miles to traverse in a black, howling
storm, over a pathless road, through forests, with hardly a house by
the way.

When she reached Captain Isaac Lovejoy's house, next to the Meeting
House in the North Precinct of Braintree, stumbling blindly into the
warm, lighted kitchen, the captain and the doctor could hardly
believe their senses. She told the doctor about Thirsey; then she
almost fainted from cold and exhaustion.

Good wife Lovejoy laid her on the settee, and brewed her some hot
herb tea. She almost forgot her own sick little girl, for a few
minutes, in trying to restore this brave child who had come from the
South Precinct in this dreadful storm to save little Thirsey Wales'
life.

When Ann came to herself a little, her first question was, if the
doctor were ready to go.

"He's gone," said Mrs. Lovejoy, cheeringly.

Ann felt disappointed. She had thought she was going back with him.
But that would have been impossible. She could not have stood the
journey for the second time that night, even on horseback behind the
doctor, as she had planned.

She drank a second bowlful of herb tea, and went to bed with a hot
stone at her feet, and a great many blankets and coverlids over her.

The next morning, Captain Lovejoy carried her home. He had a rough
wood sled, and she rode on that, on an old quilt; it was easier than
horseback, and she was pretty lame and tired.

Mrs. Dorcas saw her coming and opened the door. When Ann came up on
the stoop, she just threw her arms around her and kissed her.

"You needn't make the candle-wicks," said she. "It's no matter about
them at all. Thirsey's better this morning, an' I guess you saved her
life."

Grandma was fairly bursting with pride and delight in her little
gal's brave feat, now that she saw her safe. She untied the gold
beads on her neck, and fastened them around Ann's. "There," said she,
"you may wear them to school to-day, if you'll be keerful."

That day, with the gold beads by way of celebration, began a new era
in Ann's life. There was no more secret animosity between her and
Mrs. Dorcas. The doctor had come that night in the very nick of time.
Thirsey was almost dying. Her mother was fully convinced that Ann had
saved her life, and she never forgot it. She was a woman of strong
feelings, who never did things by halves, and she not only treated
Ann with kindness, but she seemed to smother her grudge against
Grandma for robbing her of the southwest fire-room.



III

The Adopted Daughter


The Inventory of the Estate of Samuel Wales Late of Braintree, Taken
by the Subscribers, March the 14th, 1761.

  His Purse in Cash .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   L11-15-01
  His apparrel  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .10-11-00
  His watch     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 2-13-04
  The Best Bed with two Coverlids, three sheets,
       two underbeds, two Bolsters, two pillows,
       Bedstead rope    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   L 6
  One mill Blanket, two Phlanel sheets, 12 toe
       Sheets   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   L 3- 4- 8
  Eleven Towels & table Cloth   .   .   .   .   .   . 0-15- 0
  a pair of mittens & pr. of Gloves .   .   .   .   . 0- 2- 0
  a neck Handkerchief & neckband    .   .   .   .   . 0- 4- 0
  an ovel Tabel--Two other Tabels   .   .   .   .   . 1-12- 0
  A Chist with Draws    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 2- 8- 0
  Another Low Chist with Draws & three other
       Chists   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1-10- 0
  Six best Chears and a great chear .   .   .   .   . 1- 6- 0
  a warming pan--Two Brass Kittles  .   .   .   .   . 1- 5- 0
  a Small Looking Glass, five Pewter Basons .   .   . 0- 7- 8
  fifteen other Chears  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 0-15- 0
  fire arms, Sword & bayonet    .   .   .   .   .   . 1- 4- 0
  Six Porringers, four platters, Two Pewter Pots    L 1- 0- 4
  auger Chisel, Gimlet, a Bible & other Books   .   . 0-15- 0
  A chese press, great spinning-wheel, & spindle    . 0- 9- 4
  a smith's anvil   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 3-12- 0
  the Pillion   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 0- 8- 0
  a Bleu Jacket .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 0- 0- 3
       Aaron Whitcomb.
       Silas White.

The foregoing is only a small portion of the original inventory of
Samuel Wales' estate. He was an exceedingly well-to-do man for these
times. He had a good many acres of rich pasture and woodland, and
considerable live stock. Then his home was larger and more
comfortable than was usual then; and his stock of household utensils
plentiful.

He died three years after Ann Ginnins went to live with Grandma, when
she was about thirteen years old. Grandma spared her to Mrs. Polly
for a few weeks after the funeral; there was a great deal to be done,
and she needed some extra help. And, after all, Ann was legally bound
to her, and her lawful servant.

So the day after good Samuel Wales was laid away in the little
Braintree burying-ground, Ann returned to her old quarters for a
little while. She did not really want to go; but she did not object
to the plan at all. She was sincerely sorry for poor Mrs. Polly, and
wanted to help her, if she could. She mourned, herself, for Mr.
Samuel. He had always been very kind to her.

Mrs. Polly had for company, besides Ann, Nabby Porter, Grandma's old
hired woman whom she had made over to her, and a young man who had
been serving as apprentice to Mr. Samuel. His name was Phineas Adams.
He was very shy and silent, but a good workman.

Samuel Wales left a will bequeathing every thing to his widow; that
was solemnly read in the fore-room one afternoon; then the inventory
had to be taken. That on account of the amount of property was quite
an undertaking; but it was carried out with the greatest formality
and precision.

For several days, Mr. Aaron Whitcomb, and Mr. Silas White, were
stalking majestically about the premises, with note-books and pens.
Aaron Whitcomb was a grave portly old man, with a large head of white
hair. Silas White was little and wiry and fussy. He monopolized the
greater part of the business, although he was not half as well fitted
for it as his companion.

They pried into everything with religious exactitude. Mrs. Polly
watched them with beseeming awe and deference, but it was a great
trial to her, and she grew very nervous over it. It seemed dreadful
to have all her husband's little personal effects, down to his
neck-band and mittens, handled over, and their worth in shillings and
pence calculated. She had a price fixed on them already in higher
currency.

Ann found her crying one afternoon sitting on the kitchen settle,
with her apron over her head. When she saw the little girl's pitying
look, she poured out her trouble to her.

"They've just been valuing _his_ mittens and gloves," said she,
sobbing, "at two-and-sixpence. I shall be thankful, when they are
through."

"Are there any more of _his_ things?" asked Ann, her black eyes
flashing, with the tears in them.

"I think they've seen about all. There's his blue jacket he used to
milk in, a-hanging behind the shed-door--I guess they haven't valued
that yet."

"I think it's a shame!" quoth Ann. "I don't believe there's any need
of so much law."

"Hush, child! You mustn't set yourself up against the judgment of
your elders. Such things have to be done."

Ann said no more, but the indignant sparkle did not fade out of her
eyes at all. She watched her opportunity, and took down Mr. Wales'
old blue jacket from its peg behind the shed-door, ran with it up
stairs and hid it in her own room behind the bed. "There," said she,
"Mrs. Wales sha'n't cry over _that!_"

That night, at tea time, the work of taking the inventory was
complete. Mr. Whitcomb and Mr. White walked away with their long
lists, satisfied that they had done their duty according to the law.
Every article of Samuel Wales' property, from a warming pan to a
chest of drawers, was set down, with the sole exception of that old
blue jacket which Ann had hidden.

She felt complacent over it at first; then she begun to be uneasy.

"Nabby," said she confidentially to the old servant woman, when they
were washing the pewter plates together after supper, "what would
they do, if anybody shouldn't let them set down all the things--if
they hid some of 'em away, I mean?"

"They'd make a dretful time on't," said Nabby, impressively. She was
a large, stern-looking old woman. "They air dretful perticklar 'bout
these things. They hev to be."

Ann was scared when she heard that. When the dishes were done, she
sat down on the settle and thought it over, and made up her mind what
to do.

The next morning, in the frosty dawning, before the rest of the
family were up, a slim, erect little figure could have been seen
speeding across lots toward Mr. Silas White's. She had the old blue
jacket tucked under her arm. When she reached the house, she spied
Mr. White just coming out of the back door with a milking pail. He
carried a lantern, too, for it was hardly light.

He stopped, and stared, when Ann ran up to him.

"Mr. White," said she, all breathless, "here's--something--I guess
yer didn't see yesterday."

Mr. White set down the milk pail, took the blue jacket which she
handed him, and scrutinized it sharply, by the light of the lantern.

"I guess we _didn't_ see it," said he, finally.

"I will put it down--it's worth about three pence, I judge. Where"--

"Silas, Silas!" called a shrill voice from the house. Silas White
dropped the jacket and trotted briskly in, his lantern bobbing
agitatedly. He never delayed a moment when his wife called; important
and tyrannical as the little man was abroad, he had his own tyrant at
home.

Ann did not wait for him to return; she snatched up the blue jacket
and fled home, leaping like a little deer over the hoary fields. She
hung up the precious old jacket behind the shed-door again, and no
one ever knew the whole story of its entrance in the inventory. If
she had been questioned, she would have told the truth boldly,
though. But Samuel Wales' Inventory had for its last item that blue
jacket, spelled after Silas White's own individual method, as was
many another word in the long list. Silas White consulted his own
taste with respect to capital letters too.

After a few weeks, Grandma said she must have Ann again; and back she
went. Grandma was very feeble lately, and everybody humored her. Mrs.
Polly was sorry to have the little girl leave her. She said it was
wonderful how much she had improved. But she would not have admitted
that the improvement was owing to the different influence she had
been under; she said Ann had outgrown her mischievous ways.

Grandma did not live very long after this however. Mrs. Polly had her
bound girl at her own disposal in a year's time. Poor Ann was
sorrowful enough for a long while after Grandma's death. She wore the
beloved gold beads round her neck, and a sad ache in her heart. The
dear old woman had taken the beads off her neck with her own hands
and given them to Ann before she died, that there might be no mistake
about it.

Mrs. Polly said she was glad Ann had them. "You might jist as well
have 'em as Dorcas's girl," said she; "she set enough sight more by
you."

Ann could not help growing cheerful again, after a while. Affairs in
Mrs. Polly's house were much brighter for her, in some ways, than
they had ever been before.

Either the hot iron of affliction had smoothed some of the puckers
out of her mistress' disposition, or she was growing, naturally, less
sharp and dictatorial. Anyway, she was becoming as gentle and loving
with Ann as it was in her nature to be, and Ann, following her
impulsive temper, returned all the affection with vigor, and never
bestowed a thought on past unpleasantness.

For the next two years, Ann's position in the family grew to be more
and more that of a daughter. If it had not been for the indentures
lying serenely in that tall wooden desk, she would almost have
forgotten, herself, that she was a bound girl.

One spring afternoon, when Ann was about sixteen years old, her
mistress called her solemnly into the fore-room. "Ann," said she,
"come here, I want to speak to you."

Nabby stared wonderingly; and Ann, as she obeyed, felt awed. There
was something unusual in her mistress's tone.

Standing there in the fore-room, in the august company of the best
bed, with its high posts and flowered-chintz curtains, the best chest
of drawers, and the best chairs, Ann listened to what Mrs. Polly had
to tell her. It was a plan which almost took her breath away; for it
was this: Mrs. Polly proposed to adopt her, and change her name to
Wales. She would be no longer Ann Ginnins, and a bound girl; but Ann
Wales, and a daughter in her mother's home.

Ann dropped into one of the best chairs, and sat there, her little
dark face very pale. "Should I have the--_papers?_" she gasped at
length.

"Your papers? Yes, child, you can have them."

"I don't want them!" cried Ann, "never. I want them to stay just
where they are, till my time is out. If I am adopted, I don't want
the papers!"

Mrs. Polly stared. She had never known how Ann had taken the
indentures with her on her run-away trip years ago; but now Ann told
her the whole story. In her gratitude to her mistress, and her
contrition, she had to.

It was so long ago in Ann's childhood, it did not seem so very
dreadful to Mrs. Polly, probably. But Ann insisted on the indentures
remaining in the desk, even after the papers of adoption were made
out, and she had become "Ann Wales." It seemed to go a little way
toward satisfying her conscience. This adoption meant a good deal to
Ann; for besides a legal home, and a mother, it secured to her a
right in a comfortable property in the future. Mrs. Polly Wales was
considered very well off. She was a smart business-woman, and knew
how to take care of her property too. She still hired Phineas Adams
to carry on the blacksmith's business, and kept her farm-work running
just as her husband had. Neither she nor Ann were afraid of work, and
Ann Wales used to milk the cows, and escort them to and from pasture,
as faithfully as Ann Ginnins.

It was along in spring time when Ann was adopted, and Mrs. Polly
fulfilled her part of the contract in the indentures by getting the
Sunday suit therein spoken of.

They often rode on horseback to meeting, but they usually walked on
the fine Sundays in spring. Ann had probably never been so happy in
her life as she was walking by Mrs. Polly's side to meeting that
first Sunday after her adoption. Most of the way was through the
woods; the tender light green boughs met over their heads; the
violets and anemones were springing beside their path. There were
green buds and white blossoms all around; the sky showed blue between
the waving branches, and the birds were singing.

Ann in her pretty petticoat of rose-colored stuff, stepping daintily
over the young grass and the flowers, looked and felt like a part of
it all. Her dark cheeks had a beautiful red glow on them; her black
eyes shone. She was as straight and graceful and stately as an Indian.

"She's as handsome as a picture," thought Mrs. Polly in her secret
heart. A good many people said that Ann resembled Mrs. Polly in her
youth, and that may have added force to her admiration.

Her new gown was very fine for those days; but fine as she was, and
adopted daughter though she was, Ann did not omit her thrifty ways
for once. This identical morning Mrs. Polly and she carried their
best shoes under their arms, and wore their old ones, till within a
short distance from the meeting-house. Then the old shoes were tucked
away under a stone wall for safety, and the best ones put on. Stone
walls, very likely, sheltered a good many well-worn little shoes, of
a Puritan Sabbath, that their prudent owners might appear in the
House of God trimly shod. Ah! these beautiful, new peaked-toed,
high-heeled shoes of Ann's--what would she have said to walking in
them _all_ the way to meeting!

If that Sunday was an eventful one to Ann Wales, so was the week
following. The next Tuesday, right after dinner, she was up in a
little unfinished chamber over the kitchen, where they did such work
when the weather permitted, carding wool. All at once, she heard
voices down below. They had a strange inflection, which gave her
warning at once. She dropped her work and listened: "What _is_ the
matter?" thought she.

Then there was a heavy tramp on the stairs, and Captain Abraham
French stood in the door, his stern weather-beaten face white and
set. Mrs. Polly followed him, looking very pale and excited.

"When did you see anything of our Hannah?" asked Captain French,
controlling as best he could the tremor in his resolute voice.

Ann rose, gathering up her big blue apron, cards, wool and all. "Oh,"
she cried, "not since last Sabbath, at meeting! What is it?"

"She's lost," answered Captain French. "She started to go up to her
Aunt Sarah's Monday forenoon; and Enos has just been down, and they
haven't seen anything of her." Poor Captain French gave a deep groan.

Then they all went down into the kitchen together, talking and
lamenting. And then, Captain French was galloping away on his gray
horse to call assistance, and Ann was flying away over the fields,
blue apron, cards, wool and all.

"O, Ann!" Mrs. Polly cried after, "where are you going?"

"I'm going--to find--_Hannah!_" Ann shouted back, in a shrill,
desperate voice, and kept on.

She had no definite notion as to where she was going; she had only
one thought--Hannah French, her darling, tender little Hannah French,
her friend whom she loved better than a sister, was lost.

A good three miles from the Wales home was a large tract of rough
land, half swamp, known as "Bear Swamp." There was an opinion, more
or less correct, that bears might be found there. Some had been shot
in that vicinity. Why Ann turned her footsteps in that direction, she
could not have told herself. Possibly the vague impression of
conversations she and Hannah had had, lingering in her mind, had
something to do with it. Many a time the two little girls had
remarked to each other with a shudder, "How awful it would be to get
lost in Bear Swamp."

Anyway, Ann went straight there, through pasture and woodland, over
ditches and stone walls. She knew every step of the way for a long
distance. When she gradually got into the unfamiliar wilderness of
the swamp, a thought struck her--suppose she got lost too! It would
be easy enough--the unbroken forest stretched for miles in some
directions. She would not find a living thing but Indians; and,
maybe, wild beasts, the whole distance.

If she should get lost she would not find Hannah, and the people
would have to hunt for her too. But Ann had quick wits for an
emergency. She had actually carried those cards, with a big wad of
wool between them all the time, in her gathered-up apron. Now she
began picking off little bits of wool and marking her way with them,
sticking them on the trees and bushes. Every few feet a fluffy scrap
of wool showed the road Ann had gone.

But poor Ann went on, farther and farther--and no sign of Hannah. She
kept calling her, from time to time, hallooing at the top of her
shrill sweet voice: "Hannah! Hannah! Hannah Fre-nch."

But never a response got the dauntless little girl, slipping almost
up to her knees, sometimes, in black swamp-mud; and sometimes
stumbling painfully over tree-stumps, and through tangled undergrowth.

"I'll go till my wool gives out," said Ann Wales; then she used it
more sparingly.

But it was almost gone before she thought she heard in the distance a
faint little cry in response to her call: "Hannah! Hannah Fre-nch!"
She called again and listened. Yes; she certainly did hear a little
cry off toward the west. Calling from time to time, she went as
nearly as she could in that direction. The pitiful answering cry grew
louder and nearer; finally Ann could distinguish Hannah's voice.

Wild with joy, she came, at last, upon her sitting on a fallen
hemlock-tree, her pretty face pale, and her sweet blue eyes strained
with terror.

"O, Hannah!" "O, Ann!"

"How did you ever get here, Hannah?"

"I--started for aunt Sarah's--that morning," explained Hannah,
between sobs. "And--I got frightened, in the woods, about a mile from
father's. I saw something ahead, I thought was a bear. A great black
thing! Then I ran--and, somehow, the first thing I knew, I was lost.
I walked and walked, and it seems to me I kept coming right back to
the same place. Finally I sat down here, and staid; I thought it was
all the way for me to be found."

"O, Hannah, what did you do last night?"

"I staid somewhere, under some pine trees," replied Hannah, with a
shudder, "and I kept hearing things--O Ann!"

Ann hugged her sympathizingly. "I guess I wouldn't have slept much if
I had known," said she. "O Hannah, you haven't had anything to eat!
ain't you starved?"

Hannah laughed faintly. "I ate up two whole pumpkin pies I was
carrying to aunt Sarah," said she.

"O how lucky it was you had them!"

"Yes; mother called me back to get them, after I started. They were
some new ones, made with cream, and she thought aunt Sarah would like
them."

Pretty soon they started. It was hard work; for the way was very
rough, and poor Hannah weak. But Ann had a good deal of strength in
her lithe young frame, and she half carried Hannah over the worst
places. Still both of the girls were pretty well spent when they came
to the last of the bits of wool on the border of Bear Swamp. However,
they kept on a little farther; then they had to stop and rest. "I
know where I am now," said Hannah, with a sigh of delight; "but I
don't think I can walk another step." She was, in fact, almost
exhausted.

Ann looked at her thoughtfully. She hardly knew what to do. She could
not carry Hannah herself--indeed, her own strength began to fail; and
she did not want to leave her to go for assistance.

All of a sudden, she jumped up. "You stay just where you are a few
minutes, Hannah," said she. "I'm going somewhere. I'll be back soon."
Ann was laughing.

Hannah looked up at her pitifully: "O Ann, don't go!"

"I'm coming right back, and it is the only way. You must get home.
Only think how your father and mother are worrying!"

Hannah said no more after that mention of her parents, and Ann
started.

She was not gone long. When she came in sight she was laughing, and
Hannah, weak as she was, laughed, too. Ann had torn her blue apron
into strips, and tied it together for a rope, and by it she was
leading a red cow.

Hannah knew the cow, and knew at once what the plan was.

"O Ann! you mean for me to ride Betty!"

"Of course I do. I just happened to think our cows were in the
pasture, down below here. And we've ridden Betty, lots of times, when
we were children, and she's just as gentle now. Whoa, Betty, good
cow."

It was very hard work to get Hannah on to the broad back of her novel
steed, but it was finally accomplished. Betty had been a perfect pet
from a calf, and was exceedingly gentle. She started off soberly
across the fields, with Hannah sitting on her back, and Ann leading
her by her blue rope.

It was a funny cavalcade for Captain Abraham French and a score of
anxious men to meet, when they were nearly in sight of home; but they
were too overjoyed to see much fun in it.

Hannah rode the rest of the way with her father on his gray horse;
and Ann walked joyfully by her side, leading the cow.

Captain French and his friends had, in fact, just started to search
Bear Swamp, well armed with lanterns, for night was coming on.

It was dark when they got home. Mrs. French was not much more
delighted to see her beloved daughter Hannah safe again, than Mrs.
Polly was to see Ann.

She listened admiringly to the story Ann told.

"Nobody but you would have thought of the wool or of the cow," said
she.

"I do declare," cried Ann, at the mention of the wool, "I have lost
the cards!"

"Never mind the cards!" said Mrs. Polly.



IV

The "Horse House" Deed


Know all Men By These Presents, that I Seth Towner of Braintree, in
the County of Suffolk & Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New
England, Gent. In Consideration that I may promote & encourage the
worship of God, I have given liberty to Ephriam, and Atherton Wales,
& Th'o:s Penniman of Stoughton who attend Publick worship with us to
erect a Stable or Horse House, on my Land near the Meeting House, in
the South Precinct in Braintree afores:d, to serve their Horses,
while attending the service of God--and to the intent that the s:d
Ephriam, Atherton & Thomas, their Heirs or assignes shall and may
hereafter So long as they or any of them incline or Desire to keep up
& maintain a Horse House for the afores:d use and Purpose; have s:d
Land whereon s:d House Stands without mollestation: I the said Seth
Towner for my Selfe, my Heirs, exec. and admin.: Do hereby Covenant
promise bind & oblige my selfe & them to warrant & Defend the
afores:d Privilege of Land. To the s:d Ephriam Wales, Atherton Wales,
& Tho:s Penniman their Heirs or assignes So long as they or any of
them keep a Horse House their, for the afores:d use: they keeping s:d
House in Such repair at all times, as that I the s:d Seth Towner, my
Heirs or assignes, may not receive Damage by any Creature Coming
through s:d House into my Land adjoining. In Witness Whereof, I the
s:d Seth Towner have hereunto set my Hand & Seal the first Day of
November One Thous. and Seven Hundred Sixty & four: in the fifth year
of his Majesty's Reign George the third King etc.

  Signed Sealed and Del:d
    presence of Seth Towner, Daniel Linfield, Simeon Thayer."

Ann's two uncles by adoption, and Thomas Penniman of Stoughton, were
well pleased to get this permission to erect a stable, or
Horse-House, as they put it then, to shelter their horses during
divine worship. The want of one had long been a sore inconvenience to
them. The few stables already erected around the meeting-house, could
not accommodate half of the horses congregated there on a Puritan
Sabbath, and every barn, for a quarter of a mile about, was put into
requisition on severe days. After the women had dismounted from their
pillions at the meeting-house door, the men-folks patiently rode the
horses to some place of shelter, and then trudged back through the
snow-drifts, wrestling with the icy wind.

So this new "Horse-House" was a great benefit to the Waleses, and to
the Pennimans, who lived three miles from them over the Stoughton
line. They were all constant meeting-folks. Hard indeed was the storm
which could keep a Wales or a Penniman away from meeting.

Mrs. Polly Wales' horses were accommodated in this new stable also.
In the winter time, there were two of them; one which she and Ann
rode, Ann using the pillion, and one for Nabby Porter. Phineas Adams
always walked. Often the sturdy young blacksmith was at the
meeting-house, before the women, and waiting to take their horses.

One Sunday, the winter after the Horse-House was built, Mrs. Polly,
Ann, Phineas, and Nabby went to meeting as usual. It was a very cold,
bleak day; the wind blew in through the slight wooden walls of the
old meeting-house, and the snow lay in little heaps here and there.
There was no stove in the building, as every one knows. Some of the
women had hot bricks and little foot-stoves, and that was all. Ann
did not care for either. She sat up straight in the comfortless,
high-backed pew. Her cheeks were as red as her crimson cloak, her
black eyes shone like stars. She let Mrs. Polly and Nabby have the
hot stones, but her own agile little feet were as warm as toast.
Little Hannah French, over across the meeting-house, looked chilled
and blue, but somehow Ann never seemed to be affected much by the
cold.

The Wales pew was close to a window on the south side; the side where
the new stable was. Indeed Ann could see it, if she looked out. She
sat next the window because the other women minded the draught more.

Right across the aisle from Mrs. Polly's pew was Thomas Penniman's.
He was there with his wife, and six stalwart sons. The two youngest,
Levi and John, were crowded out of the pew proper, and sat in the one
directly back.

John sat at the end. He was a tall, handsome young fellow, two or
three years older than Ann. He was well spoken of amongst his
acquaintances for two reasons. First, on account of his own brave,
steady character; and second, on account of his owning one of the
finest horses anywhere about. A good horse was, if anything, a more
important piece of property then than now. This one was a beautiful
bay. They called him "Red Robin."

To-day, Red Robin was carefully blanketed and fastened in the new
stable. John thought when he tied him there how thankful he was he
had such a good shelter this bitter day. He felt grateful to
Lieutenant Seth Turner, who owned all the land hereabouts and had
given the liberty to build it.

The people all sat quietly listening to the long sermon. Two hours
long it was. When the minister perched up in his beetling pulpit with
the sounding-board over his head, was about half through his
discourse, Ann Wales happened to glance out of the window at her
side. She rarely did such a thing in meeting-time; indeed she had
been better instructed. How she happened to to-day, she could not
have told, but she did.

It was well she did. Just at that moment, a man in a gray cloak
sprang into the Horse-House, and began untying John Penniman's Red
Robin.

Ann gave one glance; then she never hesitated. There was no time to
send whispers along the pew; to tell Phineas Adams to give the alarm.

Out of the pew darted Ann, like a red robin herself, her read cloak
flying back, crowding nimbly past the others, across the aisle to
John Penniman.

"Somebody's stealing Red Robin, John," said she in a clear whisper.
They heard it for several pews around. Up sprang the pewful of
staunch Pennimans, father and sons, and made for the door in a great
rush after John, who was out before the whisper had much more than
left Ann's lips.

The alarm spread; other men went too. The minister paused, and the
women waited. Finally the men returned, all but a few who were
detailed to watch the horses through the remainder of the services,
and the meeting proceeded.

Phineas sent the whisper along the pew, that John had got out in time
to save Red Robin; but the robber had escaped. Somehow, he had taken
alarm before John got there. Red Robin was standing in the stable
untied; but the robber had disappeared.

After meeting the people all came and questioned Ann. "He was a very
tall man, in a gray cloak," said she. "He turned his face, or I saw
it, just for one second, when I looked. He had black eyes and a dark
curling beard."

It seemed very extraordinary. If it had not been for Red Robin's
being untied, they would almost have doubted if Ann had seen rightly.
The thief had disappeared so suddenly and utterly, it almost seemed
impossible that he could have been there at all.

There was much talk over it after meeting. "Are you _sure_ you saw
him, Ann?" Mrs. Polly asked.

"Yes; I am _sure_," Ann would reply. She began to feel rather
uncomfortable over it. She feared people would think she had been
napping and dreaming although Red Robin _was_ untied.

That night the family were all in bed at nine o'clock, as usual; but
Ann up in her snug feather-bed in her little western chamber, could
not sleep. She kept thinking about the horse-thief, and grew more and
more nervous. Finally she thought of some fine linen cloth she and
Mrs. Polly had left out in the snowy field south of the house to
bleach, and she worried about that. A web of linen cloth and a horse
were very dissimilar booty; but a thief was a thief. Suppose anything
should happen to the linen they had worked so hard over!

At last, she could not endure it any longer. Up she got, put on her
clothes hurriedly, crept softly down stairs and out doors. There was
a full moon and it was almost as light as day. The snow looked like a
vast sheet of silver stretching far away over the fields.

Ann was hastening along the path between two high snowbanks when all
of a sudden she stopped, and gave a choked kind of a scream. No one
with nerves could have helped it. Right in the path before her stood
the horse-thief, gray cloak and all.

Ann turned, after her scream and first wild stare, and ran. But the
man caught her before she had taken three steps. "Don't scream," he
said in a terrible, anxious whisper. "Don't make a noise, for God's
sake! They're after me! Can't you hide me?"

"No," said Ann, white and trembling all over but on her mettle, "I
won't. You are a sinful man, and you ought to be punished. I won't do
a thing to help you!"

The man's face bending over her was ghastly in the moonlight. He went
on pleading. "If you will hide me somewhere about your place, they
will not find me," said he, still in that sharp agonized whisper.
"They are after me--can't you hear them?"

Ann could, listening, hear distant voices on the night air.

"I was just going to hide in your barn," said the thief, "when I met
you. O let me in there, now! don't betray me!"

Great tears were rolling down his bearded cheeks. Ann began to waver.
"They might look in the barn," said she hesitatingly.

The man followed up his advantages. "Then hide me in the house," said
he. "I have a daughter at home, about your age. She's waiting for me,
and it's long she'll wait, and sad news she'll get at the end of the
waiting, if you don't help me. She hasn't any mother, she's a little
tender thing--it'll kill her!" He groaned as he said it.

The voices came nearer. Ann hesitated no longer. "Come," said she,
"quick!"

Then she fled into the house, the man following. Inside, she bolted
the door, and made her unwelcome guest take off his boots in the
kitchen, and follow her softly up stairs with them in his hand.

Ann's terror, leading him up, almost overwhelmed her. What if anybody
should wake! Nabby slept near the head of the stairs. Luckily, she
was a little deaf, and Ann counted on that.

She conducted the man across a little entry into a back, unfurnished
chamber, where, among other things, were stored some chests of grain.
The moon shone directly in the window of the attic-chamber, so it was
light enough to distinguish objects quite plainly.

Ann tiptoed softly from one grain-chest to another. There were three
of them. Two were quite full; the third was nearly empty.

"Get in here," said Ann. "Don't make any noise."

He climbed in obediently, and Ann closed the lid. The chest was a
rickety old affair and full of cracks--there was no danger but he
would have air enough. She heard the voices out in the yard, as she
shut the lid. Back she crept softly into her own room, undressed and
got into bed. She could hear the men out in the yard quite plainly.
"We've lost him again," she heard one of them say.

Presently Phineas Adams opened a window, and shouted out, to know
what was the matter.

"Seen anything of the horse-thief?" queried a voice from the yard.

"No!" said Phineas. "I have been asleep these three hours. You just
waked me up."

"He was hiding under the meeting-house," said the voice, "must have
slipped in there this morning, when we missed him. We went down there
and watched to-night, and almost caught him. But he disappeared a
little below here, and we've lost him again. It's my opinion he's an
evil spirit in disguise. He ran like the wind, in amongst the trees,
where we couldn't follow with the horses. Are you sure he did not
skulk in here somewhere? Sim White thinks he did."

"I knew I saw him turn the corner of the lane," chimed in another
voice, "and we've scoured the woods."

"I think we'd better search the barn, anyhow," some one else said,
and a good many murmured assent.

"Wait a minute, I'll be down," said Phineas, shutting his window.

How long poor Ann lay there shaking, she never knew. It seemed hours.
She heard Phineas go down stairs, and unlock the door. She heard them
tramp into the barn. "O, if I had hidden him there!" she thought.

After a while, she heard them out in the yard again. "He could _not_
have gotten into the house, in any way," she heard one man remark
speculatively. How she waited for the response. It came in Phineas
Adams' slow, sensible tones: "How could he? Didn't you hear me unbolt
the door when I came out? The doors are all fastened, I saw to it
myself."

"Well, of course he didn't," agreed the voice.

At last, Phineas came in, and Ann heard them go. She was so thankful.
However, the future perplexities, which lay before her, were enough
to keep her awake for the rest of the night. In the morning, a new
anxiety beset her. The poor thief must have some breakfast. She could
easily have smuggled some dry bread up to him; but she did want him
to have some of the hot Indian mush, which the family had. Ann,
impulsive in this as everything, now that she had made up her mind to
protect a thief, wanted to do it handsomely. She did want him to have
some of that hot mush; but how could she manage it?

The family at the breakfast table discussed the matter of the
horse-thief pretty thoroughly. It was a hard ordeal for poor Ann, who
could not take easily to deception. She had unexpected trouble too
with Nabby. Nabby _had_ waked up the preceding night.

"I didn't see anything," proclaimed Nabby; "but I heerd a noise. I
think there's mice out in the grain-chist in the back chamber."

"I must go up there and look," said Mrs. Polly. "They did
considerable mischief, last year."

Ann turned pale; what if she should take it into her head to look
that day!

She watched her chance very narrowly for the hot mush; and after
breakfast she caught a minute, when Phineas had gone to work, and
Mrs. Polly was in the pantry, and Nabby down cellar. She had barely
time to fill a bowl with mush, and scud.

How lightly she stepped over that back chamber floor, and how
gingerly she opened the grain-chest lid. The thief looked piteously
out at her from his bed of Indian corn. He was a handsome man,
somewhere between forty and fifty. Indeed he came of a very good
family in a town not so very far away. Horse-thiefs numbered some
very respectable personages in their clan in those days sometimes.

They carried on a whispered conversation while he ate. It was
arranged that Ann was to assist him off that night.

What a day poor Ann had, listening and watching in constant terror
every moment, for fear something would betray her. Beside, her
conscience troubled her sadly; she was far from being sure that she
was doing right in hiding a thief from justice. But the poor man's
tears, and the mention of his daughter, had turned the scale with
her; she could not give him up.

Her greatest fear was lest Mrs. Polly should take a notion to search
for mice in the grain-chests. She so hoped Nabby would not broach the
subject again. But there was a peculiarity about Nabby--she had an
exceedingly bitter hatred of rats and mice. Still there was no danger
of her investigating the grain-chests on her own account, for she was
very much afraid. She would not have lifted one of those lids, with
the chance of a rat or mouse being under it, for the world. If ever a
mouse was seen in the kitchen Nabby took immediate refuge on the
settle or the table and left some one else to do the fighting.

So Nabby, being so constituted, could not be easy on the subject this
time. All day long she heard rats and mice in the grain-chests; she
stopped and listened with her broom, and she stopped and listened
with her mop.

Ann went to look, indeed that was the way she smuggled the thief's
dinner to him, but her report of nothing the matter with the grain
did not satisfy Nabby. She had more confidence in Mrs. Polly. But
Mrs. Polly did not offer to investigate herself until after supper.
They had been very busy that day, washing, and now there was churning
to do. Ann sat at the churn, Mrs. Polly was cutting up apples for
pies; and Nabby was washing dishes, when the rats and mice smote her
deaf ears again.

"I knew I heerd 'em then," she said; "I don't believe but what them
grain-chists is full of 'em."

"I am going to look," quoth Mrs. Polly then, in a tone of decision,
and straightway she rose and got a candle.

Ann's heart beat terribly. "O, I wouldn't go up there to-night," said
she.

"Yes; I am going. I'm going to satisfy Nabby about the rats in the
grain-chest, if I can."

She was out the door, at the foot of the stairs, Nabby behind her,
dishcloth and plate in hand, peering fearfully over her shoulder. Ann
was in despair. Only one chance of averting the discovery suggested
itself to her. _She tipped over the churn._ "O, oh!" she screamed.
Back rushed Mrs. Polly and Nabby, and that ended the rat-hunt for
that night. The waste of all that beautiful cream was all Mrs. Polly
could think of--prudent housewife that she was.

So in the night, when the moon was up, and the others were sound
asleep, Ann assisted her thief safely out of the grain-chest and out
of the house. "But, first," said Ann Wales, pausing bravely, with her
hand on the grain-chest lid, speaking in a solemn whisper, "before I
let you out, you must make me a promise."

"What?" came back feebly.

"That you will never, never, steal a horse again. If you don't
promise, I will give you up, now."

"I promise I won't," said the man, readily.

Let us hope he never did. That, speeding out into the clear winter
night, he did bear with him a better determination in his heart. At
all events, there were no more attempts made to rob the new
Horse-House at the Braintree meeting-house. Many a Sunday after that,
Red Robin stood there peaceful and unmolested. Occasionally, as the
years went by, he was tied, of a Sunday night, in Mrs. Polly Wales'
barn.

For, by and by, his master, good brave young John Penniman, married
Ann Wales. The handsomest couple that ever went into the
meeting-house, people said. Ann's linen-chest was well stocked; and
she had an immense silk bonnet, with a worked white veil, a velvet
cloak, and a flowered damask petticoat for her wedding attire. Even
Hannah French had nothing finer when she was married to Phineas Adams
a year later.

All the drawback to the happiness was that John had taken some land
up in Vermont, and there the young couple went, shortly after the
wedding. It was a great cross to Mrs. Polly; but she bore it bravely.
Not a tear sparkled in her black eyes, watching the pair start off
down the bridle-path, riding Red Robin, Ann on a pillion behind her
husband. But, sitting down beside her lonely hearth when she entered
the house, she cried bitterly. "I did hope I could keep Ann with me
as long as I lived," she sobbed.

"Don't you take on," said Nabby, consolingly. "You take my word
for't, they'll be back 'afore long."

Nabby proved a true prophet. Red Robin did come trotting back from
the Vermont wilds, bearing his master and mistress before long.
Various considerations induced them to return; and Mrs. Polly was
overjoyed. They came to live with her.

Riding through the wilderness to Vermont on their wedding journey,
Ann had confessed to her husband how she had secreted the thief who
had tried to steal his Red Robin. She had been afraid to tell; but he
had turned on the saddle, and smiled down in her face. "I am content
that the man is safe," said John Penniman. "Prithee, why should I
wish him evil, whilst I am riding along with thee, on Red Robin, Ann?"







End of Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Ann, by Mary E. Wilkins Freeman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF ANN ***

***** This file should be named 17560.txt or 17560.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/5/6/17560/

Produced by Jeff Kaylin and Andrew Sly

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

