Project Gutenberg's The History of Sir Richard Whittington, by T. H.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The History of Sir Richard Whittington

Author: T. H.

Editor: Henry B. Wheatley

Release Date: January 31, 2006 [EBook #17652]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF SIR RICHARD ***




Produced by Julie Barkley, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  _Chap-Books_

  _and_

  _Folk-Lore Tracts._


  _Edited by_

  _G.L. Gomme, F.S.A._

  _and_

  _H.B. Wheatley, F.S.A._


  _First Series._

  ~V.~




  THE HISTORY

  OF

  SIR RICHARD WHITTINGTON.

  BY T. H.


  EDITED, WITH AN INTRODUCTION,

  BY

  HENRY B. WHEATLEY, F.S.A.




  LONDON:
  PRINTED FOR THE VILLON SOCIETY.
  1885.




  ~Introduction.~


The popular story of Whittington and his Cat is one in which a version
of a wide-spread folk-tale has been grafted upon the history of the life
of an historical character, and in the later versions the historical
incidents have been more and more eliminated. The three chief points in
the chap-book story are, 1, the poor parentage of the hero; 2, his
change of mind at Highgate Hill by reason of hearing Bow Bells; and, 3,
his good fortune arising from the sale of his cat. Now these are all
equally untrue as referring to the historical Whittington, and the
second is apparently an invention of the eighteenth century. When the
Rev. Canon Lysons wrote his interesting and valuable work entitled _The
Model Merchant_ he showed the incorrectness of the first point by
tracing out Whittington's distinguished pedigree, but he was loath to
dispute the other two. It is rather strange that neither Mr. Lysons nor
Messrs. Besant and Rice appear to have seen the work which I now present
to my readers, which is the earliest form of the life of Whittington
known to exist. This is printed from the copy in the Pepysian Library,
a later edition of which, with a few typographical alterations, will be
found in the British Museum library. This _History_ will be found to
differ very considerably from the later and better-known story, which
appears to have been written early in the eighteenth century. A
comparison between the latter which I print at the end of this Preface
(p. xxix.) with T. H.'s earlier text will not, I think, be found
unprofitable. _The Famous and Remarkable History_ here reprinted is
undated, but was probably published about 1670; the later edition in the
British Museum is dated 1678. One passage on page 7--"The merchant went
then to the Exchange, which was then in Lumber-street, about his
affairs"--seems to show that it was originally written quite early in
the century, and it is just possible that T. H. stands for the
voluminous playwright and pamphleteer Thomas Heywood. The Exchange was
removed to its present site in 1568, and therefore our tract could not
have been written before that date, but must have appeared when the
memory of the old meeting-place was still fresh in public memory. On
page 11 it will be seen that Whittington, when discontented with his
position in Fitzwarren's house, set out before day-break on All
Hallows-day with his clothes in a bundle, in order to seek his fortune
elsewhere. He had only got as far as Bunhill when he heard Bow bells
ring out what appeared to be--

  "Turn again, Whittington, Lord Mayor of London,
  Turn again, Whittington, Lord Mayor of London."

These words took complete possession of him, and he returned before it
was known that he had run away. In the more modern chap-book Whittington
is made to reach Holloway, where it would be less easy to hear Bow
bells, and from which place he would have found it more difficult to
return before the cook had risen. As far as I can find there is no
allusion to Holloway or Highgate hill in any early version, and it is
evident that this localization is quite modern. Mr. Lysons is certainly
wrong when he says that at Highgate "a stone continued to mark the spot
for many centuries." It is not known when the stone was first erected
there, but it was probably put up when the name of the place was first
foisted into the tale. One stone was taken away in 1795, but others have
succeeded it, and now there is a Whittington Stone Tavern; and the
situation of Whittington College, which was removed to Highgate in 1808,
has helped to favour the supposition that Whittington himself was in
some way connected with that place.

The form of invitation which the bells rung out varies very much in the
different versions.

In Richard Johnson's ballad (1612) we find--

  "Whittington, back return."

which is then amplified into--

  "Turn againe, Whittington,
  For thou in time shall grow
  Lord Maior of London."

In T. H.'s _History_ (see p. 11) we have--

  "Turn again, Whittington, Lord Mayor of London."

In the later chap-book version this is altered into--

  "Turn again, Whittington,
  Lord Mayor of great London."

It will be seen that the special reference to the fact that Whittington
was three times Lord Mayor is not to be found in either the ballads or
the chap-books.

In the _Life_, by the author of _George Barnwell_ (1811), however we
read--

  "Return again, Whittington,
  Thrise Lord Mayor of London."

And in _The Life and Times of Whittington_ (1841)--

  "Turn again, turn again, Whittington,
  Three times Lord Mayor of London."

In the early version of the _History_ by T. H. the fanciful portions are
only allowed to occupy a small portion of the whole, and a long account
is given of Whittington's real actions, but, in the later chap-book
versions, the historical incidents are ruthlessly cut down, and the
fictitious ones amplified. This will be seen by comparing the two
printed here. Thus T. H. merely says (p. 6) that Whittington was
obscurely born, and that being almost starved in the country he came up
to London. In the later chap-book the journey to London is more fully
enlarged upon (p. xxxiii.), and among those at Whittington's marriage
with Alice Fitzwarren the name of the Company of Stationers not then in
existence is foisted in (pp. xlii.) It does not appear in T. H.'s
_History_.

In many other particulars the later chap-book which contains the story
as known to modern readers is amplified, and thus shows signs of a very
late origin.

With regard to the three fictitious points of Whittington's history
mentioned at the beginning of this preface, the first--his poor
parentage--is disposed of by documentary evidence; the second--his
sitting on a stone at Highgate hill--has been shown to be quite a modern
invention; and the third--the story of the cat--has been told of so many
other persons in different parts of the world that there is every reason
to believe it to be a veritable folk-tale joined to the history of
Whittington from some unexplained connection. None of the early
historians who mention Whittington allude to the incident of the cat,
and it is only to be found in popular literature, ballads, plays, &c.
The story seems to have taken its rise in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
The reason why however the life of Whittington should have been chosen
as the stock upon which this folk-tale should be grafted is still
unexplained. Some have supposed that he obtained his money by the
employment of "cats," or vessels for the carriage of coals; but this
suggestion does not appear to be worthy of much consideration.

It is said that at Newgate, which owed much to Whittington, there was a
statue of him with a cat, which was destroyed in the Great Fire; and in
1862, when some alterations were made in an old house at Gloucester,
which had been occupied by the Whittington family until 1460, a stone
was said to have been dug up on which was a basso-relievo representing
the figure of a boy carrying a cat in his arms. This find, however,
appears rather suspicious.

Keightley devotes a whole chapter of his _Tales and Popular Fictions_ to
the legend of Whittington and his Cat, in which he points out how many
similar stories exist. The _Facezie_, of Arlotto, printed soon after the
author's death in 1483, contain a tale of a merchant of Genoa, entitled
"Novella delle Gatte," and probably from this the story came to England,
although it is also found in a German chronicle of the thirteenth
century. Sir William Ouseley, in his _Travels_, 1819, speaking of an
island in the Persian Gulf, relates, on the authority of a Persian MS.,
that "in the tenth century, one Keis, the son of a poor widow in Siraf,
embarked for India with a cat, his only property. There he fortunately
arrived at a time when the palace was so infested by mice or rats that
they invaded the king's food, and persons were employed to drive them
from the royal banquet. Keis produced his cat; the noxious animals soon
disappeared, and magnificent rewards were bestowed on the adventurer of
Siraf, who returned to that city, and afterwards, with his mother and
brothers, settled on the island, which from him has been denominated
Keis, or according to the Persians Keisch." Mr. Halliwell-Phillipps
quotes from the _Description of Guinea_ (1665) the record of "how
Alphonso, a Portuguese, being wrecked on the coast of Guinney, and being
presented by the king thereof with his weight in gold for a cat to kill
their mice; and an oyntment to kill their flies, which he improved
within five years to 6000l. in the place, and, returning to Portugal
after fifteen years traffick, became the third man in the kingdom."[1]
Keightley also quotes two similar stories from Thiele's _Danish Popular
Traditions_ and another from the letters of Count Magalotti, a
Florentine of the latter half of the seventeenth century.

Mr. Lysons gives much information as to the great value of cats in the
Middle Ages, but the writer of the _History of Whittington_ does not
lead us to believe that they were dear in England, for he makes the boy
buy his cat for one penny. The two following titles are from the
Stationers' Registers. The ballad is probably the one subsequently
referred to as by Richard Johnson:--

"The History of Richard Whittington, of his lowe birthe, his great
fortune, as yt was plaied by the Prynces Servants. Licensed to Thomas
Pavyer, Feb. 8, 1604-5."

"A Ballad, called The vertuous lyfe and memorable death of Sir Richard
Whittington, mercer, sometymes Lord Maiour of the honorable Citie of
London. Licensed to John Wright, 16 July, 1605."

The first reference that we find to the cat incident is in the play
_Eastward Hoe_ by Chapman, Ben Jonson, and Marston; for, as the portrait
which was said to have existed at Mercers' Hall is not now known, it can
scarcely be put in evidence. This half-length portrait of a man of about
sixty years of age, dressed in a livery gown and black cap of the time
of Henry VIII. with a figure of a black and white cat on the left, is
said to have had painted in the left-hand upper corner of the canvas the
inscription, "R. Whittington, 1536."

In _Eastward Hoe_, 1605, Touchstone assures Goulding that he hopes to
see him reckoned one of the worthies of the city of London "When the
famous fable of Whittington and his puss shall be forgotten."

The next allusion is in Thomas Heywood's _If you know not me, you know
nobody_, 2nd part, 1606.

  _Dean Nowell._ "This Sir Richard Whittington, three times Mayor,
  Sonne to a knight and prentice to a mercer,
  Began the Library of Grey-Friars in London,
  And his executors after him did build
  Whittington Colledge, thirteene Alms-houses for poore men,
  Repair'd S. Bartholomewes, in Smithfield,
  Glased the Guildhall, and built Newgate.

  _Hobson._ Bones of men, then I have heard lies;
  For I have heard he was a scullion,
  And rais'd himself by venture of a cat.

  _Nowell._ They did the more wrong to the gentleman."

Here it will be seen that, although the popular tale is mentioned, it is
treated as a mere invention unworthy of credence.

The next in point of time is the ballad by Richard Johnson, published in
the _Crowne Garland of Goulden Roses_ (1612), which probably had a much
earlier existence in a separate form. It is the earliest form of the
story of Whittington now in existence.

_A song of Sir Richard Whittington, who by strange fortunes came to bee
thrice Lord Maior of London; with his bountifull guifts and liberallity
given to this honourable Citty._

  (To the tune of "_Dainty come thou to me_.")

  "Here must I tell the praise
    Of worthie Whittington,
  Known to be in his dayes
    Thrice Maior of London.
  But of poor parentage
    Borne was he, as we heare,
  And in his tender age
    Bred up in Lancashire.

  Poorely to London than
    Came up this simple lad,
  Where, with a marchant-man,
    Soone he a dwelling had;
  And in a kitchen plast,
    A scullion for to be,
  Whereas long time he past
    In labour grudgingly.

  His daily service was
    Turning spits at the fire;
  And to scour pots of brasse,
    For a poore scullions hire.
  Meat and drinke all his pay,
    Of coyne he had no store;
  Therefore to run away,
    In secret thought he bore.

  So from this marchant-man
    Whittington secretly
  Towards his country ran,
    To purchase liberty.
  But as he went along
    In a fair summer's morne,
  London bells sweetly rung,
  'Whittington, back return!'

  'Evermore sounding so,
    Turn againe, Whittington;
  For thou in time shall grow
    Lord-Maior of London.'
  Whereupon back againe
    Whittington came with speed,
  Aprentise to remaine,
    As the Lord had decreed.

  'Still blessed be the bells'
    (This was his daily song),
  'They my good fortune tells,
    Most sweetly have they rung.
  If God so favour me,
    I will not proove unkind;
  London my love shall see,
    And my great bounties find.'

  But see his happy chance!
    This scullion had a cat,
  Which did his state advance,
    And by it wealth he gat.
  His maister ventred forth,
    To a land far unknowne,
  With marchandize of worth,
    And is in stories shewne.

  Whittington had no more
    But this poor cat as than,
  Which to the ship he bore,
    Like a brave marchant-man.
  'Vent'ring the same,' quoth he,
    'I may get store of golde,
  And Maior of London be,
    As the bells have me told.'

  Whittington's marchandise,
    Carried was to a land
  Troubled with rats and mice,
    As they did understand.
  The king of that country there,
    As he at dinner sat,
  Daily remain'd in fear
    Of many a mouse and rat.

  Meat that in trenchers lay,
    No way they could keepe safe
  But by rats borne away,
    Fearing no wand or staff.
  Whereupon, soone they brought
    Whittington's nimble cat;
  Which by the king was bought;
    Heapes of gold giv'n for that.

  Home againe came these men
    With their ships loaden so;
  Whittington's wealth began
    By this cat thus to grow.
  Scullions life he forsooke
    To be a marchant good,
  And soon began to looke
    How well his credit stood.

  After that he was chose
    Shriefe of the citty heere,
  And then full quickly rose
    Higher as did appeare.
  For to this cities praise
    Sir Richard Whittington
  Came to be in his dayes
    Thrise Maior of London.

  More his fame to advance,
    Thousands he lent his king
  To maintaine warres in France,
    Glory from thence to bring.
  And after, at a feast,
    Which he the king did make,
  He burnt the bonds all in jeast,
    And would no money take.

  Ten thousand pound he gave
    To his prince willingly,
  And would not one penny have.
    This in kind courtesie.
  God did thus make him great,
    So would he daily see
  Poor people fed with meat,
    To shew his charity.

  Prisoners poore cherish'd were,
    Widdowes sweet comfort found;
  Good deeds, both far and neere,
    Of him do still resound.
  Whittington Colledge is
    One of his charities,
  Records reporteth this
    To lasting memories.

  Newgate he builded faire,
    For prisoners to live in;
  Christ's Church he did repaire,
    Christian love for to win.
  Many more such like deedes
    Were done by Whittington;
  Which joy and comfort breedes,
    To such as looke thereon.

  Lancashire thou hast bred
    This flower of charity;
  Though he be gone and dead,
    Yet lives he lastingly.
  Those bells that call'd him so,
    'Turne again, Whittington,'
  Call you back may moe
    To live so in London."

This ballad, as it stands here with the exception of the last stanza,
was reprinted in _A Collection of Old Ballads_, 1823, vol. i. p. 130.

This ballad is the original of all the later ballads, although the
titles have been greatly varied. The Roxburghe ballad (vol. iii. p. 58)
is dated in the British Museum Catalogue 1641[?]. Its full title is as
follows:--

"London's Glory and Whittington's Renown, or a Looking Glass for
Citizens of London, being a remarkable story how Sir Richard Whittington
(a poor boy bred up in Lancashire) came to be three times Lord Mayor of
London in three several kings' reigns, and how his rise was by a cat,
which he sent by a venture beyond sea. Together with his bountiful gifts
and liberality given to this honourable City, and the vast sums of money
he lent the King to maintain the wars in France; and how at a great
Feast, to which he invited the King, the Queen, and the Nobility, he
generously burnt the writings and freely forgave his Majesty the whole
Debt. Tune of 'Dainty, come thou to me.' London: Printed for R. Burton,
at the Horse Shoe in West Smithfield."

The bulk of the ballad is the same as Richard Johnson's, but the
following first stanza is added, the original first stanza becoming the
second:--

  "Brave London Prentices,
    Come listen to my song,
  Tis for your glory all
    And to you both belong.
  And you poor country lads,
    Though born of low degree,
  See by God's providence
    What you in time may be."

The second half of the original seventh stanza, and the eighth, ninth,
and tenth stanzas, are left out.

Immediately before the last stanza the following one is introduced:--

  "Let all kynde Citizens
    Who do this story read,
  By his example learn
    Always the poor to feed.
  What is lent to the poor
    The Lord will sure repay,
  And blessings keep in store
    Until the latter day."

The other alterations are not many, and chiefly consist in
transpositions by which the rhymes are varied. This may be seen by
comparing with the original the Roxburghe version of the last stanza
which is as follows:--

  "Lancashire, thou hast bred
    This flower of charity;
  Though he be dead and gone,
    Yet lives his memory.
  Those bells that call'd him so,
    Turn again, Whittington,
  Would they call may moe
    Such men to fair London."

At the end of one of the chap-books there is a version of the ballad in
which Lancashire is replaced by Somersetshire.

In the same volume of the _Roxburghe Ballads_ (p. 470) is a short
version [1710?] containing a few only of the verses taken from the
ballad. It is illustrated with some woodcuts from T. H.'s earlier
_History_.

"An old Ballad of Whittington and his Cat, who from a poor boy came to
be thrice Lord Mayor of London. Printed and sold in Aldermary Church
Yard, London."

There is a copy of this in the Chetham Library.

The following are some of the chief references to Whittington's story in
literature after the publication of Johnson's ballad, arranged in
chronological order:--

  "As if a new-found Whittington's rare cat,
  Come to extoll their birth-rights above that
  Which nature once intended."--

               Stephens's _Essayes and Characters_, 1615.

  "Faith, how many churches do you mean to build
  Before you die? Six bells in every steeple,
  And let them all go to the _City tune_,
  _Turn again, Whittington_, and who they say
  Grew rich, and let his land out for nine lives,
  'Cause all came in by a cat."--

               Shirley's _Constant Maid_ (1640), act ii. sc. 2.

"I have heard of Whittington and his cat, and others, that have
made fortunes by strange means."--Parson's _Wedding_ (1664).

Pepys went on September 21, 1668, to Southwark Fair, "and there saw the
puppet show of Whittington, which was pretty to see." He adds in his
_Diary_ "how that idle thing do work upon people that see it, and even
myself too."

In the _Tatler_ of September 13, 1709 (No. 67), is a list of great men
to be entered in the Temple of Fame, and in the subsequent No. 78 is
printed the following letter from a Citizen:--

     "Mr. Isaac Bickerstaff, Sir, Your _Tatler_ of September 13 I am now
     reading, and in your list of famous men desire you not to forget
     Alderman Whittington, who began the world with a cat, and died
     worth three hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling, which he
     left to an only daughter three years after his mayoralty. If you
     want any further particulars of ditto Alderman, daughter, or cat,
     let me know, and per first will advise the needful, which
     concludes, Your loving Friend, LEMUEL LEGER."

     "I am credibly informed that there was once a design of casting
     into an opera the story of Whittington and his Cat, and that in
     order to it there had been got together a great quantity of mice;
     but Mr. Rich, the proprietor of the playhouse, very prudently
     considered that it would be impossible for the cat to kill them
     all, and that consequently the princes of the stage might be as
     much infested with mice as the prince of the island was before the
     cat's arrival upon it; for which reason he would not permit it to
     be acted in his house."--_Spectator_ (No. 5, March 6, 1711).

The Rev. Samuel Pegge brought the subject of Whittington and his Cat
before a meeting of the Society of Antiquaries in 1771, but he could
make nothing at all of the cat. There is no record of the inquiry in the
_Archaeologia_, but it is mentioned in a letter from Gough to Tyson, 27
Dec. 1771 (Nichols's _Literary Anecdotes_, vol. viii. p. 575). Horace
Walpole was annoyed at the Society for criticising his "Richard III."
and in his _Short Notes on his Life_ he wrote--"Foote having brought
them on the stage for sitting in council, as they had done on
Whittington and his Cat, I was not sorry to find them so ridiculous, or
to mark their being so, and upon that nonsense, and the laughter that
accompanied it, I struck my name out of their book."

Foote brought out his comedy of _The Nabob_ at the Haymarket Theatre in
1772. Sir Matthew Mite, the hero of the piece, is elected a member of
the Society of Antiquaries, and delivers an address on Whittington and
his Cat in which he gave the following solution of the difficulty:--"The
commerce this worthy merchant carried on was chiefly confined to our
coasts. For this purpose he constructed a vessel which for its agility
and lightness he aptly christened a cat. Nay, to this our day,
gentlemen, all our coals from Newcastle are imported in nothing but
cats. From thence it appears that it was not the whiskered four-footed,
mouse-killing cat that was the source of the magistrate's wealth, but
the coasting, sailing, coal-carrying cat; that, gentlemen, was
Whittington's cat."

We may now pass from the fictitious to the real Richard Whittington, and
although this is not the place for a life of the distinguished citizen,
which may be found elsewhere, it will be convenient to set down in order
the chief incidents of his career.

Richard Whittington was the third son of Sir William Whittington,
knight, of Pauntley, Gloucestershire, and it is assumed, by some
writers, that he was born in or about the year 1360. We must, however,
place his birth at an earlier date, for his name appears in the city
_Letter Book_, H, fol. 110_a_, (as Richard Whyttingdone), in the second
year of Richard II. (A.D. 1379), as a contributor of five marks
towards a loan to the city authorities; about four-fifths of the
subscribers contributing the same, which is the lowest figure among the
contributions.[2] This is the first appearance of Whittington's name in
the city books. William, the eldest son, succeeded to the family
property of Pauntley, but, dying without issue, the estate went to
Robert, the second son, who became high sheriff of the county in 1402,
and again in 1407. Pauntley remained in the family as late as 1546.

Nothing is known of Richard's early life, either as to when or how he
came to London. He appears to have married Alice, daughter of Hugh
Fitzwarren, and probably he was originally apprenticed to his
father-in-law, whose name appears in all the versions of his history.

The second appearance of Whittington's name in the city books is in 8
Richard II., when he was one of the eight common councilmen for Coleman
Street ward. In 11 Richard II. he is named as becoming surety to the
chamberlain in the sum of ten pounds towards providing money for defence
of the city. In the following year he appears to have been no longer a
member for Coleman Street ward. On the 12th of March, 1393, he is named
as then chosen alderman of Broad Street ward; and on 21st September of
the same year he was chosen by the mayor, William Staundon, one of the
sheriffs for the ensuing year.[3]

When Adam Bamme died in the year 1397, during his mayoralty, Richard II.
arbitrarily put Whittington in his place, and at the lord mayor's day of
that year Whittington again filled the office, being then regularly
elected.[4] From his will we find that this king, who was a member of
the Mercers' Company, to which Whittington was apprenticed, was an
especial patron of his. In 1400 he was excused from attending the
Scottish wars, and in 1406 he was again elected mayor. He rebuilt his
parish church, and Mr. Riley has printed in his valuable _Memorials_ (p.
578) the grant by Whittington of land or the re-building of the church
of St. Michael, Paternoster, "in the street called La Riole," called
after the merchants of La Riole, a town near Bordeaux, who had
established themselves there.

Whittington was knighted by Henry V., and in 1419 he was elected mayor
for the fourth time. It was in this year that John Carpenter commenced
the compilation of his famous _Liber Albus_. We see how highly this
distinguished citizen was appreciated from the writings of such men as
Grafton and Stow. Richard Grafton writes in his _Chronicle_ (1569, p.
433)--

     "This yere (1406) a worthie citizen of London, named Rychard
     Whittyngton, mercer and alderman, was elected maior of the sayde
     citie, and bare that office three tymes. This worshipfull man so
     bestowed his goodes and substaunce to the honor of God, to the
     reliefe of the pore, and to the benefite of the comon weale, that
     he hath right well deserved to be regestered in the boke of fame.
     First, he erected one house or church in London to be a house of
     prayer, and he named the same after his awne name Whittyngtons
     College, and so it remayneth to this day. And in the same church,
     besydes certeine priestes and clerkes, he placed a number of poore
     aged men and women and buylded for them houses and lodgyngs, and
     allowed unto them wood, cole, cloth, and weekly money to their
     great reliefe and comfort.... He also buylded for the ease of the
     maior of London and his brethren, and of the worshipfull citizens
     at the solempne dayes of their assemblye, a chapell adioining to
     the Guyldhall, to the entent they should euer before they entered
     into any of theyr affayrs first to go into the chappel, and by
     prayer to call upon God for assistaunce.... He also buylded a great
     part of the east ende of the Guildhall, besyde many other good
     workes that I knowe not. But among all other I will shewe unto you
     one very notable, which I receyved credibly by a writyng of his
     awne hande, which also he willed to be fixed as a schedule to his
     last will and testament, the contentes whereof was that he willed
     and commaunded his executors as they would aunswere before God at
     the day of the resurrection of all fleshe, that if they found any
     debtor of his that ought to him any money, that if he were not in
     their consciences well worth three tymes as much, and also out of
     the debt of other men, and well able to pay, that then they shoulde
     never demaund it, for he cleerely forgave it, and that they should
     put no man in sute for any debt due to him. Looke upon thys, ye
     aldermen, for it is a glorious glasse."

Stow writes as follows in his _Survey of London_ on some of
Whittington's good works:--

     "Richard Whittington, mercer, three times mayor, in the year 1421
     began the library of the grey friars in London, to the charge of
     four hundred pounds: his executors with his goods founded and built
     Whittington College, with almshouses for thirteen poor men, and
     divinity lectures to be read there for ever. They repaired St.
     Bartholomew's hospital in Smithfield; they bare half the charges of
     building the library there, and they built the west gate of London,
     of old time called Newgate," &c.[5]

     "The 1st year of Henry VI. John Coventrie and John Carpenter,
     executors to Richard Whitington, gave towards the paving of this
     great hall twenty pounds, and the next year fifteen pounds more, to
     the said pavement, with hard stone of Purbeck; they also glazed
     some windows thereof, and of the mayor's court; on every which
     windows the arms of Richard Whitington are placed."[6]

Respecting the library at Guildhall, Stow, after relating how the Duke
of Somerset, Lord Protector, borrowed the books and never returned them,
writes:--"This library was built by the executors of Richard Whittington
and by William Burie; the arms of Whittington are placed on the one side
in the stone work, and two letters, to wit W and B, for William Burie,
on the other side; it is now lofted through, and made a storehouse for
clothes."[7]

Whittington appears to have died childless, and in the interesting
picture of his deathbed, copied by Mr. Lysons from an illumination in
the ordinances of his college, his executors are seen around his bed.
His will was proved in 1423 by John Coventry, John White, William Grove
and John Carpenter. The College of St. Spirit and St. Mary consisted of
a master, four fellows (masters of arts), clerks, conducts, chorists,
&c. It was dissolved by Edward VI.; but the memory of it remains in the
name College Hill, Upper Thames Street. God's House or Hospital for
thirteen poor men was moved to Highgate in 1808.

By his will Whittington directed that the inmates of his college should
pray for the souls of himself and his wife Alice, of Sir William
Whittington, and his wife Dame Joan, of Hugh Fitzwarren and his wife
Dame Malde, as well as for the souls of Richard II. and Thomas of
Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, "special lords and promoters of the said
Whittington."

Whittington's epitaph is preserved by Stow and is in Latin; yet the
author of a _Life of Whittington_ (1811) makes the following
misstatement:--

     "Record, however, has handed down to us the original epitaph, as it
     was cut on the monument of Sir Richard, by order of his executors;
     and, exclusive of its connection with the subject of these pages,
     it may be subjoined as a curious specimen of the poetry of an age
     which was comparatively with the present so entirely involved in
     the darkness of superstition and ignorance."

      "Beneath this stone lies Whittington,
        Sir Richard rightly named;
      Who three times Lord Mayor served in London,
        In which he ne'er was blamed.

      He rose from indigence to wealth
        By industry and that;
      For lo! he scorned to gain by stealth
        What he got by a cat.

      Let none who reads this verse despair
        Of providences ways;
      Who trust in him he'll make his care,
        And prosper all their days.

      Then sing a requiem to departed merit,
      And rest in peace till death demands his spirit."--

     _Life of Sir R. Whittington_, by the author of _Memoirs of George
     Barnwell_, 1811, p. 106.


       *       *       *       *       *


     LIST OF VERSIONS, EDITIONS, &c.

     1604-5, Feb. 8. Play licensed, see _ante_, p. vii.

     1605, July 16. Ballad licensed, see _ante_, p. vii.

     1612. Johnson's Ballad published in _Crowne Garland of Goulden
     Roses_, see _ante_, p. ix.

     1641? Roxburghe Ballad ("London's Glory"), see _ante_, p. xiv.

     1670? Famous and Remarkable History by T. H., reprinted in this
     volume (see p. 1).

     1678. Another edition with the same title as the above (see p. 1),
     but with the following imprint:

     "London: Printed by A. P. and T. H. for T. Vere and J. Wright, and
     are to be sold at their shops at the Angel without Newgate and at
     the Crown on Ludgate Hill. 1678."

     There are a few alterations in spelling, &c. but otherwise it is
     the same as the earlier edition.

     1730. The History of Sir Richard Whittington, thrice Lord Mayor of
     London. Durham: Printed and sold by I. Lane.

     This is the earliest version of the common chap-book tale in the
     British Museum. It is divided into chapters, and the headings of
     these chapters are given at p. xxx. of the present preface. All the
     other chap-books that I have seen are more or less versions of this
     story, but one of the most complete is that printed in this
     Introduction (p. xxxii.) The book was printed in most of the chief
     towns, as Newcastle, Edinburgh, &c. but one of the most interesting
     editions is that printed at York and illustrated by Bewick:--

     The History of Whittington and his Cat; how from a poor country boy
     destitute of parents or relatives he attained great riches and was
     promoted to the high and honorable dignity of Lord Mayor of London.
     York: Printed by J. Kendrew, Colliergate.

     The frontispiece represents the stiff figure of a man in wig and
     gown of the time of Charles II., underneath which is printed--

      "Sir Richard Whittington behold
      In mayor's robes and chain of gold."

     1808. In the _Antiquarian Repertory_ (vol. ii. pp. 343-346) there
     is a good account of Whittington.

     1811. The Life of Sir Richard Whittington, Knight, and four times
     Lord Mayor of London, in the reigns of Edward III. Richard II. and
     Henry V. Compiled from authentic documents; and containing many
     important particulars respecting that illustrious man never before
     published: intended to amuse, instruct, and stimulate the rising
     generation. By the Author of "Memoirs of George Barnwell." Harlow:
     Printed by B. Flower for M. Jones, No. 5, Newgate Street, London.
     1811. Small 8vo.

     1828. The Life of Sir Richard Whittington, Knight, four times Lord
     Mayor of London. London: Published by Thomas North, 64, Paternoster
     Row. 1828. (Lysons.)

     1841. The Life and Times of Dick Whittington: an Historical
     Romance. London: Hugh Cuningham, St. Martin's Place. 1841. 8vo.

     This is a novel written in imitation of Ainsworth, illustrated with
     plates in imitation of Cruikshank.

     [1845.] Woodcock's "Lives of Illustrious Lords Mayors and Aldermen
     of London, with a Brief History of the City of London." London.
     8vo. Pp. 28-46, Life of Whittington; but it contains no information
     of any value.

     1860. The Model Merchant of the Middle Ages, exemplified in the
     Story of Whittington and his Cat: being an attempt to rescue that
     interesting story from the region of fable, and to place it in its
     proper position in the legitimate history of this country. By the
     Rev. Samuel Lysons, M.A. London: Hamilton, Adams & Co. 1860. 8vo.

     1871. The Story of Sir Richard Whittington, Lord Mayor of London in
     the years 1397, 1406-7, and 1419 A.D. Written and
     illustrated by Carr. London: Longmans, Green and Co. 1871. Folio.

     A new Ballad prettily illustrated, in which Canon Lysons's
     researches are taken into account, and the boy is made of good
     parentage, but the rest of the legend is retained.

     1881. Sir Richard Whittington, Lord Mayor of London. By Walter
     Besant and James Rice. London: Marcus Ward and Co. 1881. Sm. 8vo.

     Whittington and his Cat. By Ernest J. Miller. Published by the
     Albany Institute, Albany, N.Y. Weed, Parsons, and Company. 1881.
     8vo.

     A valuable paper, which contains a great mass of information on
     both the true and----the fictitious Whittington.

     Whittington and his Cat, an Entertainment for Young People, by Miss
     Corner.

     The Remarkable History of Richard Whittington and his Cat. Aunt
     Busy Bee's New Series. Dean and Son. Coloured illustrations on the
     page.

     The following title is taken from Mr. Lysons's book, and I presume
     it is merely an edition of the ordinary chap-book.

     History of Sir Richard Whittington. Printed at Sympson's in
     Stonecutter Street, Fleet Market.


       *       *       *       *       *


The following extract from Granger's _History of England_ is curious as
showing that the public would not have a portrait of Whittington without
a representation of his famous cat:--

     "The true portraicture of Richard Whitington, thrise Lord Maior of
     London; a vertuous and godly man, full of good works, and those
     famous. He builded the gate of London called Newegate, which before
     was a miserable doungeon. He builded Whitington College, and made
     it an almose-house for poore people. Also he builded a great parte
     of the hospitall of St. Bartholomew's, in West Smithfield, in
     London. He also builded the beautiful library at the Grey Friars in
     London, called Christe's Hospitall. He also builded the Guildehalle
     chappell, and increased a great parte of the east ende of the said
     halle, beside many other good workes."--_R. Elstracke sc. Collar of
     SS.; his right hand on a cat._

Granger says of this:

     "The cat has been inserted as the common people did not care to buy
     the print without it. There was none originally in the plate, but a
     skull in the place of the cat. I have seen only two proofs of this
     portrait in its first state, and these were fine
     impressions."--1775, vol. i. p. 62.

The following is a copy of the headings of the chapters in an early form
of the chap-book version of Whittington's life:




  THE

  HISTORY

  OF

  SIR RICHARD WHITTINGTON,

  THRICE LORD MAYOR OF LONDON.


  _Durham: Printed and sold by I. Lane._ [1730.]




     THE LIFE OF

     SIR RICHARD WHITTINGTON.


     CHAP. I.

     How, Whittington, being born of unknown parents, was left to a
     desperate fortune, and rambled the country till necessity and fear
     made him come to London.


     CHAP. II.

     How, at the instance of Mrs. Alice, the Merchant's daughter, he
     became a servant in the family under the cook maid, who used him
     cruelly, and how Mrs. Alice took pity on him, and interpos'd her
     authority.


     CHAP. III.

     How, lying in a garret, he was ready to be devoured by rats and
     mice, and to prevent it purchased a cat with a penny given him for
     cleaning shoes; and how, with the servants, he adventured the cat,
     being all his stock.


     CHAP. IV.

     How the bitter jade of a cook maid encreasing her cruelty towards
     him he grew weary of his service, and was running away on
     All-Hallow's day; but upon hearing the ringing of Bow bells came
     back again. Also how the merchant abroad disposed of his cat.


     CHAP. V.

     Of the great riches received for Whittington's cat more than for
     all the goods in the ship; on the arrival of which his master sent
     for him upstairs by the title of Mr. Whittington, and the excuses
     he made, and how he distributed part of his wealth to his
     fellow-servants giving the ill-natur'd cook maid 100l.


     CHAP. VI.

     How Mr. Whittington, being genteely dress'd, became, to all
     appearance, a very comely, proper person; how Mrs. Alice, his
     master's daughter, fell in love with him, and, by her father's
     consent, married him; and also how he was chosen sheriff of London.


     CHAP. VII.

     How he was thrice elected Lord Mayor of London; how he entertain'd
     King Henry V. in his return from the conquest of France: with an
     account of his buildings for pious and charitable uses, great
     liberality to the poor, his death, burial, and epitaph.


      EPITAPH.

      Here lies Sir Richard Whittington, thrice mayor,
      And his dear wife, a virtuous, loving pair;
      Him fortune rais'd to be belov'd and great,
      By the adventure only of a cat.
      Let none who read of God's great love despair,
      Who trusts in Him of him He will take care;
      But growing rich chuse humbleness, not pride,
      Let these dead persons' virtues be your guide.


The following reprint of a later version of the chap-book is almost
identical with a large number of editions:




  THE

  ADVENTURES

  OF

  SIR RICHARD WHITTINGTON,

  WHO WAS

  THREE TIMES

  LORD MAYOR OF LONDON.

  _And the Surprising History of his_

  CAT,

  TO WHICH IS ADDED

  THE CALEDONIAN, A POEM.


  _Banbury:
  Printed and sold by J. Cheney, in the High Street._


       *       *       *       *       *




  THE

  HISTORY

  OF

  WHITTINGTON.


       *       *       *       *       *


Dick Whittington was a very little boy when his father and mother died;
little indeed, that he never knew them, nor the place where he was
born. He strolled about the country as ragged as a colt, till he met
with a waggoner who was going to London, and who gave him leave to walk
all the way by the side of his waggon without paying anything for his
passage, which pleased little Whittington very much, as he wanted to see
London badly, for he had heard that the streets were paved with gold,
and he was willing to get a bushel of it; but how great was his
disappointment, poor boy! when he saw the streets covered with dirt
instead of gold, and found himself in a strange place, without a friend,
without food, and without money.

Though the waggoner was so charitable as to let him walk up by the side
of the waggon for nothing, he took care not to know him when he came to
town, and the poor boy was, in a little time, so cold and so hungry that
he wished himself in a good kitchen and by a warm fire in the country.

In this distress he asked charity of several people, and one of them bid
him "Go to work for an idle rogue." "That I will," says Whittington,
"with all my heart; I will work for you if you will let me."

The man, who thought this favoured of wit and impertinence (tho' the
poor lad intended only to show his readiness to work), gave him a blow
with a stick which broke his head so that the blood ran down. In this
situation, and fainting for want of food, he laid himself down at the
door of one Mr. Fitzwarren, a merchant, where the cook saw him, and,
being an ill-natured hussey, ordered him to go about his business or she
would scald him. At this time Mr. Fitzwarren came from the Exchange, and
began also to scold at the poor boy, bidding him to go to work.

Whittington answered that he should be glad to work if any body would
employ him, and that he should be able if he could get some victuals to
eat, for he had had nothing for three days, and he was a poor country
boy, and knew nobody, and nobody would employ him.

He then endeavoured to get up, but he was so very weak that he fell down
again, which excited so much compassion in the merchant that he ordered
the servants to take him in and give him some meat and drink, and let
him help the cook to do any dirty work that she had to set him about.
People are too apt to reproach those who beg with being idle, but give
themselves no concern to put them in the way of getting business to do,
or considering whether they are able to do it, which is not charity.

                   "Think of this ye affluent,
  And when the overplus of your fortunes disturb
  Your minds, think how little stops the lash of penury,
  And makes the wretched happy!"

I remember a circumstance of this sort, which Sir William Thompson told
my father with tears in his eyes, and it is so affecting that I shall
never forget it:




  STORY

  OF

  SIR WILLIAM THOMPSON.


"When Sir William Thompson was in the plantation abroad, one of his
friends told him he had an indentured servant whom he had just bought,
that was his countryman and a lusty man; 'but he is so idle,' says he,
'that I cannot get him to work.' 'Aye,' says Sir William, 'let me see
him.' Accordingly they walked out together and found the man sitting on
a heap of stones. Upon this Sir William, after enquiring about his
country, asked why he did not go out to work. 'I am not able,' answered
the man. 'Not able?' says Sir William, 'I am sure you look very well;
give him a few stripes.' Upon this the planter struck him several times,
but the poor man still kept his seat.

"Then they left him to look over the plantation, exclaiming against his
obstinacy all the way they went; but how surprised were they, on their
return, to find the poor man fallen from off the place where he had been
sitting, and dead! 'The cruelty,' says Sir William, 'of my ordering the
poor man to be beaten while in the agonies of death lies always next my
heart. It is what I shall never forget, and will for ever prevent my
judging rashly of people who appear in distress. How do we know what our
children may come to? The Lord have mercy upon the poor, and defend them
from the proud, the inconsiderate, and the avaricious."

But we return to Whittington: who would have lived happy in this worthy
family had he not been bumped about by the cross cook, who must be
always roasting or basting, and when the spit was still employed her
hands upon poor Whittington! 'till Miss Alice, his master's daughter,
was informed of it, and then she took compassion on the poor boy, and
made the servants treat him kindly.

Besides the crossness of the cook, Whittington had another difficulty to
get over before he could be happy. He had, by order of his master, a
flock-bed placed for him in a garret, where there were such a number of
rats and mice that often ran over the poor boy's nose and disturbed him
in his sleep. After some time, however, a gentleman, who came to his
master's house, gave Whittington a penny for brushing his shoes. This
he put into his pocket, being determined to lay it out to the best
advantage; and the next day, seeing a woman in the street with a cat
under her arm, he ran up to know the price of it. The woman (as the cat
was a good mouser) asked a deal of money for it, but on Whittington's
telling her he had but a penny in the world, and that he wanted a cat
sadly, she let him have it.

This cat Whittington concealed in the garret, for fear she should be
beat about by his mortal enemy the cook, and here she soon killed or
frightened away the rats and mice, so that the poor boy could now sleep
as sound as a top.

Soon after this the merchant, who had a ship ready to sail, called for
his servants, as his custom was, in order that each of them might
venture something to try their luck; and whatever they sent was to pay
neither freight nor custom, for he thought justly that God Almighty
would bless him the more for his readiness to let the poor partake of
his fortune. "He that giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord, who will
return it seventy-fold."

All the servants appeared but poor Whittington, who, having neither
money nor goods, could not think of sending anything to try his luck;
but his good friend Miss Alice, thinking his poverty kept him away,
ordered him to be called.

She then offered to lay down something for him, but the merchant told
his daughter that would not do, it must be something of his own. Upon
which poor Whittington said he had nothing but a cat which he bought for
a penny that was given him. "Fetch thy cat, boy," said the merchant,
"and send her." Whittington brought poor puss and delivered her to the
captain, with tears in his eyes, for he said he should now be disturbed
by the rats and mice as much as ever. All the company laughed at the
adventure but Miss Alice, who pitied the poor boy, and gave him
something to buy another cat.

While puss was beating the billows at sea, poor Whittington was severely
beaten at home by his tyrannical mistress the cook, who used him so
cruelly, and made such game of him for sending his cat to sea, that at
last the poor boy determined to run away from his place, and, having
packed up the few things he had, he set out very early in the morning on
All-Hallows day. He travelled as far as Holloway, and there sat down on
a stone to consider what course he should take; but while he was thus
ruminating, Bow bells, of which there were only six, began to ring; and
he thought their sounds addressed him in this manner:

  "Turn again, Whittington,
  Lord Mayor of great London."

"Lord Mayor of London!" said he to himself; "what would not one endure
to be Lord Mayor of London, and ride in such a fine coach? Well, I'll go
back again, and bear all the pummelling and ill-usage of Cicely rather
than miss the opportunity of being Lord Mayor!" So home he went, and
happily got into the house and about his business before Mrs. Cicely
made her appearance.

We must now follow Miss Puss to the coast of Africa, to that coast where
Dido expired for loss of AEnus (_sic_). How perilous are voyages at sea,
how uncertain the winds and the waves, and how many accidents attend a
naval life!

The ship, which had the cat on board, was long beaten at sea, and at
last, by contrary winds, driven on a part of the coast of Barbary which
was inhabited by Moors, unknown to the English. These people received
our countrymen with civility, and therefore the captain, in order to
trade with them, shewed them the patterns of the goods he had on board,
and sent some of them to the king of the country, who was so well
pleased that he sent for the captain and the factor to his palace, which
was about a mile from the sea. Here they were placed, according to the
custom of the country, on rich carpets, flowered with gold and silver;
and the king and queen being seated at the upper end of the room, dinner
was brought in, which consisted of many dishes; but no sooner were the
dishes put down but an amazing number of rats and mice came from all
quarters, and devoured all the meat in an instant. The factor, in
surprise, turned round to the nobles and asked "If these vermin were not
offensive?" "O yes," said they, "very offensive; and the king would give
half his treasure to be freed of them, for they not only destroy his
dinner, as you see, but they assault him in his chamber, and even in
bed, so that he is obliged to be watched while he is sleeping for fear
of them."

The factor jumped for joy; he remembered poor Whittington and his cat,
and told the king he had a creature on board the ship that would
despatch all these vermin immediately. The king's heart heaved so high
at the joy which this news gave him that his turban dropped off his
head. "Bring this creature to me," says he; "vermin are dreadful in a
court, and if she will perform what you say, I will load your ship with
gold and jewels in exchange for her." The factor, who knew his business,
took this opportunity to set forth the merits of Miss Puss. He told his
majesty "That it would be inconvenient to part with her, as, when she
was gone, the rats and mice might destroy the goods in the ship--but to
oblige his majesty he would fetch her." "Run, run," said the queen; "I
am impatient to see the dear creature."

Away flew the factor, while another dinner was providing, and returned
with the cat just as the rats and mice were devouring that also. He
immediately put down Mrs. Puss, who killed a great number of them.

The king rejoiced greatly to see his old enemies destroyed by so small a
creature, and the queen was highly pleased, and desired the cat might be
brought near that she might look at her. Upon which the factor called
"Pussy, pussy, pussy," and she came to him. He then presented her to the
queen, who started back, and was afraid to touch a creature who had made
such a havoc among the rats and mice; however, when the factor stroked
the cat and called "Pussy, pussy," the queen also touched her and cried
"Putty, putty," for she had not learned English.

He then put her down on the queen's lap, where she, purring, played with
her majesty's hand, and then sung herself to sleep.

The king having seen the exploits of Mrs. Puss, and being informed that
she was with young, and would stock the whole country, bargained with
the captain and factor for the whole ship's cargo, and then gave them
ten times as much for the cat as all the rest amounted to. With which,
taking leave of their majesties, and other great personages at court,
they sailed with a fair wind for England, whither we must now attend
them.

The morn had scarcely dawned when Mr. Fitzwarren stole from the bed of
his beloved wife, to count over the cash, and settle the business for
that day. He had just entered the compting-house, and seated himself at
the desk, when somebody came, tap, tap, at the door. "Who's there?" says
Mr. Fitzwarren. "A friend," answered the other. "What friend can come at
this unseasonable time?" "A real friend is never unseasonable," answered
the other. "I come to bring you good news of your ship _Unicorn_." The
merchant bustled up in such an hurry that he forgot his gout; instantly
opened the door, and who should be seen waiting but the captain and
factor, with a cabinet of jewels, and a bill of lading, for which the
merchant lifted up his eyes and thanked heaven for sending him such a
prosperous voyage. Then they told him the adventures of the cat, and
shewed him the cabinet of jewels which they had brought for Mr.
Whittington. Upon which he cried out with great earnestness, but not in
the most poetical manner,--


  "Go, send him in, and tell him of his fame,
  And call him Mr. Whittington by name."


It is not our business to animadvert upon these lines; we are not
critics, but historians. It is sufficient for us that they are the words
of Mr. Fitzwarren; and though it is beside our purpose, and perhaps not
in our power to prove him a good poet, we shall soon convince the reader
that he was a good man, which was a much better character; for when
some, who were present, told him that this treasure was too much for
such a poor boy as Whittington, he said, "God forbid that I should
deprive him or a penny; it is his own, and he shall have it to a
farthing." He then ordered Mr. Whittington in, who was at this time
cleaning the kitchen, and would have excused himself from going into the
compting-house, saying, the room was rubbed, and his shoes were dirty
and full of hob-nails. The merchant, however, made him come in, and
ordered a chair to be set for him. Upon which, thinking they intended to
make sport of him, as had been too often the case in the kitchen, he
besought his master not to mock a poor simple fellow, who intended them
no harm, but let him go about his business. The merchant, taking him by
the hand, said, "Indeed, Mr. Whittington, I am in earnest with you, and
sent for you to congratulate you on your great success. Your cat has
procured you more money than I am worth in the world, and may you long
enjoy it and be happy."

At length, being shown the treasure, and convinced by them that all of
it belonged to him, he fell upon his knees and thanked the Almighty for
his providential care of such a poor and miserable creature. He then
laid all the treasure at his master's feet, who refused to take any part
of it, but told him he heartily rejoiced at his prosperity, and hoped
the wealth he had acquired would be a comfort to him, and would make him
happy. He then applied to his mistress, and to his good friend Miss
Alice, who refused to take any part of the money, but told him she
heartily rejoiced at his good success, and wished him all imaginable
felicity. He then gratified the captain, factor, and the ship's crew,
for the care they had taken of his cargo. He likewise distributed
presents to all the servants in the house, not forgetting even his old
enemy the cook, though she little deserved it.

After this Mr. Fitzwarren advised Mr. Whittington to send for the
necessary people and dress himself like a gentleman, and made him the
offer of his house to live in till he could provide himself with a
better.

Now it came to pass that when Mr. Whittington's face was washed, his
hair curled, and dressed in a rich suit of clothes, that he turned out a
genteel young fellow; and, as wealth contributes much to give a man
confidence, he in a little time dropped that sheepish behaviour which
was principally occasioned by a depression of spirits, and soon grew a
sprightly and good companion, insomuch that Miss Alice, who had formerly
seen him with an eye of compassion, now viewed him with other eyes,
which perhaps was in some measure occasioned by his readiness to oblige
her, and by continually making her presents of such things that he
thought would be most agreeable.

When her father perceived they had this good liking for each other he
proposed a match between them, to which both parties cheerfully
consented, and the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, Sheriffs, the Company
of Stationers, and a number of eminent merchants attended the ceremony,
and were elegantly treated at an entertainment made for that purpose.

History further relates that they lived very happy, had several
children, and died at a good old age. Mr. Whittington served Sheriff of
London in the year 1340, and was three times Lord Mayor. In the last
year of his mayoralty he entertained King Henry V. and his Queen, after
his conquest of France, upon which occasion the King, in consideration
of Whittington's merit, said, "Never had prince such a subject;" which
being told to Whittington at the table, he replied "Never had subject
such a king." His Majesty, out of respect to his good character,
conferred the honour of knighthood on him soon after.

Sir Richard many years before his death constantly fed a great number of
poor citizens, built a church and a college to it, with a yearly
allowance for poor scholars, and near it erected an hospital. He also
built Newgate for criminals, and gave liberally to St. Bartholomew's
Hospital and other public charities.


       *       *       *       *       *


Two old houses in London, which were pulled down at the beginning of the
present century, have been associated with the name of Whittington, but
there is no evidence that he really dwelt in either of them. One ruinous
building in Sweedon's Passage, Grub Street, engravings of which will be
found in J.T. Smith's _Topography of London_, was pulled down in 1805,
and five houses built on its site. A tablet was then set up, on which
was an inscription to the effect that the house had been called Gresham
House, and that Whittington once inhabited it.

The magnificent house which stood in Hart Street, Crutched Friars, a few
doors from Mark Lane, is said to have been called Whittington's palace
in the old leases, but this is the only evidence in favour of the
popular belief. The front was elaborately carved in oak, the work of a
much later date than that of Whittington. The decoration is attributed
to the latter part of the reign of Henry VIII., and on the ceiling among
other forms was that of a cat's head, from which possibly the tradition
of its having been the residence of Whittington arose. There was a
popular superstition that the cat's eyes followed the visitor as he
walked about the room. This house was taken down in 1801, but both it
and the house in Sweedon's Passage were reproduced in the interesting
Old London Street at the International Health Exhibition of 1884.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Catalogue of Chap Books, Garlands, &c._ 1849, p. 69.

[2] Riley's _Memorials of London and London Life_, p. 534 (note).

[3] Riley's _Memorials_, pp. 533-4.

[4] The Royal Mandate, dated June 8, is printed in Riley's _Memorials_,
p. 545.

[5] _Survey of London_, ed. Thoms, 1842, p. 41.

[6] _Survey of London_, ed. Thoms, 1842, p. 162.

[7] _Ibid._ p. 103.


       *       *       *       *       *




  THE

  FAMOUS AND REMARKABLE

  HISTORY

  OF

  SIR RICHARD WHITTINGTON,

  THREE TIMES LORD MAYOR OF LONDON:


  _who lived in the time of King Henry the Fifth in the year 1419, with
  all the Remarkable Passages, and things of note, which happened in his
  time: with his Life and Death._


  WRITTEN BY T. H.


  _Printed by W. Thackeray and T. Passinger._




  _The Printer to the Reader._


Courteous Reader,--I here present unto thee no strange or forreign news,
no imagination, or vain conceit of poetical fiction; neither do I tell
thee of Gallagantua or of the Red Rose Knight, nor such like stories;
but I here offer to thy view a true pattern of humility; being the glory
of our Kingdom, and raised to Honour by desert; the title tells you that
it is the life and death of Richard Whittington, who for his clemency
and understanding was three times chosen Lord Mayor of the Honourable
City of London, who always acknowledged his beginning to be of mean and
low rank; yet he was beloved of the King for his fidelity and trust, as
may appear in larger volumes, and the entertainment that he gave at his
own house to his Soveraign at several times: his bounty upon all
occasions, when the King wanted his purse; his love to the City and
Commons; which are not to be buried in oblivion, but rather to be
proclaimed as living monuments to all people of what condition soever,
to animate them never to be dejected though never so poor, as the story
will more at large declare; all which happened in the days of our
forefathers, and very probable it may be for us to believe; if we will
not give credit to former historians who will give the like to us in
future ages: read it through, and you will find something worthy
of note, and thou shall do thy self some pleasure and me a high
favour.    _Vale._




  _The Life and Death of Sir Richard Whittington;
  who was three times Lord Mayor of the
  City of London._


The saying is not so old as true, He that refuseth to buy counsel cheap
shall buy repentance dear; neither let any work [mock?] a man in his
misery, but rather beware by him how to avoid the like misfortune; if
thou intend to do any good, defer it not till the next day, for thou
knowest not what may happen over night to prevent thee. Behold thyself
in a looking glass, if thou appearest beautiful do such things as may
become thy beauty; but if thou seem foul or deformed, let the actions of
thy life make good that splendor which thy face lacketh. Tell not thy
mind to every man, make thy self indebted to no man, be friend to few
men, be courteous to all men, let thy wit be thy friend, thy mind thy
companion, thy tongue thy servant, let vertue be thy life, valour thy
love, honour thy fame and heaven thy felicity. These (Reader) be good
documents for thee to follow, and I am now to present thee with a
worthy president to imitate; observe his beginning, forget not the
middle passage of his life, and thou wilt no question crown his head. He
that made all things of nothing can of a little make much, and multiply
a mite into a magazine, as will easily appear by the succeeding history.

This Richard Whittington was so obscurely born that he could scarcely
give account of his parents or kindred, and being almost starved in the
country, necessity compelled him up to London, hoping to find more
charity in the town than in the country: to beg he was ashamed, to steal
he did abhor: two days he spent in gaping upon the shops and gazing upon
the buildings feeding his eyes but starving his stomach. At length meer
faintness compell'd him to rest himself upon a bench before a merchant's
gate, where he not long sat but the owner of the house having occasion
of business into the town finding him a poor simple fellow, and thinking
that he had no more within him than appeared without, demanded of him
why he loytered there, and being able to work for his living did not
apply himself unto some lawful calling, threatning him at the first with
the stocks and the whipping-post; but the poor man, after the making of
some plain leggs and courtesie, desired him to pardon him, and told him
that he was a dejected man, who desired any imployment, and that no
pains how mean or course (_sic_) soever could seem tedious or
burthensome unto him, so he might but find some good master, by whose
charity he might relieve his present necessity: for his great ambition
was but to keep his body from nakedness and his stomach from hunger,
and told him withal how long it was since he had tasted meat or drink.

The worthy merchant seeing him of a personable body, and an ingenious
aspect howsoever both were clouded under a rustick habit, began somewhat
to commiserate his estate, and knocking for a servant had him take in
that fellow and give him such victuals as the house for the present
afforded, and at his return he would have further conference with him.
The servant did as he was commanded and took him in.

The merchant went then to the Exchange, which was then in Lumber Street,
about his affairs; in which intrim (_sic_) poor Whittington was hied
into the kitchin to warm himself, for faintness by reason of hunger and
cold (for it was then in the winter time) had quite rob'd him of his
colour. Meat was set before him in plenty, and being bred in the
country, as the proverb goeth, _He fed like a farmer_, and having
satisfied himself sufficiently and warm'd him to the full, a fresh
colour began to come into his cheeks: at which the Merchant's daughter
(hearing of a new come guest) came into the kitchin, and began to
question him of divers things concerning the country, to all which he
gave her such modest and sensible answers that she took a great liking
unto him, and so left him.

Dinner time came, and Master Fitzwarren (for so was the merchant called)
came home with a good stomach, and brought a friend or two with him from
the Exchange; down they sat to meat, and had speech of many things at
the table; meanwhile the servants were set also at dinner, who would
needs have Whittington, though he had so lately broke his fast, to keep
them company, some of them delighting in his country speech, others
deriding his supposed simplicity.

But to come to the purpose, the table being withdrawn in the parlour,
and the guests departed, and Master Fitzwarren and his daughter left
alone, she being of a good and gentle disposition, began to commend his
charity concerning the poor man whom he relieved that morning, to whom
he answered, God-a-mercy daughter, thou hast done well to remember me,
such a one I sent indeed, but have my servants done as I commanded them?
and where is he now? who answered him, that she had given order he
should stay dinner, and not depart the house till he himself had further
spoken with him. At which they both went unto the Hall, and called the
fellow before them; who appeared unto them with such a bashful humility
that it seemed to them both to beg a charity; some language past betwixt
them concerning him, which gave them content; at length they bid him
retire himself.

When the father and the daughter had some private conference concerning
him she urged him to entertain him into his house, and that there would
be some employment for him, either to run or to go of errands or else to
do some drudgery in the kitchin, as making of fires, scouring kettles,
turning the spit, and the like: To whom the father reply'd that indeed
his work might be worth his meat, but he had no lodging to spare, and
she again answered that there were garrets in the house that were put to
no use at all, and in one of them he might conveniently be lodged and
put the house to no trouble at all.

Well at length he was admitted, and made a member of the family, in
which he demeaned himself so well by his willingness to run or go or do
any service how mean so ever that he had got the good will of all the
whole houshold, only the kitchin maid being a curst quean, and knowing
him to be an under servant to her, domineered over him and used him very
coursely and roughly, of which he would never complain, though he had
cause enough. The garret in which he lay, by reason it had been long
unfrequented, was troubled with rats and mice, insomuch that he could
not sleep in the night but they ran over his face, and much disturb'd
him in his rest: to prevent which having got a penny either for going of
an errand, or for making clean boots or shooes or the like, with that he
bought a young cat which he kept in his garret, and whatsoever he had
from the reversion of the servants table he would be sure to reserve
part for her, because he had found by experience that she had rid him of
the former inconveniences.

The History tells us that this merchant, Master Hugh Fitzwarren, was so
generous that he never adventured any ship to sea but he would have his
daughter, his cashire, and every one of his servants, whar (_sic_) or
whatsoever, to put in something, and to adventure with him, and
according to that proportion which they could spare, every one received
to a token at the return of the ship. His daughter she began, the rest
followed, and the servants borrowed out of their wages everyone
according to their abilities, and when they all had done Whittington was
remembered and called for, and his master telling him the custome of his
home, asked him what he had to hazard in this adventure, who replyed
again, he was a poor man, and had nothing in the world saving the
cloaths upon his back, but for money he had none at all: then his
daughter drew out her purse and told her father, that for his servant
Whittington she would lay down whatsoever he would desire. Who answered
again, that what she had spoke was nothing to the purpose; for
whatsoever was ventured in that kind must be out of ones proper goods
and chattels, and again demanded of him if he had anything he could call
his own to put to hazard, and charged him deeply concerning that point,
who making some unnecessary leggs, told him that he had nothing which he
could call his saving a cat, which he had bought with his penny, which
he could not spare because she had done him so many good offices, and
told them every circumstance before, related, which when the merchant
heard he told him that he should venture that commodity and none else,
and charged him to fetch her instantly (for the ship which was called
the Unicorn) was fallen down as low as Blackwal and all their lading
was already had aboard. Whittington although unwilling to part from so
good a companion yet being forced by his masters command by whom he had
his subsistence he brought her and (not without tears) delivered her to
his factor who was partly glad of her, by reason they were troubled with
mice and rats in the ship, which not only spoyled their victuals but
damaged their wares and commodities.

I must leave the cat upon her voyage at sea and honest Whittington on
land, who by that cursed quean the kitchin maid was so beaten and abused
that he was as weary of his life as of his service: for she (usurping
upon his plainness and modesty) would be quarrelling with him, upon
every small or no occasion at all; sometimes beating him with the broom,
sometimes laying him over the shoulders with a laddle, the spit or what
came next to her hands, being of so dogged a disposition that she still
continued her cruelty towards him, and therefore he resolved with
himself to run away, and for that purpose he had bundled up those few
clothes which he had, and before day broke was got as far as Bunhill,
and then he sat down to consider with himself what course he were best
to take; where by chance (it being all-hallows day) a merry peal from
Bow Church began to ring, and as he apprehended they were tun'd to this
ditty,--

  Turn again Whittington, Lord Mayor of London,
  Turn again Whittington, Lord Mayor of London.

This took such a great impression in him, that finding how early it was,
and that he might yet come back in his masters house before any of the
family were stirring, he resolved to go back, and found every thing
according to his own wishes and desires, insomuch that when the
household were up none could challenge him to have been missing. And
thus he continued as before in his first plainness and honesty, well
beloved of all save the kitchin drudge; I come now to tell you what
became of his adventure.

It so hapned that this goodly ship Unicorn was by contrary gusts and bad
weather driven upon the utmost coast of Barbary, where never any
Englishman (or scarce any Christian) had ever traded before, where they
showed their commodities and offered them to be vended. The Moors came
down in multitudes, much taken with the beauty of their ship, for they
had never seen any of that bigness or burthen before, but when they had
taken a serious view of their commodities as hatchets, knives and
looking-glasses, fish-hooks, &c. but especially their cloth and kersies
of several sizes and colours, they brought them gold in abundance for it
was more plentiful with them then (_sic_) lead or copper with us.

Presently the news was carryed to the king who sent some of his chief
nobility to bring him some sorts of every commodity that was aboard,
which when he saw they pleased him highly, sending for the master and
merchants factor to court. He at their own rate bargained with them for
their whole lading, nor would he suffer them to depart till he had
feasted them royally.

Now the fashion of the Moors is not to sit at the table as the custom is
among us, but to have a rich carpet spread upon the ground, and when the
meal or banquet is served in, as well the king himself as the rest sit
round about cross-legg'd as taylors commonly used to do upon their
shop-boards, and in that manner our English are set at the king's
banquet, but the meal was no sooner served in but swarms of rats and
mice seized upon the dishes, and snatched away the meat even from the
king and queen's trenchers: at which the factor being annoyed asked one
of the nobility (by an interpreter) if they preserved those vermin for
sport, or if they were noysome, and troublesome unto them: who answered
him again, that they were the greatest vexation unto them that could be
possible, and by reason of their multitudes they could not be destroyed,
but the king would willingly give half the revenue of his crown if he
could but only clear the court of them, for not only his table but his
very bed-chamber swarmed with them, insomuch that he durst not lay him
down to rest without a watch about him, to keep them off his pillow: To
whom the factor replyed, that they had a strange beast aboard which he
made no doubt would rid them of those vermine: which being told the king
he rose from his place and imbracing the factor told him if he could
shew him such a creature he would ballast his vessel with silver and
lade her with gold and pearl. Who apprehending the occasion made very
coy of the business, telling him it was a creature of great value and
not common. Besides they could not spare her from the ship, in regard
when they were asleep yet she was still waking in the night, not only to
preserve their merchandise but there dyet from the like spoyl. The more
dainty that he made of the matter the more earnest was the king for this
beast, insomuch that he was presently sent for.

And a second feast being prepared and the rats and mice appearing as
they did before, the young merchant having the cat under his cloak the
king desired to see the thing which he had before so much commended;
when presently he discovered her, and cast her among them; she no sooner
saw these vermine but fell upon them with such a fury that here lay one
panting, there another quite dead; nor left them till she had frighted
and disperst the whole number, but such as she seized their carkasses
lay there as witnesses of their unexpected slaughter.

Great pleasure took the king and the nobility in the sport, vowing that
the hunting of the lyon (of which there was plenty in that country) was
not answerable unto it. In the interim one began to praise her for her
colour, another commending her for her valour, one said she had the
countenance of a lyon, and every one gave his sentence. When the poor
cat finding no more work for her to do, went round to the King and Queen
purling and curling (as their manner is), which they apprehended to be,
as if she inquired of them what she had deserved for that late service.

To cut off circumstance, no price could part them, and the rather when
the factor had told the king that she was with kittens, and that her
brood would in some few years, being carefully lookt into, furnish the
whole kingdom, so that Whittingtons cats adventure only surmounted all
the ships lading beside, with which fortune and unexpected gain we bring
them safe into England; the ship lying at anchor near Blackwal, and the
Pilot and Cape-merchant, with some other officers in the ship at Mr.
Fitzwarrens house, which was by Leaden-Hall, to give accompt of their
voyage. But these caskets of jewels and pearls, with other unvaluable
(_sic_) riches which were given for the cat, they caused to be brought
along, not daring, by reason of their inestimable value, to trust them
in the ship. The Bills of lading and the benefit of the return of the
Commodities being viewed and considered of by the owner, he praised God
for so prosperous a voyage, and called all his servants and gave order
that according to their adventures every one should receive his portion.

At length casting his eye upon those rich caskets and cabinets, he asked
to whose share they belonged; who whispered him in the ear, and told
him to his poor Whittington, relating every particular as is before
discoursed. To whom Master Fitzwarren replyed, if they then be his, God
forbid I should keep from him the least farthing that is his right, and
presently commanded Whittington to be sent for by the name of Mr.
Whittington.

The servants not knowing anything of the business, went unto him into
the kitchin, where he was then rubbing the spits, scouring the kettles,
and making clean the dressers, and told him he must come to his Master
presently into the parlor. The poor man excused himself, that his shooes
were dirty and the room was rubb'd, and if he should but touch any thing
there he should spoyl and deface those things in the room. But still the
master of the House called for Master Whittington, sending one servant
after another till he was brought before him; and having scraped some
few legs, instantly his master took him by the hand, and called for a
chair for Master Whittington, his daughter, the pilot, and the factor,
every one of them saluted him by the name of Mr. Whittington and forced
him to sit down. He wondering what this should mean desired them not to
mock a poor simple man who meant none any harm, &c. and wept (the tears
dropping from his eyes), desiring them not to deride his poverty, for
his ambition was never to come so high as from the kitchin to the hall
much more from the hall to the parlor.

Then came his master to him seriously and said, Indeed Mr. Whittington,
we are all in very good earnest, for you are at this time a better man
than myself in estate, and then shewed him all those cabinets and
caskets, and how richly they were lined.

When he perceived by all their earnest asservations that all was true he
first fell down upon his knees and gave God most hearty thanks, who out
of his great bounty would vouchsafe to cast an eye upon so poor and
wretched a creature as himself; then turning to his master he presented
all his riches before him and told him that all he had was at his
disposing and service, who answered him again, that for his own part God
had sent him sufficient of his own, neither would he take from him the
value of one Barbary ducket. He came nere and with a low leg saluted his
mistris, and told her that when she pleased to make choice of a husband
he would make her the richest marriage in London, because she was so
willing out of her own purse (when he was altogether penniless) to lay
out for his adventure. To the pilot, and master, and every officer, and
common saylor he gave liberal according to their degree, even to the
ship boy, and then to every servant of the house, nay to the very
kitchin wench who was so churlish unto him, and had so often basted him
instead of her roast meats; having caused her to be called unto him he
gave her an hundred pounds towards her marriage.

This being done, taylors were sent for, sempsters and the like to put
him into cloaths and linnen of the best, who were to accommodate him
with all speed possible, and his lodging in the garret was chang'd into
the best chamber of the house. And when the barber had been with him and
the rest to make him compleat in his habit, there was a strange and
sudden metamorphosis; for out of a smoky and dirty kitchin-drudge there
appeared a proper and well-proportioned man, and gentile merchant, in so
much that his young mistris began to cast a more amorous eye upon him
than before, which not a little pleased Master Fitzwarren her father,
who intended a match betwixt them.

The brute of this great adventure was presently revised through the
whole city, insomuch that his master intreated his late servant to walk
with him into the Exchange to see the fashion of the merchants, which he
did, when all of them came about him and saluted him, some bid God give
him joy of his fortune, others desired of him better and further
acquaintance, and every one as his several fancy led him: some commended
him for his person, others for his modest answers and discreet carriage.
Indeed, wealth is able to make all these good where they are most
wanting, which was not in him as appears by the sequel.

Within few weeks the match was propounded betwixt Master Whittington
and Mistris Alice, and willingly entertained by both parties and not
without great cost, with the invitation of the Lord Mayor and the
Aldermen very nobly celebrated, and the bridegroom by this means had got
acquaintances with the best.

After this his father-in-law demanded of his son what he purposed to
take in hand (his freedom being offered him). Who made answer again that
since God had so blest him in his small adventure he would not leave it
of so, but prove his goodness in a greater, and that his purpose was to
turn merchant, which reply gave him no small content in regard he knew
the best among them would be glad to have the society of so hopeful a
citizen, which he continued adventuring in divers bottoms with his
father, and had very happy and prosperous returns.

The time being come when he was prickt for Sheriff he modestly refused
it as unable to take so great a charge, and would willingly have paid
his fine, which his father-in-law would not suffer, at whose persuasion
he took the place upon him, in which he so well behaved himself in the
management of all affairs belonging to his office that he not only left
it without the least taxation, but with a general love and approbation,
insomuch that the universal eye of the whole city was fixt upon him in
an hopeful expectation what a profitable member of that united body he
might futurely prove, and this hapned in the year of our Lord 1493, Sir
John Hodley grocer being mayor and Drewerie Barentine his fellow
Sheriff, of the truth of which Mr. Fabian in his _Chronicle_ and Mr.
John Stow in his _Survey of London_ can fully satisfie you.

In the year 1497 and the one and twentieth of the same Kings reign, Sir
Richard Whittington was Lord Mayor of London, John Woodcok and William
Askam being Sheriffs, and he held the place with great reputation and
honour. In which time of his Mayoralty there was much discontent in the
kingdom, by reason of many differences betwixt the King and the Commons;
the circumstances whereof were here too long to relate, only one thing
is worthy of observation that whether by his adventures or no may it be
questioned, bringing in yearly such store of gold, silks, sattins,
velvets, damasks, stones, and jewels, &c. into the kingdom might be the
cause of that great pride and rioting in apparel which was used in those
days. But as Harding, Fabian, and others have left to me how in that
year of his Mayoralty and after there resorted to the Kings Court at
their pleasures daily, at the least ten thousand persons. In his kitchin
were three hundred servitors, and in every office according to that
rate. Moreover of ladies, chambermaids, and laundresses about three
hundred, and they all exceeded in gorgeous and costly apparel far above
their degrees; for even the yeomen and grooms were clothed in silks and
velvets, damasks, and the like, with imbroydery, rich furs, and
goldsmiths work, devising very strange and new fashions.

And in this year also, about the feast of St. Bartholomew, grew a great
discord betwixt the Duke of Hereford and Mowbery, Duke of Norfolk, the
beginning thereof being as followeth: The two Dukes riding from the
Parliament towards their lodgings, the Duke of Norfolk said to the
other, Sir, you see how variable the King is in his words, and
(reflecting upon what had past) how without mercy he putteth his Lords
and kinsfolks to death, imprisoning some and exciting others. Therefore
it behoveth us not too much to trust to his fair and smooth language,
for doubtless in time he will bring even to us the like death and
destruction. Of which words he accused him to the King, which the other
denying it was to be tryed by combate. The lists were appointed and the
day of meeting the eleventh day of September, to which place and on the
day assigned came both the Dukes and bravely accoutred, appeared before
the King ready to enter into battel; when the King threw down his
warder, and staying the combate banished the Duke of Hereford for ten
years, but the Duke of Norfolk for ever, was travelling many countries,
at the last came to Venice and then ended his life.

Again in 1406, and in the eighth of Henry the fourth, Sir Richard
Whittington was the second time Lord Mayor, Nicholas Worton and Geffery
Brook being Sheriffs. Again in the year 1409, being the seventh year of
Henry the fifth, he supplyed the Pretorship, Robert Whittington (his
near Kinsman) and John Butler being Sheriffs, and which is more
remarkable of him then of any other that ever preceded him in that place
of honour, he was once Sheriff and three times Lord Mayor of this famous
and honourable City in three several Kings reigns.

Now to cut off all circumstances and come close to the matter, we may
easily find what this man was, by the pious and religious acts done in
his life to the Cities present grace, use and benefit, and to his own
blessed memory for ever.

In the Vintry-ward he built a church and dedicated it to S. Michael
calling it Pater Noster in the Royal, and added to it a Colledge founded
to St. Mary, and placed therein a President and four fellows which ought
to be masters of arts, besides other yearly allowance to clerks and
young schollars, near which he erected an Hospital which he called God's
house, for thirteen poor men, and there according to the devout
superstition of those days were to pray for the souls of his
father-in-law Hugh Fitzwarren and Dame Molde his wife, for whom he
erected a fair tomb in the church he before built, leaving also a place
for himself and Dame Alice his lady when it should please God to call
them. In which place they were afterwards both of them according to
their degree very honourably interred, great mourning and much
lamentation being made for him by the Commons of the City in regard he
was a man so remarkable for his charity.

He builded another brave structure which he called after his own name
Whittington Colledge, with a perpetual allowance for Divinity Lectures
to be read there for ever, leaving good land for the maintenance
thereof.

And on the west side of the City he built that famous gate and prison to
this day called Newgate, and thereupon caused the Merchants arms to be
graven in stone. He added to St. Bartholomew's Hospital in Smithfield
and was at the charge of repairing thereof.

Further at the Grey-Fryars in London he erected a Library as a testimony
of the great love he had to Learning, which he began in the year of our
Lord 1421 and finished it in the year following. Moreover that place
which is called the Stocks to this day, betwixt Cheapside and Cornhill,
a good house of stone, which for a flesh market and a fish market
greatly beneficial to the City.

Besides he enlarged Guild Hall and glazed most or all of the windows at
his own costs or charges, paving the Hall and contributing largely to
the Library, adding to those places a conduit which yieldeth store of
sweet and wholesome water to the general good and benefit of the City.

In the year 1497, when Sir Richard Whittington was first elected Lord
Mayor, that rebel Sir John Oldcastle was taken in the territories of the
Lord Powess, not without danger and hurt of some that took him, at which
time all the States of the realm were assembled at Parliament in
London, therein to provide the King of a subsidy and other aid of money
and ammunition, who took great pains beyond the seas in France. These
Lords and others when they heard that the publick enemy was taken they
agreed all not to dissolve the Parliament, until he were examined, and
heard to answer in the same. Whereupon the Lord Powess was sent for to
fetch him up with power and great aid, who brought him to London in a
lyter wounded very much having received seventeen wounds and also a
clerk which he called his Secretary with him that was of his counsel in
all his secrecy. As soon as the aforesaid Sir John Oldcastle was brought
into the Parliament before the Earl of Bedford who was then left Regent
and Governour of the Realm in the time of the King's absence being in
France and other Lords and States, his indictment being read before him
of his forcible insurrection against the King and State in St. Gyles's
Fields, and other treasons and outrages by him committed, the question
was asked how he could excuse himself and show why he should not be
judged to dye according to the law. But he seeking other talk and
discourse of the mercies of God, and that all mortal men that would be
followers of God ought to prefer mercy above judgment and that vengeance
pertained only to the Lord, and ought not to be practised by them that
worship, but to be left to God alone, with many other words to protract
the time, until the Lord Chief Justice admonished the Regent not to
suffer him to spend the time so vainly, in molesting the nobles of the
Realm, whereupon the Duke of Bedford, Regent, commanded him to answer
formally and punctually to the matter laid to his charge.

Then said Sir John, being thus urged at last after deliberation taken,
he said, It is the least thing that I account of to be judged by you as
of man's judgment, and again he began to talk, but nothing to the
purpose until the Chief Justice commanded him again to answer finally,
and to answer them if he could, why he should not suffer death according
to his desert. To which he stoutly answered that he had no judge amongst
them, so long as his liege Lord King Richard was alive and in his realm
of Scotland, which answer when he had made, because there needed no
further witness, he was then presently censured to be drawn and hanged
on a gallows and then to be burnt hanging upon the same, which judgment
was executed upon him the thirtieth day of December in St. Gyles's
Fields, where many honourable persons were present, and the last words
that he spake were to Sir Thomas Upingham, adjuring him that if he saw
him rise from death to life again the third day he would procure that
his sect which he had raised might be in peace and quiet. He was hanged
by the neck in a chain of iron and after consumed by fire.

Moreover it is recorded that in the time of this worthy pretor Sir
Richard Whittington the glorious city of Constantinople was taken by
Mahomet the Second, Prince of the Turks, whose souldiers sacked it with
all extremity and omitted no manners of cruelty by violence to either
virgins, aged women, or sucking babes. This Sir Richard Whittington had
traffick from thence by his factors which there abode, and were then
taken prisoners, so that he lost near upon fifteen thousand pounds,
which when he heard of never was so much as cast down or dismayed, but
said God will send more; yea such was the incessant practice of the
Turkish tyranny upon this imperial city, as it exceeded the damage,
rapes and spoyls of other cities. They also beheaded at the same time
Constantine, sticking his head upon a launce, and with derision caused
it to be carried thorow the Turkish camp.

In the space of a week after, there hapned a horrible tempest of thunder
and lightning which burned almost eight hundred houses and spoiled three
thousand people at the sacking of the aforesaid city by the said
Mahomet. The Turks found therein so much treasure that they wondred that
the citizens would not spend it in souldiers for their own defence, but
so dotingly to spare the true spending thereof to become an enticing
prey for their irreconcileable enemies, for indeed it was thought that
if the State would have hired souldiers, and given them good pay they
might have raised the siege of the Turks. It is an old and true saying,
Covetousness is the mother of ruine and mischief.

This strange thing happened in the second time that he was elected Lord
Mayor and that was upon the twenty-seventh of April, being Tuesday in
Easter week: William Foxley, Pot maker for the Mint in the Tower of
London, fell asleep, and so continued sleeping and snoring and could not
be wakened with pricking, cramping, or otherwise burning or whatsoever
till the first day of the term, which was full 14 days and 15 nights.
The cause of this his sleeping could not be known though the same was
diligently searched for by the King's Command of his Physicians and
other learned men, yea the King himself examined the said William
Foxley, who was in all points sound at his awaking to be as if he had
slept but one night, and yet lived 41 years after. But in length of time
did call to mind how he did wish to God that he might sleep a fortnight
together if it was not so and so concerning a bargain between a
neighbour of his and himself.

One Thursday in Whitson week following the Duke of Somerset with Anthony
Rivers and four others kept Justs and Tournament before the King and
Queen and others of the nobility in the Tower of London, against three
Esquires of the Queen's Bedchamber, which were performed before some of
the French nobility that then were Prisoners to the King, which he took
in France, to the great admiration of those strangers who never saw the
like action before, being so earnestly performed. There was also Sir
Richard Whittington and the two Sheriff's, and that night the King and
Queen did sup with the Lord Mayor.

Those strangers which beheld those Justs were prisoners in the Tower at
that time, namely, the Duke of Orleance and Burbon, brother to the Duke
of Britain, the Earls of Vaudosine, of Ewe and Richmond, and the High
Marshal of France, and many other Knights and Esquires to the number of
seven hundred, all which were at one time prisoners to the King, but
nobly used and attended every one according to their rank and quality,
who when they were ransomed made it known to their King how honourably
they were attended in England, and what respect the King and our English
nation shewed them being prisoners who might have taken their lives away
as well as their persons prisoners.

The second thing that was remarkable in Sir Richard Whittington's year
was that the King kept his Christmas at Lambeth, and at the feast of
Purification seven Dolphins of the sea came up to the River of Thames
and played there up and down until four of them were kill'd.

On Saturday the eve of St. Michael the Archangel the year following, in
the morning before day, betwixt the hour of one and two of the Clock,
began a terrible earthquake with Lightning and thunder which continued
the space of six hours, and that universally through the whole world, so
that most men thought the world as then would have ended. The
unreasonable beasts roared and drew to the town with a hideous noise,
also the fowls of the ayr cryed out, such was the work of God at that
time to call his people to repentance.

The four and twentieth day of January following a battel or combat was
fought in Smithfield within the lists before the King between the men of
Feversham in Kent, John Upton Notary Appelant and John Down Gentleman
defendant. John Upton accused John Down that he and his compiers should
design the King's death on the day of his Coronation following. When
they had fought somewhat long and received each of them some wounds, and
still persisting in their violent action and no hopes to find out the
truth, the King took up the matter and forgave both parties.

On Candlemas eve following in divers places of England was great
weathering of wind, hail, snow, rain with thunder and lightning, whereby
the church of Baldock in Hertfordshire and the church and part of the
town of Walden in Essex, with other neighbouring villages, were sore
shaken, and the steeple of St. Pauls in London about two in the
afternoon was set on fire in the midst of the shaft first on the west
side and then on the south, and divers people espying the fire came to
quench it in the steeple, which they did with vinegar, so far as they
could find, so that when the Lord Mayor with much people came to Pauls
to have holpen if need had been they returned again every man to his own
home, trusting in God all had been well, but anon after between eight
and nine of the clock the fire burst out again afresh out of the
steeple, by reason of the wind more hot and fervent then before, and did
much hurt to the lead and timber thereof. Then the Lord Mayor and many
people came thither again and with vinegar quenched the fire which was
so violent, but no man received any hurt.

Moreover in Sir Richard Whittington's time lived one Richard Fleming,
Bishop of Lincoln, in the year 1430 who founded Lincoln Colledge in
Oxford, which was afterwards in Richard the third's time in the year of
our Lord 1479 by Thomas Rotherham Bishop of the same sea (_sic_) much
augmented and enlarged with great revenues. Likewise Magdalen Colledge
in Oxford was built by William Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester, who was a
loving and constant friend to Sir Richard Whittington and did much good
in many parts of this kingdom, and the said Sir Richard did largely
contribute to these and the like pious uses by the intreaty of this
Bishop.

In the year of our Lord 1419, in which Sir Richard Whittington was the
third time inaugurated into the Mayoralty as is before mentioned King
Henry the fifth, who having conquered the greatest part of France and
espoused Katherine sole daughter to the King and heir to the crown,
taking leave of his father-in-law, embarked with his Royal bride and
landed at Dover upon Candlemas Day, leaving in France for his deputy his
brother the Duke of Clarence, from thence arrived in London the
fourteenth day of February, and the Queen came thither the one and
twentieth day of the same month, being met upon Black-Heath by the Lord
Mayor and three hundred aldermen and prime citizens in gold chains and
rich costly habits with other sumptuous and brave devices as pageants,
speeches and shows to the great delight and content of both their
Maiesties.

The four and twentieth day of February following being St. Mathew's Day
her coronation was solemnized in St. Peter's Church in Westminster;
which being ended, she was afterwards royally conveyed into the great
hall and there under a rich canopy of State sat to dinner, upon whose
right hand sate at the end of the table the Lord Archbishop's grace of
Canterbury and Henry called the rich Cardinal Bishop of Winchester, upon
the left hand of the Queen sat the King of Scots in a chair of State,
and was served with covered dishes, as the Bishops were. But after them
and upon the same side next to the Boards end were seated the Dutchess
of York and Countess of Huntington, the Earl of March holding a scepter
in his hand, kneeling upon the right side, the Earl Marshal in the like
manner kneeled upon the left hand of the Queen: the Countess of Kent sat
under the table at the right foot, and the Countess Marshal at the left
foot of her Majesty.

Humphery Duke of Glocester was that day overseer and stood before the
Queen bareheaded, Sir Richard Newel was carver and the Earl of Suffolk's
brother cup-bearer, Sir John Stewart, Sewer, the Lord Clifford (instead
of the Earl of Warwick) Pantler, the Lord Willoby (instead of the Earl
of Arundel) chief Butler, the Lord Gray Caterer, Naperer, the Lord
Audley (in the stead of the Earl of Cambridge) Almner, the Earl of
Worcester was Lord high Marshal, who rode about the Hall on a great
courser, with many tip-staves about him to make room in the Hall. In the
which Hall next after the Queen, the Barons of the Cinque Ports began
the table, upon the right hand towards St. Steven's Capel (_sic_), and
beneath them at the table sat the Vouchers of the Chancery, and upon the
left hand next to the cupboard sat Sir Richard Whittington (now the
third time Lord Mayor) and his brethren the Aldermen of London. The rest
of the Bishops began the table over against the Baron of the Cinque
Ports, and the ladies and chief noble-women the table against the Lord
Mayor and the Aldermen, at which two tables of the Bishops the Bishop of
London and the Bishop of Durham sat highest at the one and the Countess
of Stafford and the Countess of March on the other. And for ordering of
the service divers chief lords were appointed officers as Steward,
Controuler, Surveyor, and the like, which places were supplyed by the
Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, the Lord Fizmur, the Lord
Farneval, the Lord Gray of Wilton, the Lord Feres of Groby, the Lord
Poynings, the Lord Harrington, the Lord Ducy, the Lord Daker, the Lord
Delaware, &c.

I have shewed you onely the ordering of this rich feast, but the cost
and sumptuousness of the fare would ask too long and large a
circumstance to discourse; what I have hitherto done was onely to show
to the world that at those high solemnities inaugurations and
coronations the Lord Mayor of the City of London and the Aldermen have
place, and their presence is still required; the City being the King's
Chamber and in an interregnum he the first and prime officer in the
kingdom. But I fear I have dwelt too long on the premises which I hope
none will hold for an unnecessary deviation. I come now to discourse
unto you of Sir Richard Whittington's invitation of the King and Queen
into the City when he bountifully feasted them in his own house at his
own proper charge.

How great and magnificent the Londoners feasts be even amongst
themselves especially at that high and pompous festival at Guild-Hall
the day after Simon and Jude, at the solemn inauguration of his Lordship
who but knows, as also the ordinary Tables of the Lord Mayor and the
Sheriffs where there is free and generous entertainment for all men of
fashion and quality, the like both for plenty of dishes and order of
service is not elsewhere to be or found through Europe. If then their
daily provision be so curious and costly, what may we think their
variety and rarity was at the invitation and entertainment of two such
great majesties? I must therefore leave it to the Readers imagination
being so far transcending my expression. Let it therefore give
satisfaction to any one that shall doubt thereof, that it was performed
to the everlasting reputation of the honour of the city and great
content of these royal personages invited. The bounty of the table not
to be question'd. I come now to the fire that he made in the Presence
chamber where the King and Queen then dined, which was only of sweet and
odoriferious (_sic_) wood, far exceeding the smell of juniper, for it
was mixed with mace, cinnamon, and other rare and costly spices, which
did cast such a pleasant and delightful savor through the room that it
pleased his majesty to call him unto him and say, my good Lord Mayor,
though your fare be choice, costly and abundant, yet above all things I
have observed in your noble entertainment this fire which you have
provided for me gives me more content. To whom Sir Richard Whittington
making a low obeysance made answer, It much rejoyceth me dread Soveraign
that any that remaineth in my power can give your highness the least
cause to be pleased, but since you praise this fire already made I
purpose ere your sacred majesty depart the house to entertain you with
one (I hope) that shall content you much better. The King not thinking
it could be possible desired him to make a proof thereof, when he
(having before provided himself for that purpose) brought a great bundle
of Bonds, Indentures and Covenants under his arm, said thus to the King,
Royal Soveraign to whom I owe both my fortunes and my life, I have here
a faggot of purpose left for this fire, which I hope will smell much
more sweetly than the first in your nostrils, for saith he, here is
first your Highness security for ten thousand marks, lent you for the
maintainance of your royal wars in France, by the Right Worshipful
Company of the Mercers, which I here cancel and cast into the fire,
fifteen hundred lent by the City to our Majesty I send after the former,
two thousand marks borrowed of the Grocers Company, three thousand of
the Merchant Taylors, one thousand of the Drapers, one thousand of the
Skinners, one thousand of the Ironmongers, one thousand of the Merchant
Staplers, of the Goldsmiths three thousand, of the Haberdashers as much,
of the Vintners, Brewers and Brown Bakers three thousand marks. All
these you see are cancel'd and burnt, saith he, with divers other bonds
for money lent by my father in law Aldermen Fitzwarren for the payment
of your souldiers in France, which coming unto me by executorship I have
taken in and discharged.

Others there likewise due to me of no small sums by divers of your
nobility here present, all which with the former I have sacrificed to
the love and honour of my dread sovereign, amounting to the sum of three
score thousand pounds sterling, and can your Majesty (saith he) desire
to sit by a fire of more sweet scent and savour? At this the King was
much extasi'd and the rather because it came unexpectedly and from so
free a spirit, and embracing him in his arms said unto him that he
thought never King had such a subject, and at his departure did him all
the grace and honour that could descend from a King to a subject,
promising him moreover that he should ever stand in the first rank of
those whom he favoured. And so the Lord Mayor bearing the sword before
their two most sacred Majesties as far as Temple Bar the King for his
former service and his most kind and loving entertainment at that time,
and the noble men for that extraordinary courtesie offered them all
unitely (_sic_) and unanimously commended his goodness, applauded his
bounty and wished that he might live to perpetual memory and so bid both
him and the City for that time adieu.

To omit all other circumstances having acquainted you with the poor and
mean estate of this Sir Richard Whittington when he came first into the
City of London, and by what means he was relieved in his miserable
poverty, as also the fortunate success of his small adventure whereby he
was raised unto so great honour, that he became the Cities Governour,
and how discreetly and wisely he behaved in his authority and office,
gaining thereby the love and probation (_sic_) of all men. And further
having shewed you what goodly buildings have been raised by his great
cost and charge, as one church, two colledges, and certain almshouses,
with yearly means left for the maintenance of all such as shall be
admitted into them, and many other charitable acts performed by him
which are before related, to the great good and benefit of the City, and
what things of note happened in his time, I will now conclude with
Master Stow, O that London had a Park near adjoining to it, stored with
such Deer (as doubtless it hath, though not easily known) for some build
Alms houses, free schools, causies and Bridges in needful and necessary
places, others repair ruinated and decayed churches, relieving Hospitals
in a bountiful manner, and are weekly benefactors to Prisons and those
performed by such agents faithfully, that the true bestowers are not
publicly noted, howsoever they may be easily supposed. But the glory
they seek to invade here will (no doubt) for ever shine on them
elsewhere. And that great God who hath created us, and plentifully
distributed in his great bounty all things to men, and yet not given all
things to any one man, lest it might take away that necessary commerce
and mutual society which ought to be amongst us, stir up the minds of
more of them to imitate at least, though not to exceed them in their
bounty and liberality.


FINIS.






End of Project Gutenberg's The History of Sir Richard Whittington, by T. H.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF SIR RICHARD ***

***** This file should be named 17652.txt or 17652.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/6/5/17652/

Produced by Julie Barkley, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

