The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Prairie Farmer, Vol. 56, No. 2, January
12, 1884, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Prairie Farmer, Vol. 56, No. 2, January 12, 1884
       A Weekly Journal for the Farm, Orchard and Fireside

Author: Various

Release Date: February 5, 2006 [EBook #17683]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRAIRIE FARMER, VOL. 56 ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







PRAIRIE FARMER

A Weekly Journal for

THE FARM, ORCHARD, AND FIRESIDE.

ESTABLISHED IN 1841.
ENTIRE SERIES: VOL. 56--NO. 2.

CHICAGO, SATURDAY, JANUARY 12, 1884.

PRICE, $2.00 PER YEAR,
IN ADVANCE.




[Transcriber's Note: The Table of Contents was originally located on
page 24 of the periodical. It has been moved here for ease of use.]


THE CONTENTS OF THIS NUMBER.

AGRICULTURE--Dew and Soil Moisture, Page 17; Specialty in Farming, 17;
Public Squares in Small Cities, 17-18; Farm Names, 18; Diogenes In His
Tub, 18; Field and Furrow, 18-19; Agricultural Organizations, 19; Didn't
No. 38 Die Hard, 19; A Grange Temple, 19.

LIVE STOCK--Items, Page 20; Swine Statistics, 20; Iowa Stock Breeders,
20; The Horse and His Treatment, 20; Items, 20-21.

THE DAIRY--Winter Feed for Cows, Page 21; Churning Temperature, 21; Seas
of Milk, 21.

VETERINARY--About Soundness, Page 21; Questions Answered, 21.

HORTICULTURE--The Hedge Question, Page 22; Young Men Wanted, 22;
Possibilities of Iowa Cherry Growing, 22-23; Prunings, 23.

FLORICULTURE--Gleanings by an Old Florist, Page 23.

EDITORIAL--Items, Page 24; Illinois State Board, 24-25; Sorghum at
Washington, 25; The Cold Spell, 25; American Ash, 25; Wayside Notes, 25;
Letter from Champaign, 25.

POULTRY NOTES--A Duck Farm, Page 26.

THE APIARY--Apiary Appliances, Page 26; What Should be Worked For, 26.

SCIENTIFIC--The Star of Bethlehem, Page 27.

HOUSEHOLD--How the Robin Came, Poem, Page 28; After Twenty Years, 28;
Will Readers Try It, 28; The Secret of Longevity, 28; How the Inventor
Plagues His Wife, 28; Recipes, 28; Pamphlets, etc., Received, 28.

YOUNG FOLKS--The City Cat, Poem, Page 29; Amusing Tricks, 29; Bright
Sayings, 29; Compiled Correspondence, 29.

LITERATURE--The Wrong Pew, Poem, Page 30; Yik Kee, 30-31.

HUMOROUS--"A Leedle Mistakes," Page 31; Sharper Than a Razor, 31; A
Coming Dividend, 31.

NEWS OF THE WEEK--Page 31.

MARKETS--Page 32.




DEW AND SOIL MOISTURE.


Bulletin No. 6 of Missouri Agricultural College Farm is devoted to an
account of experiments intended to demonstrate the relation of dew to
soil moisture. Prof. Sanborn has prosecuted his work with that patience
and faithfulness characteristic of him, and the result is of a most
interesting and useful nature.

The Professor begins by saying that many works on physics, directly or
by implication, assert that the soil, by a well-known physical law,
gains moisture from the air by night. One author says "Cultivated soils,
on the contrary (being loose and porous), very freely radiate by night
the heat which they absorb by day; in consequence of which they are much
cooled down and plentifully condense the vapor of air into dew." Not all
scientific works, however, make this incautious application of the fact
that dew results from the condensation of moisture of the air in contact
with cooler bodies. Farmers have quite universally accepted the view
quoted, and believe that soils gain moisture by night from the air. This
gain is considered of very great importance in periods of droughts, and
is used in arguments favoring certain methods of tillage.

Professor Stockbridge, in 1879, at the Massachusetts Agricultural
College, carried on very valuable and full experiments in test of this
general belief, and arrived at results contradictory of this belief. He
found, in a multitude of tests, that in every instance, save one, for
the months from May to November, that the surface soil from one to five
inches deep, was warmer than the air instead of cooler, as the law
requires for condensation of moisture from the air. That exception was
in the center of a dense forest, under peculiar atmospheric conditions.
After noting these facts, ingenious methods were employed to test more
directly the proposition that soil gains moisture from the air by night,
with the result that he announced that soils lose moisture by night.
Professor Stockbridge's efforts met with some criticism, and his
conclusions did not receive the wide acceptance that his view of the
question justifies. In reasoning from observation, Professor Stockbridge
noted that the bottom of a heap of hay, during harvesting, would be wet
in the morning, the under side of a board wet in the morning, and so of
the other objects named. In the progress of tillage experiments related
in his Bulletins Nos. 3 and 5, Prof. Sanborn's attention was again
called to this question, resulting in the prosecution of direct tests of
the soil moisture itself. When completed it is thought that there will
then no longer be occasion to reason from assumed premises regarding the
matter. The trials were begun late, and under disadvantages; and are to
be understood as preliminary to more complete tests during 1884. The
experiments were all conducted upon a soil bare of vegetation.

Prof. Sanborn concludes from his experiments thus far that the surface
gains moisture from soil beneath it by capillary action, but gathers
nothing from the air. This is made strongly probable, if not shown;
first, because the soil is warmer by night than the air. (He relies upon
other facts than his own for this assertion.) 2nd. Because he found more
moisture in the soil when covered over night than when left bare. 3d.
Because when hoed, thereby disturbing capillary action, he found less
moisture than when unhoed, in surface soil. Finally, he concludes the
position proven, for, when he shut off the upward flow of water to the
surface of the soil, he found not only less moisture above the cut off
or in the surface soil than where no disturbance of capillary action
had been made, but actually less moisture in the surface soil than the
night before. Strongly corroborating this conclusion is the fact that
all of the tests conspire to show that the gain of moisture in the
surface of the soil by night is traceable to one source, and only one
source.

[Illustration: AMERICAN ASH.--See Page 25.]

The facts of this bulletin accord with the previous ones in showing that
mulching and frequent shallow tillage economize the moisture of the soil
and add new proof of this to those already given.




SPECIALTY IN FARMING.


This subject in my estimation should begin to attract attention,
especially among the large land owners and farmers of the West. If we
study the whole catalogue of money-making enterprises and money-making
men, we find that the greatest success has been attained where there has
been the greatest concentration on a special line of work. True, it is,
that specialists are subject to unexpected changes of the times, and if
thrown out of their employment are not well prepared for other work, and
yet their chances for success as compared with the "general idea" man
are as ten to one.

For an example look at science. How has it advanced? Is it not by the
invaluable aid of men who have given their whole lives to the solution
of some special problem? It could not be otherwise. If every scientist
had attempted to master the majority of scientific truths before he was
contented to concentrate his time on some special branch of science,
science would have progressed little or none at all. Linnaeus opened the
way in botany, and the world profited by his blunders. But to be
brief--it seems to me that the most successful farmer in the future is
to be the man who can so arrange his work that he is led into the
deepest research on some one branch of farming. He must be a specialist.
He must thoroughly master the raising of fine stock for breeding
purposes, for practical profit and the shambles. Attend stock
associations, and hear witnesses testify on every hand to the
difficulties connected with properly rearing calves for breeding
purposes.

The honest breeder, though full of ideas, acknowledges he knows but very
little on breeding. His time in farm life, for twenty years or more has
been devoted to too many things. Is not the expert swine-grower the
successful man? Books are something, but practical experience is
something more. It matters little however practical the author of a work
on agricultural science may be, unless the man who reads has some
practical experience, his application of the author's truths will be a
total failure.

We insist, therefore, that the successful farmer must be a specialist.
He must devote his time to special more than to general farm work. You
ask me to outline in detail the idea thus advanced. You somewhat
question its practicability. To attempt it might lead to endless
discussion, but let us reduce to example. Farmer A. raises cattle, hogs,
and sheep for breeding purposes, devotes some attention to fine horses,
and keeps thirty-six cows for dairy purposes. Farmer B. devotes his
entire attention to dairying and has invested in dairy cows as much
money as A. has in all his stock. Is it not evident that though each
farmer began life the same year, the latter man will make the most
money, providing the section he is in demands dairy work? It seems to me
so. And if we further place limit on the dairyman's work, we should say
he can not afford, with fifty or seventy-five cows, to give as much
attention to the manufacture of cheese and butter as that work
necessarily demands. Even though he employs a specialist in creamery
work, he himself must be a specialist to some extent. We say to
investing farmers do not put $500 into horses, $500 into fine cattle,
and $500 into swine, but concentrate on one class of stock, and give
that your time.

    J.N. MUNCEY,
    Asst. Ag. Expts. Ag. Col., Ames, Iowa.




PUBLIC SQUARES IN SMALL CITIES.

BY H.W.S. CLEVELAND.


A respectable looking, middle-aged gentleman called upon me not long
since and told me he was a resident of an interior city of some eight or
ten thousand inhabitants, and at a recent public meeting had been
appointed chairman of a committee on the improvement of a small park,
which it was thought might be made an attractive ornamental feature of
the town.

On further inquiry I learned that the proposed park was simply a public
square with a street on each of its four sides, on which fronted the
principal public buildings, stores, etc. It was a dead level, with no
natural features of any kind to suggest the manner of its arrangement,
but they thought it might be made to add to the beauty of the town, and
he had called to ask my advice in regard to it.

As the arrangement of such areas had occupied my thoughts a good deal in
a general way, it occurred to me that this was a good opportunity to
ventilate some opinions I had formed in regard to prevalent errors in
their management, and accordingly I addressed him substantially as
follows:

"It is very rare that the people of any town show a just appreciation of
the value of such an area for ornamental use. Such a piece of ground as
you describe in the very business center of a town must of course
possess great pecuniary value, and the fact that it has been voluntarily
given up and devoted for all time to purposes of recreation and ornament
would lead us to expect that they would at least exercise the same
shrewdness in securing their money's worth, that they do in their
private transactions. They have given this valuable tract for the object
of ornamenting the town by relieving the artificial character of the
buildings and streets by the refreshing verdure of trees and grass and
shrubbery, and that it may afford a place for rest and recreation for
tired wayfarers and laborers, and nurses with their children, and a
pleasant resort for rest and refreshment when the labors of the day are
at an end.

"Its arrangement, therefore, should be such as to set forth these
objects so obviously that no one could look upon the scene without
perceiving it. The trees should be so arranged in groups and in such
varieties as would afford picturesque effects when seen from the
principal points of approach. The paths and open areas should be so
arranged as to prevent the possibility of saving time by a short cut
across, and so provided with seats under the shade of the trees as to
invite to repose, instead of this, in nine cases out of ten, the trees
(if any are planted) are simply set in rows at equal distances, without
the faintest attempt at picturesque effect, and the paths are carried
diagonally across from corner to corner for the express purpose of
affording an opportunity for a short-cut to every one who is hastening
to or from his business. The consequence is that at certain hours the
paths are filled by a hurrying throng whose presence would alone suffice
to banish the effect of repose which should be the ruling spirit of the
place, while at all other times it is comparatively deserted.

"Perhaps these ideas might not be satisfactory to your people, and I
have therefore set them forth somewhat at length in order that you may
understand what I conceive should be the ruling principle of
arrangement."

I perceived that my visitor was somewhat disturbed and it was not till
he had told me, in a kind of half apologetic way, that he did not know
"but what I was pretty nigh right," that he finally informed me that the
square in question was already divided in the manner I described, by
diagonal paths, and moreover that the paths were lined on each side by
rows of well-grown trees.

I could not help inquiring what further laying out it required, and it
then came out that there had been no thought of a re-arrangement of the
component elements of the park in order to give it an expression of
grace or beauty, but they had thought I might be able to make it
attractive by the introduction of rustic arbors and gateways, or perhaps
a fountain or "something of that sort to give it a stylish look."

I gave him an advertising pamphlet containing designs and prices of
garden ornaments, and told him they could select and order whatever they
liked from the manufacturers,--but declined to give any advice which
should connect my name with the work.

I have told this story as the readiest means of setting forth my ideas
of the capabilities of such public areas, and also as an illustration of
prevailing errors in regard to landscape gardening, which most people
seem to think consists solely of extraneous, artificial decoration, by
means of which any piece of ground can be made beautiful, however stiff
and formal may be the arrangement of the trees, shrubbery, and lawns
which give expression to its character as truly as the features of a
human face.

Such squares as I have described are the most common and simple forms of
public parks, and they might and should in all cases constitute not only
a chief ornament of the town, but a most attractive place of resort for
rest and refreshment. Nothing beyond the materials which nature
furnishes is needed for the purpose, but it is essential that these
should be gracefully dispersed, and that they should exhibit a
luxuriant, healthy growth.

Above all we should avoid the introduction of artificial decorations
which are intended to "look pretty." If arbors or rests are needed, let
them be placed at the points where they are obviously required, and be
made of graceful patterns; but do not put elaborate structures of rustic
work where no one will ever use them, and where in a few years they will
be only dilapidated monuments of a futile effort at display.

The Village Improvement Societies which are everywhere springing up
should devote their earliest efforts to the tasteful arrangement and
care of these public ornamental areas, which should form the nucleus and
pattern of the graceful expression which should pervade the streets.




FARM NAMES.


Since the call of THE PRAIRIE FARMER for "something new" I have been
afraid to follow any of the old beaten paths so long traveled by
agricultural writers; and have been on the lookout for the "something
new." Something that does not appear in our agricultural papers, yet of
interest to the fraternity. It matters little how trifling the subject
may be, if it begets an interest in farm or country life; anything that
will make our homes more attractive, more beautiful, and leave a lasting
impression on the minds of the boys and girls that now cluster around
the farmers' hearths throughout this vast country of ours.

There is a beautiful little song entitled, "What is Home Without a
Mother?" which could be supplemented with another of equal interest, to
wit: "What is Home Without a Name?" I answer, a dreary waste of field
and fence, there being nothing in the mind of the absent one to remind
him of his distant home but a lone farm-house, a barn, long lines of
fences, and perhaps a few stunted apple trees; and when he thinks of it,
his whole mind reverts to the hot harvest field, the sweat, the toil,
and the tiresomeness of working those big fields! Nothing attractive, no
pleasant memory. Nothing to draw the mind of the youth to the roof that
sheltered his childhood. No wonder boys and girls yearn for a change.

Then what are we to do to change this for the better. I say give your
country homes a name, no matter how homely or isolated that home may be.
Give each one a name, and let those names be appropriate and musical,
short, sweet, and easily remembered and pronounced, and then, when you
go to visit a neighbor, either on business or pleasure, instead of
saying, I am going to Jones', or to Brown's, or Smith's, let it be, I am
going over to "The Cedars," or, to "Hickory Grove," or, to "Holly Hill."
How much pleasanter it would sound. There would be no mistake about your
destination, there being perhaps half a dozen Jones, Browns, or Smiths
within five miles of your home, but only one "Hickory Hill." Then, when
young folks make up their surprise parties during the long, cold, winter
evenings, in place of notifying each other that they are going to
surprise the James', the Jones', or the Jackson's, it would be, we are
going to surprise "Pleasant Valley" "Viewfield" or "Walnut Hill." Every
member of the surprise party would know the place intended, and the
squads and companies of sleighs with their closely packed loads of
laughing girls, and well filled baskets of good things would begin to
marshal on the several roads that lead towards the trysting place; and
when the merry-makers reach the well trimmed walnut grove from which the
farm takes its name, and march up to the dwelling, instead of shouting:
Mrs. Brown, we greet you, or Uncle Brown, etc., it would be: "Walnut
Hill" we greet you, which would include all the Browns, old and young.

One of the brightest spots in my memory is the remembrance of "Rose
Valley" my childhood's happy home. Every pleasant occurrence of my
boyhood clusters around that never-to-be forgotten name. It has acted
like a guide, a land mark for me through my life; and my great aim in
life has been to make my own home just like dear "Rose Valley." To begin
the work, I have set my own house in order; and the following names
given to the farms under my care will practically illustrate my plan.

-----------------+-------------------------+-----------------------------
  FORMER OWNERS. |       FARM NAMES.       | PRESENT TENANTS.
-----------------+-------------------------+-----------------------------
Thompson Place   | Hickory Ridge           | A. Maddox
Home       "     | Elmwood                 | Mr. Houck's home
Doutey     "     | South Elmwood           | D.Q. Renfrue
Horroll    "     | Gravel Hill             | T.H. Miller
Conran     "     | Cedar Grove             | A. Miller
Casebolt   "     | Millbrook               | C. Blettner
Harness    "     | Burnside                | A. Tunge
Heller     "     | Pleasant Hill           | J.H. Kempf
Lewis      "     | Woodlawn                | W. Lewis
Oaks'      "     | Castle Rock             | Noah Neff
Held       "     | The Glade               | W. Reubelman
Jackson    "     | Beechwald               | G. Edwards
Bottom     "     | Deerfield               | . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benna      "     | The Mound               | R. Oliver
Williams   "     | Blacklands              | W. Mitchel
McGee      "     | Lone Tree               | Tom Miller
Johnson    "     | South Park              | Owen Bush
New Land         | Cedar Cliff             | Peter Heller
 "   "           | Cypress Grove           | Geo. Surlett
Old Homestead    | Middle Park             | Johd Meintz
West of City     | West Park               | Dave Meintz
East of R. By.   | Spring Park             | Jas. Ballinger
Manning Place    | Longview                | Aug. Klemme
Cox       "      | Meadow Hill             | H. Stinehoff
Davis     "      | Lilypond                | Chas. Davis
Renfroe   "      | Beechfield              | I. Renfroe
Ruble     "      | Sycamore Springs        | Mrs. Sarah Miller
Bair             | Clover Hill             | W. Gunter
Edmonson  "      | Riverside               | J.H. Relley
New       "      | Cotton Grove            | W.H. Henson
Garaghty  "      | Wheatland               | J.H. Relley
Price     "      | Roundpond               | W. Miller
Jordan    "      | Parsonage               | Wm. Jackson
Bird      "      | Richwood                | Mrs. Jackson
Laseley   "      | Richland                | W. Lackey
New       "      | Lakeside                | D. Edmunson
New       "      | The Island              | Geo. Laseley
Sexton    "      | Beech Hill              | J.H. Irving
Martin    "      | Creekfield              | Joe Bair
Miss Co   "      | Catalpa Grove           | Geo. Burns
Cramer    "      | Hubbleside              | . . . . . . . . . . . .
Miller    "      | Spring Grove            | A. Miller
Brown     "      | East Gravel Hill        | J.H. Miller
----------------------------------------------------------------------

I give these as samples to guide my brother farmers in selecting names
for their homes. Every one of those farms can be identified by some
local peculiarity, prominent and visible. For instance, Davis place is
situated close to a large pond covered with white lilies. Standing on
the doorsteps of the Manning place you can view a ten-mile stretch of
the Mississippi river, while Mr. Relley's place is situated on the banks
of that great stream. Such names can be multiplied to an indefinite
extent, and duplicated in each county.

If such names were generally in use, it would greatly assist postmasters
in their difficult task of knowing which Smith or Brown was intended.

Now brother farmers, I have moved the adoption of appropriate names for
every farm in the land; who will second the motion? Give your wives and
daughters a chance to name the homestead, and my word for it, it will be
both musical and appropriate. Let us give our children something
pleasant to think of after they have left the dear old home. To afix the
name, paint it on a large board and nail it over your front gate.

    ALEX ROSS,
    CAPE GIRARDEAU, MO.




DIOGENES IN HIS TUB.


Allow me, Messrs. Editors, to give you notes of what I see, and hear,
and learn, and cogitate, and endeavor to inculcate, from my snug little
home in my Tub--will you not?

Well--having your assent, I begin by wishing you all--editors,
correspondents, typos, and "devils"--a Happy New Year, and your
excellent paper unlimited success in 1884, and a long life thereafter.
Next, permit me to advert to the contents of some

RECENT NUMBERS.

First, to the pro and con of pasturing corn-stalks. That is a subject,
like many others, on which much can be said on both sides. Mr. Stahl (in
No. 50) quotes Prof. Sanborn as saying that a ton of corn fodder,
"rightly cured and saved," is worth two-thirds of a ton of good timothy
hay. That may be true; but to be rightly cured and saved it must be
protected from the rains and snows as the hay is; otherwise it will be
as worthless as the corn left standing in the field. Most people who
have cut their corn and left it standing in the shock during the fall
rains, know by experience that large portions of it are rendered
useless. And if we deduct the waste of corn by wet, and by rats and
mice, and the waste of fodder, added to the cost of cutting, it would
seem that a "Subscriber" (in No. 52) has at least a strong side of the
argument. But these men are both right, in a degree. In the East in
cases where the crop is not large, or in the West, and where the
producer has large barns or sheds in which to store his fodder, it had
doubtless best be cut and utilized in that way. But where no such
facilities exist and the crop is large, as usual in the West, I can
conceive of no better way to utilize the product than to feed it where
it grew.


HOW TO RAISE WHEAT.

Prof. Hamilton (see No. 52) has hit the nail squarely on the head in his
essay. I doubt if there has been a more valuable article on
wheat-growing in the public prints, for many a day. It gives a new view
of the question, and in my opinion illustrates, at least in part, why it
was that in the early days of wheat-growing throughout the prairie
States, the crops were so much better than now. Wheat was then sown for
the most part on newly broken prairie sod, and its character was such
that the grain could not be deeply covered, nor could the ground be
heaved so much as in later sowings, when it has been mellowed by deeper
culture. Prof. Hamilton's essay ought to be read by every wheat-grower
in the country. Other valuable articles in No. 52 are those of J.H., on
Corn, Prof. Hall's lecture on Schools, and many others--not omitting
what the two talented ladies say about hens and bees.


COUNTS AND BARONS IN AMERICA.

Some alarm has been manifested in certain quarters, and Congress been
inquired of, concerning the fact that divers European noblemen have been
purchasing large bodies of lands in our public domain. There are no
laws, I believe, to prevent foreign noblemen from acquiring lands in
large or small quantities in our Territories; but it is clearly contrary
to public policy to permit these, or our own capitalists or syndicates
to do this thing. The public lands should be held for actual settlers,
and for them alone; and it is to be hoped that Congress will so amend
the laws as to prevent English or European lords, or American lords,
from acquiring large bodies of land. The Government has been
generous--too generous--to the railroads in the gift of lands; and that
policy ought now to cease, and the roads required to fulfil their side
of the contract to the letter.


MONOPOLY--AGRARIANISM.

In connection with the above, it will do to say, that as monopolies
increase and gain strength, agrarianism also is extending. Legislation
should be so shaped as to check the one, and give no cause for the
other. Good government and strict regard for the rights and interests of
the masses, are the surest means of checking agrarian and nihilistic
tendencies. Had the French monarchy and governing classes been just, the
revolution would have been impossible.


TO CONCLUDE.

It does seem to me that your magnificent offer of your Standard Time or
Commercial Map--worth $2 itself--in connection with THE PRAIRIE FARMER,
all for $2, ought to bring you hosts of subscribers, and that it does is
the hope of

    DIOGENES.




FIELD AND FURROW.


The best temperature to preserve apples, potatoes, turnips, or any other
roots or fruits stored in the cellar, is just above the freezing point.

Stiff, hard clays intended for tillage in the spring ought, by all
means, to be broken up in the fall. A light, sandy soil should, on the
contrary, be suffered to remain unbroken.

A wholesale drug house in Indianapolis, tells the editor of the Drainage
Journal that tile drainage has reduced the sale of quinine and other
fever and ague medicines nearly sixty per cent.

The American Cultivator says that if barley has not germinated the fact
of its having been slightly stained by wet is no actual detriment
whatsoever; the grain is not really injured and ought to bring to the
farmer just as much as the bright samples of equal plumpness.

Dr. E. Lewis Sturtevant, reporting in Bulletin LXXII. of the State
Experiment Station his hybridizing tests during the past season with 135
different kinds of corn, incidentally mentions that "the red ears have a
constancy of color which is truly remarkable; where sweet corn appears
upon red pop and red dent ears the sweet corn partakes of the red
color."

An esteemed exchange suggests, if farmers would go to the barn on a wet
day and spend their time in making an eaves-trough for the barn or
stable, and thereby carry away the drip which would otherwise fall on
the manure pile, causing a waste of the elements of plant food contained
therein, they will make more money that day than they could any fine day
in the field.

American Cultivator: In winter, while the ground is covered with snow
and the soil is frozen deeply, it is sometimes curious to note the
effect of openings leading down to deep underdrains. The snow will be
melted away by the warm air coming up from the unfrozen earth. Even in
an uncovered drain three feet deep, a little straw or loose earth will
generally protect the bottom from severe freezing.

Cincinnati Gazette: There are so many excellencies about the cow pea,
and it is good for so many uses, that we advise our Ohio, Indiana, and
Kentucky farmers to be sure and cultivate it this year. Next spring,
when all danger of frost is over, sow, plant, or drill more or less of
these valuable peas, and, in the language of the elder Weller, "you'll
be glad on it arterwards," and so will your live stock.

New England Homestead: Nearly level culture, hand-hoeing and slightly
hilling but once, and keeping the cultivator running, was recommended at
the Waterbury meeting as the best culture for potatoes. It was said that
the second hilling induced a second growth of roots higher up on the
plant which produced small tubers. If this is not done the additional
growth will make large potatoes.

Cincinnati Gazette: During sundry recent visits to Tennessee, we noticed
that a considerable share of the immigrants arriving were from Michigan.
They are mostly of the second generation from the settlers from the East
in that State--men in the prime of life, who are seeking cheap lands in
a genial climate, where the pastoral, dairy, and fruit-raising pursuits
to which they are accustomed may be pursued with perfect success.
Michigan farmers are usually intelligent, practical workers, who
understand their profession and like it. They, and such as they,
appreciate the advantages they will enter upon in their new homes at the
South.

New England Farmer: Prof. Goessmann, as Director of the State Experiment
Station, has been analyzing a sample of rye hay, sent to the Station by
Secretary Russell of the State Board of Agriculture. The sample was not
cut till in full bloom, but Prof. Goessmann finds it compares well in
nutritive value with a medium good quality of meadow hay. This agrees
with our own estimate of well cured rye hay, judged by its effect in
practical feeding to stock. Animals usually have to learn to eat it
heartily, as they do many other kinds of coarse fodder which are
inferior to the best hay. Rye should be cut before it comes in full
bloom, to obtain the greatest feeding value from the fodder. It is then
liked better, and a larger per cent will be digested.

Republican, Manhattan, Kan.: In traveling through a considerable portion
of the country this week, we noticed that the wheat looked exceedingly
promising. The contrast between the green fields and the dry grass and
naked trees was cheering to behold. Cattle are in good condition; most
of the farmers are provided with sheds or shelter of some sort to
protect the animals, but we saw some small bunches of young cattle
standing in unprotected enclosures shivering from the north wind; it is
cruel to take them through the winter without so much as a wind break to
turn off the scorching blasts. Surely every farmer can afford to build a
wind break, at least a pile of brush and old hay, around the stock
yards. The cost would be more than made up in the saving of feed.

They are growing some pretty heavy crops of wheat in New Hampshire. The
Lebanon Free Press reports that Harlan Flint, of Hanover, raised this
year eighty bushels of wheat on five acres of ground, and Uel Spencer,
of the same town, 206 bushels from four and a half acres, while the town
farm crop averaged forty-three bushels per acre. That raised by Mr.
Flint was winter wheat, and Spencer's White Russian. A Meredith
correspondent of the Laconia Democrat says that eight farms adjoining
each other, in that town, have produced this year 524 bushels of wheat.
Reports from all sections of the State show that a great yield of wheat
has been secured wherever the crop has been sown. Perhaps by the time
the prairie skinners of the Northwest have spread over all the wheat
bearing land this side of the Rocky Mountains, they may begin the New
England States and travel the continent over again.

Correspondent Farm and Fireside: There is nothing so much needed about
many houses as good walks in paths that must be used daily. There is
hardly an excuse for not having them when either brick, gravel, or
timber can be had. A good walk through muddy yards can be easily and
cheaply made by placing poles side by side, a short distance apart, and
then filling the intervening space with gravel, or with broken corn
cobs, or with sawdust. Oak planks will last many years, if turned over
occasionally, and this also counteracts warping. One of the best of
walks through a level barn-yard can be made by cutting off short pieces
from logs, a foot or more in diameter, and setting them upon end in a
shallow trench. Such a walk from the barn to the kitchen will always be
clean, and there will be less to disturb the temper of the women folks
of the household, to say nothing of the good effect upon the men folks
who take pleasure in lightening the labor required to keep everything
neat and tidy within doors.




AGRICULTURAL ORGANIZATIONS.


[_Officers and members of farmers' organizations of all kinds are
invited to send for publication in this department notices of meetings,
time of holding fairs, and other pertinent information. We desire to
make of it a weekly bulletin that shall be looked for with interest by
members of clubs, granges, fair associations, and agricultural and
horticultural societies._]


The Maine State Grange has elected the following officers: Master,
Frederick Robie, of Gorham; Overseer, H.E. Gregory, of Hampden;
Lecturer, D.H. Thing, of Vernon.


At a meeting of the Wisconsin State Grange resolutions were passed
requesting the Legislature to separate the State Agricultural Experiment
Farm from the State University, and to locate it in an agricultural
district.


At the Vermont State Grange's annual meeting at Brattleboro, December
13-14, 1883, 72 granges were represented. For the first time since the
organization of the grange its doors were opened to the public, and the
State Board of Agriculture met with it. Worthy Master Franklin's address
revealed a healthy condition of the Order in Vermont.


The meeting of the Massachusetts State Grange was an excellent one.
Master Draper was again re-elected. The committees' reports and
discussions revealed a hearty interest in and sympathy with the
experimental station and the agricultural college, but the present
system by which the college trustees perpetuate themselves was sharply
criticised, and a change in the law was recommended. It was also
"Resolved, that as Patrons of Husbandry, we recommend such a change in
the law as will withhold the State bounty from all societies that permit
liquor selling or gambling at their annual fairs."


The annual meeting of the Michigan Grange last month was largely
attended. The Secretary's report showed the grange to be in good
condition. The committee on the agricultural college recommended the
admission of girls to that institution. Reports were adopted
recommending the restoration of the duty on wool, so that it shall equal
that on manufactured woolen articles; urged that taxpayers be required
to make oath to their assessments; recommended the continued fostering
of the sorghum industry; condemned the extortionate practices of many
millers in the State, urging co-operative mills if necessary to remedy
the same, and asks the appointment of a committee to draft a bill
similar to the Reagan bill to remedy some of the evils of
transportation.




DIDN'T NO. 38 DIE HARD!


New England Homestead: "The eminent men"--George B. Loring, Daniel
Needham, Charles L. Flint, Benjamin P. Ware, and George Noyes--composing
the late Massachusetts grange No. 38, couldn't appreciate what had
happened to them when the State Master's action in revoking the charter
of their grange was sustained by the National Grange tribunal. So
Brother Ware hied him to Barre, last week, to bring the matter up before
the State Grange at its annual session. No doubt the "eminent men"
supposed that the presence of the Hon. Mr. Ware would alone be
sufficient to cause the State Grange to tremble and humbly beg pardon
for their Master's action in disturbing the serenity of this mutual
admiration society. Alas, pride must have a fall! Judge of the
consternation of these "eminent men" when the State Grange unanimously
refused admittance to Brother Ware because he was a suspended member!
Now if the honorable delegate from No. 38 deceased had known when he was
"set on," he would have silently packed his grip sack and returned to
the secrecy of the obscure agricultural newspaper office at 45 Milk
street, Boston, the "headquarters" of the corpse of No. 38. But like all
"eminent men" he made a grave mistake. At a subsequent session he
induced a friend to move that he be given a hearing, but the grange
again voted against taking any further action in the matter. This double
rebuff was effectual. With his hopes dashed to the ground, the honorable
suspended brother crept sadly away to the depot, and when last seen was
trying to derive some consolation from his flattering picture as it
appeared in the Homestead of December 15.

As our able contemporary, the Maine Farmer remarks, it was a triumph of
principle, proving that the grange recognizes no aristocracy. Thus may
it ever be!




A GRANGE TEMPLE.


At its last meeting the National Grange determined to enter upon the
work of erecting, in Washington city, a building in which the records
and archives of the Order may be preserved. It is proposed to raise the
money needful to erect such a building in a way which shall enlist the
brotherhood at large, and yet not to be burdensome to even the least
wealthy of the members. The National Grange asks each subordinate grange
to solicit from every name on its roll a contribution of not less than
fifty cents. The money so collected is to be kept separate from all
other funds, and is to be used for no other purpose than the building of
a Grange Home in Washington. The treasurer of the National Grange is
directed to procure a book in which the names of all contributors, and
the sums contributed, shall be properly entered. In due time a
building-fund certificate will be prepared, containing an engraving of
the building, and such other devices as may be agreed upon, and a copy
of the same will be sent to every individual who donates the sum of
fifty cents or more.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLUB RATES.

TO OUR READERS.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER is the OLDEST, MOST RELIABLE, and the LEADING
AGRICULTURAL JOURNAL OF THE GREAT NORTHWEST, devoted exclusively to the
interests of the Farmer, Gardener, Florist, Stock Breeder, Dairyman,
Etc., and every species of industry connected with that great portion of
the People of the World, the PRODUCERS. Now in the Forty-Fourth Year
of its existence, and never, during more than two score years, having
missed the regular visit to its patrons, it will continue to maintain
supremacy as A STANDARD AUTHORITY ON MATTERS PERTAINING TO AGRICULTURE
AND KINDRED PRODUCTIVE INDUSTRIES, and as a FRESH AND READABLE FAMILY
AND FIRESIDE JOURNAL. It will from time to time add new features of
interest, securing for each department the ablest writers of practical
experience.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER will discuss, without fear or favor, all topics of
interest properly belonging to a Farm and Fireside Paper, treat of the
most approved practices in AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE, BREEDING, ETC.;
the varied Machinery, Implements, and improvements in same, for use both
in Field and House; and, in fact, everything of interest to the
Agricultural community, whether in FIELD, MARKET, OR HOME CIRCLE.

IT WILL GIVE INFORMATION UPON THE PUBLIC DOMAIN, WESTERN SOILS,
CLIMATE, ETC.; ANSWER INQUIRIES on all manner of subjects which come
within its sphere; GIVE each week, full and RELIABLE MARKET, CROP,
AND WEATHER REPORTS; PRESENT the family with choice and INTERESTING
LITERATURE; amuse and INSTRUCT THE YOUNG FOLKS; AND, in a word, aim
to BE, in every respect, AN INDISPENSABLE AND UNEXCEPTIONABLE farm
and fireside COMPANION.

Terms of Subscription and 'Club Rates':

ONE COPY, 1 YEAR, postage paid      $ 2.00

TWO COPIES, "   "  "                  3.75

FIVE  "  "   sent at one time         8.75

TEN   "  "   sent at one time, and
        one to Club getter           16.00

TWENTY "  "   sent at one time, and
               one to Club getter    30.00

Address

The Prairie Farmer Publishing Co.,
Chicago. Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SHEPHERD'S MANUAL
A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE SHEEP.

Designed Especially for American Shepherds
BY HENRY STEWART.

Finely Illustrated

PRICE, $1.50, by mail, postpaid. Address

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

FARM MACHINERY, ETC.

NICHOLS' CENTENNIAL WIND MILL.

[Illustration]

Contains all the valuable features of his old "Nichols' Mills" with none
of their defects. This is the only balanced mill without a vane. It is
the only mill balanced on its center. It is the only mill built on
correct scientific principles so as to govern perfectly.

ALL VANES

Are mechanical devices used to overcome the mechanical defect of forcing
the wheel to run out of its natural position.

A wind wheel becomes its own vane if no vane is used, hence, vanes--save
only to balance the wheel--are useless for good, and are only useful to
help blow the mill down.

This mill will stand a heavier wind, run steadier, last longer, and crow
louder than any other mill built. Our confidence in the mill warrants us
in offering the first mill in each county where we have no agent, at
agents' prices and on 30 days' trial.

Our power mills have 25 per cent more power than any mill with a vane.
We have also a superior feed mill adapted to wind or other power. It is
cheap, durable, efficient. For circulars, mills, and agencies, address

NICHOLS & DAGGETT, ELGIN, ILL.

(Successors to the Batavia Manf. Co., of Batavia, Ill.)

       *       *       *       *       *

CHICAGO SCALE CO.

2 TON WAGON SCALE, $40. 3 TON, $50.

4 TON $60, BEAM BOX INCLUDED.

240 lb. FARMER'S SCALE, $5.

The "Little Detective," 1/4 oz. to 25 lb. $3.

300 OTHER SIZES. Reduced PRICE LIST FREE.

FORGES, TOOLS, &c.

BEST FORGE MADE FOR LIGHT WORK, $10.

40 LB. ANVIL AND KIT OF TOOLS, $10.

FARMERS SAVE TIME AND MONEY DOING ODD JOBS.

Blowers, Anvils, Vices & Other Articles

AT LOWEST PRICES, WHOLESALE & RETAIL.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PROFIT FARM BOILER

is simple, perfect, and cheap; THE BEST FEED COOKER; the only dumping
boiler; empties its kettle in a minute. OVER 5,000 IN USE; Cook your
corn and potatoes, and save one-half the cost of pork. Send for
circular. D.B. SPERRY & CO., BATAVIA, ILLINOIS.

       *       *       *       *       *

EVAPORATING FRUIT

FULL TREATISE on improved methods, yields, profits, prices and general
statistics, free.

    AMERICAN M'FG CO.
    WAYNESBORO
    FRANKLIN COUNTY, PA.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOOSIER AUGER TILE MILL.

[Illustration: Mills on hand.

Prompt delivery.]

FOR PRICES AND CIRCULARS, ADDRESS NOLAN, MADDEN & CO., RUSHVILLE, IND.

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE BEST IS THE CHEAPEST."

ENGINES
SAW MILLS, THRESHERS,
HORSE POWERS,

(For all sections and purposes.) Write for FREE Pamphlet and Prices to
The Aultman & Taylor Co., Mansfield, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MODERN HORSE DOCTOR.

CONTAINING Practical Observations on the Causes Nature and
Treatment of Diseases and Lameness in Horses, by GEO. H. DADD,
M.D. Will be sent upon receipt of price, $1.50; or free to any
sender of three subscribers to this paper, at $2 each, by

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAPS.

RAND, McNALLY & CO.'S
NEW RAILROAD
--AND--
COUNTY MAP
--OF THE--
UNITED STATES
--AND--
DOMINION OF CANADA.

Size, 4 x 2-1/2 feet, mounted on rollers to hang on the wall. This is an

ENTIRELY NEW MAP,

Constructed from the most recent and authentic sources.

--IT SHOWS--
_ALL THE RAILROADS,_
--AND--
EVERY COUNTY AND PRINCIPAL TOWN
--IN THE--
UNITED STATES AND CANADA.

A useful Map in every one's home, and place of business. PRICE, $2.00.

Agents wanted, to whom liberal inducements will be given. Address

RAND, McNALLY & CO.,
Chicago, Ill.

By arrangements with the publishers of this Map we are enabled to make
the following liberal offer: To each person who will remit us $2.25 we
will send copy of THE PRAIRIE FARMER One Year and THIS MAP POSTPAID.
Address

    PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
            CHICAGO, ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

DRAINAGE.

PRACTICAL FARM DRAINAGE.

WHY, WHEN, and HOW TO TILE-DRAIN
--AND THE--
MANUFACTURE OF DRAIN-TILE.

By C.G. ELLOITT and J.J.W. BILLINGSLEY

PRICE, ONE DOLLAR.

For sale by

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
150 Monroe St., Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

[Illustration: FERRY'S SEED ANNUAL FOR 1884]

Will be mailed FREE TO ALL applicants and to customers of last year
without ordering it. It contains illustrations, prices, descriptions and
directions for planting all Vegetable and Flower Seeds, Plants, etc.
INVALUABLE TO ALL.

D.M. FERRY & CO. DETROIT, MICH.

       *       *       *       *       *

AGENTS make over ONE hundred per cent. profit selling the

REFLECTING SAFETY LAMP

which can be sold in every family. Gives more light than three ordinary
lamps. SAMPLE LAMP SENT FOR FIFTY CENTS IN STAMPS. We have other
household articles. Send for circulars.

FORSEE & MCMAKIN, CINCINNATI, O.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS

SEED CORN

FOR SALE.

A large quantity of first-class, selected Iowa seed corn, in large or
small quantities. Address

    _MITCHELL VINCENT,_
    Onawa, Iowa.

Please state you saw ad in this paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Great Musical Wonder of the Age.

A STEM-WINDING MUSICAL WATCH.

Each Watch is finely made, silver plated, and a _complete and
sweet-toned Musical Instrument_. Size and shape of an ordinary Watch,
and has a Music Box attachment concealed within, so arranged that when
wound at the stem plays one of the following tunes: "Wait till the
Clouds Roll By," "Carnival of Venice," "Blue Bells of Scotland," "Home,
Sweet Home," "Coming Through the Rye," "Swanee River," Waltz, Polka,
Schottische, etc. The notes, time, and tones are correct. It will please
both old and young, and is truly the _Greatest Novelty_ ever offered to
the American public.

OUR SPECIAL OFFER.

In order to introduce our large Illustrated Family Story Paper entitled
YOUTH into every home in the Union where it is not a visitor, we are
making this extraordinary offer: Upon receipt of 40 CENTS (or 20
two-cent postage stamps), we will send our paper for the next THREE
MONTHS on trial, and this _Musical Watch_ as an absolute _Free Gift_.
Just think of it! A _Music Box_ and our large 16 page paper _three
months_ for _only_ 40 cents. For a club of 3 and $1.00 will send three
subscriptions and three _Musical Watches_. This is a chance of a
life-time. Write to-day.

Address, YOUTH PUBLISHING CO., 27 DOANE ST., BOSTON, MASS.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOPE FOR THE DEAF.

PECK'S PATENT TUBULAR CUSHIONED EAR DRUMS cure Deafness in all stages.
Recommended by scientific men of Europe and America. Write for
_illustrated descriptive book_ and testimonials from doctors, judges,
ministers and prominent men and women who have been cured, and who _take
pleasure in recommending them_. They are unseen while in use,
comfortable to wear, and make a permanent cure. Address.--WEST & CO., 7
MURRAY ST., NEW-YORK, AGENTS FOR SOUTH AND WEST.

       *       *       *       *       *

FAY GRAPES

Currant HEAD-QUARTERS.

ALL BEST, NEW AND OLD.

SMALL FRUITS AND TREES. LOW TO DEALERS AND PLANTERS.

Stock First-Class. Free Catalogues.

GEO. S. JOSSELYN, Fredonia, N.Y.

REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _one year, and the
subscriber gets a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED
STATES, FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any
first-class weekly agricultural paper in this country._

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

LIVE STOCK DEPARTMENT.

Stockmen, Write for Your Paper.


Hon. A.M. Garland is expected home from Australia about the first of
February.

       *       *       *       *       *

Col. J.W. Judy & Son, the popular thoroughbred cattle auctioneers of
Tallula, Ill., last year sold 2,057 head of cattle for $500,620.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ohio Jersey cattle-breeders will hold a convention at Columbus, on the
15th. The Short-horn breeders of the State will meet at the same city on
the same day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. C. Huston, Blandinsville, Ill., has gone to Scotland to purchase
Clydesdale horses. He expects to be gone about half the year, and will
make several shipments.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wm. Yule, Esq., the well-known Short-horn breeder, of Somers, Kenosha
county, Wisconsin, names, through THE PRAIRIE FARMER, March 19th prox.,
for his public sale for 1884.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the annual meeting of the American Guernsey Cattle Club, held at the
Fifth Avenue Hotel, New York, December 20th, Dr. J. Nelson Borland, New
London, Conn., was re-elected President; Edward Norton was chosen
Secretary and Treasurer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three new cases of pleuro-pneumonia were recently discovered near West
Chester, Penn. Thus far the disease has been confined to three dairy
herds. All infected animals are promptly appraised, condemned, killed
and paid for by the State. The disease was introduced there by cows
purchased at Baltimore.

       *       *       *       *       *

The twenty-ninth volume of the new series of Coates' Short-horn
Herd-Book has just been published by the English Short-horn Society. It
contains the pedigrees of bulls ranging from (47311) to (48978). The
larger half of the volume is devoted to the entry of cows with their
produce. Each breeder's entries of females are recorded together under
his own name. Her Majesty the Queen heads the list, followed by the
Prince of Wales.

       *       *       *       *       *

The offices of the American Short-horn Breeders' Association in Chicago
were badly damaged by fire on Sunday, December 30. Some 1,500 pedigrees
were destroyed and many others partially destroyed. Pedigrees received
previous to December 20th, were saved. It will take time and work to
restore these pedigrees and the loss must cause some delay in the work
of the office. It will be remembered that the records of the association
had a narrow escape at the time the Evening Journal office burned.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following are the officers of the National Chester-White Swine
Record Co. for 1883: Hon. Jack Hardin, Pleasureville, Ky., President;
H.W. Tonkins, Fenton, Mo., Vice-President; W.B. Wilson, Eminence, Ky.,
Treasurer; E.R. Moody, Eminence, K., Secretary. The capital stock of the
company is $5,000, in shares of $10 each. Fees are charged as follows:
Book of 100 blank pedigrees, with stub for private record and
instructions for filling, $1; for entry in Record, each pedigree, $1;
stockholders, 75 cents; Record will be furnished at cost of publication.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the late meeting of the American Merino Sheep Register Association at
Burlington, Wis., the following officers were chosen: President, C.S.
Miller, Caldwell, Wis.; First Vice-President, Daniel Kelly, Wheaton,
Ill.; Second Vice-President, F.C. Gault, East Hubbardton, Vt.;
Secretary, A.H. Craig, Caldwell, Wis.; Treasurer, George Andrews,
Mukwonago, Wis.; Directors, C.A. Dingman, Troy Center, Wis.; G.B. Rhead,
Norvell, Mich.; George Peck, Geneva, Ill.; E. Campbell, Pittsfield,
Ohio; S.D. Short, Honeoye, N.Y.; John S. Goe, Brownsville. Pa.; F.C.
Gault, East Hubbardton, Vt.; E.F. Gilman, Farmington, Me.; Ward Kennedy,
Butler, Ind.; A. Wilson, Richfield, Minn.; Fayette Holmes, Russell,
Kan.; H.J. Chamberlain, Davilla, Tex. Registering committee, T.W.
Gault, Waterford, Wis.; C.A. Dingman, Troy Center, Wis.; Perry Craig,
Caldwell, Wis.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here is an excellent prize winning record: S.H. Todd, of Wakeman, Ohio,
won on Chester-Whites and Poland-Chinas in 1883 as follows: At the
Tri-State Fair, at Toledo, O., sweepstakes for best herd of
Poland-Chinas, and the same on Chester-Whites. At the Michigan State
Fair he took sweepstakes on Chester-White boar; at the Illinois State
Fair, sweepstakes, for best Poland-China sow; do. for Chester-White sow,
and the grand sweepstakes of $50 for the best herd on the ground
regardless of breed. He also won in breeders' ring the prize for best
herd of Chesters, and the prize for best boar with five of his get; also
first and second prizes for sow with five of her pigs. Besides these
notable premiums Mr. Todd's stock won for him nearly 100 class prizes at
various leading fairs.




SWINE STATISTICS.


One of the Chicago dailies recently made the point that this city should
be the center of the swine and pork statistics of the country on the
ground that here is the center of trade in these products. The point is
a good one. Some years ago the bulk of the hogs of the West was marketed
at Cincinnati. At that time the Price Current of Cincinnati with
commendable enterprize established itself as an authority in swine and
pork statistics, and it has held the position from that day to this,
despite the fact that Chicago has for several years received and packed
several times as many hogs annually as has the original porkopolis. And
this year, as usual, the Chicago press is dependent upon Cincinnati for
packing statistics throughout the extensive swine-growing regions of the
country. Of course it makes no real difference to merchants or producers
where the figures emanate from so that they are comprehensive and
reliable. It is only a bit of local pride that suggests the idea that
here should the records be kept and the statistics compiled. If there is
not sufficient enterprize here to capture the business, there is no
ground for complaint. We should not have alluded to the matter,
probably, but for the fact that the Cincinnati Price Current, with its
hog-packing statistics, for the season of 1883 has just brought it to
notice. Here the figures are compared with those of last year:

Cities.                           1883-84.   1882-83.

Chicago, packed                  1,405,000  1,500,000
Kansas City                        254,059    233,336
Cincinnati                         301,000    300,000
St. Louis                          200,000    207,000
Indianapolis                       181,700    183,000
Milwaukee                          185,000    197,000
Louisville, Ky.                    142,000    118,000
Cedar Rapids, Iowa                  91,618     86,965
Cleveland, O.                       62,280     42,352
Keokuk, Iowa                        28,601     31,411




IOWA STOCK BREEDERS.


The Iowa State Improved Stock Breeders' Association had a good
attendance at its annual meeting at Ames, last month.


SHEEP.

Hon. J. Kennedy read a paper on the subject "Will Sheep Breeding Pay."
Viewed from a financial point of view, he thought there had been no
better financial results from any commodity than from the sheep--the
wool and mutton--when given proper care and attention. Speculators and
traffickers in wool and woolen goods were failing all over the country,
but he attributed this to want of fitness for the business in which they
were engaged. Though the present depression in the wool market was
somewhat due to tariff tinkering, was more the result of
over-production--greater supply than demand.

Mr. Grinnell said that at one time he was the owner of a flock of 6,000
sheep, but wool went down in price, and he did not think it profitable
to keep so large a flock, and sold out.

Col. Lucas believed the owner of 160 acres of land could not do better
than to put upon the tract at least 100 sheep.

Hon. E. Campbell had found the business profitable where flocks were
fairly dealt with. He thought Iowa one of the best places in the world
in which to raise sheep. He believed that both sheep and cattle could be
profitably kept upon the same farm. His favorite cross is Cotswold and
Merino. The average weight of fleece in his own flock was over six
pounds.


SWINE.

Col. John Scott introduced the subject of swine by reading a compilation
of historical facts regarding them. He presented drawings, showing the
different breeds and the improvements made in them, in form and size.

Mr. Failor spoke of the Jersey-Reds as his favorite breed for docility
and other essentials.

Prof. Knapp said the most profitable hogs are those with sound
constitutions, good muscular systems, of early maturity, and in general
made to resist diseases which prevail from time to time, all over the
country.

Mr. Young said that when we want an animal for the farm, we must first
look to soundness of constitution. Breed is not of so much consequence.
A breed should not be run after merely because it is novel. He breeds
Poland-Chinas. In order to gain the most prolific breeding, the sows of
this breed should not be allowed to get too fat before dropping the
first litter; simply keep them in good condition.

C.R. Smith thought early breeding injurious to the swine interests of
the country.

H.W. Lathrop asserted that the forcing system of putting on meat had
injured the constitutions of many of our breeds of hogs. In times past,
when less pampering was in vogue and hogs were allowed wide range, there
was less disease than now.


CATTLE.

Mr. Clarkson, of Des Moines, read a paper entitled "Plain and Practical
Thoughts for Common Farmers." It treated of the breeding and care of
cattle.

Mr. Roberts said the more care there is bestowed upon cattle, the more
profitable they are. He had bred up from a good Short-horn bull. Other
members agreed upon the necessity of improving the grade of cattle. The
best demand is always for the best stock.

Hon. J.B. Grinnell read his paper upon the extent of the cattle interest
and the necessity of protecting our cattle from contagious diseases, in
this connection, the following resolutions were passed:

    Resolved, That we earnestly urge upon Congress, in view of
    the fact, the cattle interest is one of the most important
    industries, the justice and expediency of passing laws
    providing for an effectual eradication of pleuro-pneumonia
    from the entire territory of the United States, and also
    preventing the introduction of all contagious diseases in the
    future. This is the only authority to which we can go for the
    power for this purpose, as Congress has the exclusive power
    to regulate commerce with other nations, as well as among the
    several States; and, as there is now no law in any of the
    States to prevent any man who has a herd infected with a
    malignant, contagious disease, from taking them anywhere he
    pleases to the herds of any of the States; to prevent which,
    there must be a law more comprehensive in territorial power
    and extent than any State has. Therefore, it is of the most
    vital importance that the authority to regulate inter-State
    commerce should promptly act to protect our great cattle
    interest from total annihilation.

    Resolved, That the Legislature of Iowa, as a police
    regulation, should put the power in some hands, carefully and
    wisely guarded from abuse and wasteful extravagance, to
    arrest by isolation and destruction, if necessary, any
    contagious disease which may suddenly be developed in any
    neighborhood. This, however, not to include any of doubtful
    contagious character, such as hog cholera; and that we
    respectfully ask the Governor to call the especial attention
    of the Legislature to this subject, though there is no
    pleuro-pneumonia in our State now, nor has there ever been
    any, but we need laws to arrest it if any should be
    introduced.

    Resolved, That nations, as well as individuals, who ask
    justice should do justice, therefore, we insist that our
    Government should as carefully and vigilantly seek to prevent
    the exportation of contagious cattle diseases as to prevent
    their importation. This policy would create a feeling of
    national comity, and an effort to eradicate the scourge of
    nations (the cattle diseases).


WOLVES, DOGS, SHEEP.

The committee on resolutions submitted the following, which was adopted:

   Whereas, It has become impossible to keep sheep in safety in
   many parts of this State, owing to the loss occasioned by the
   ravage of wolves and dogs: therefore, be it

   Resolved, That this association petition the State Legislature
   to increase the bounty on wolves and the tax on dogs.

   Resolved, That the President of this association be requested
   to appoint a committee to draft a bill embodying the sense of
   this meeting in reference to a wolf and dog law.


BUSINESS.

The next meeting of the Association will be held at Ottumwa, commencing
the first Tuesday in December next.

Col. Scott is to prepare and publish the proceedings of this meeting.
The edition will be 5,000 copies.

The following are the officers for 1884: President, C.F. Clarkson;
Vice-presidents, H.C. Wheeler, B.F. Elbert, R. Stockdale, H. Wallace,
W.H. Jordan, E.W. Lucas, and P. Nichols; Secretary and Treasurer, Fitch
B. Stacy.




THE HORSE AND HIS TREATMENT.

NUMBER ONE.


History chronicles no improvement in the horse made by the agency of
man. The horses of the days of Pharaoh, or of Homer, have their
superiors in no part of the civilized world to-day. The Arabs have for
ages been noted for the excellence of their horses, but that excellence
was not created, nor has it been increased by the arts of man. Since the
time of Cromwell the horses of England have steadily degenerated. Those
most conversant with the matter say that this degeneracy has been the
most marked and rapid during the last fifty years. The horses of this
country lack the value of their ancestors of the Revolutionary period.
Nowhere, or at no time, can man boast of improving the horse by the arts
of breeding. What is the reason of this?

The horse, the ox, the hog, and the sheep comprise the four great
classes of domesticated farm animals. In certain directions man has
improved these three last. These improvements have made them more
valuable. The ox has been bred to make more flesh from the same amount
of food, and to lay on fat at an earlier age; the cow has been bred to
give instead of a supply of milk barely large enough to sustain her
young, a bountiful yield, and of a richer quality; the hog has been bred
into a veritable machine to convert food into pork; the sheep has been
bred to yield more wool, and of a finer texture, and to make more
mutton. All these changes have been beneficial because the value of the
animal lay in its production of beef, milk, pork, wool, or mutton, as
the case might be. It is true that these changes have been accomplished
at the expense of vigor and endurance. These two qualities are important
in the hog, ox, or sheep, but those that have been developed so far
overshadow their lessening that on the whole we can say that the arts of
man have improved our kine, swine, and sheep.

But it is not so with the horse. Its value does not depend upon the
quantity and quality of its flesh, milk, or bodily covering. Unlike the
others its value depends upon the work it can do. Hence vigor and
endurance are the prime essentials of a good horse. But as man has
lessened the vigor and endurance of the hog, ox, and sheep, so he has of
the horse. This is the invariable result of human art. Whenever man
tampers with the work of nature he is certain to lessen bodily vigor. It
could not be otherwise. For the course of nature, undisturbed and
undeflected, is always towards the greatest health. Man changes the
course of nature and the result is lessened vigor and endurance.

Man has improved some qualities of the horse. He has increased its
speed, perhaps, but only for short distances. Our race horses of to-day
would make a sorry record with those of days no longer past than those
of the "pony express," to say nothing of the couriers of centuries ago,
because they have been made to deteriorate in vigor and endurance. We
have ponderous, heavy horses to-day; but they can not do as much work
before the plow or dray as those of the eighteenth century. We can not
point anywhere to horses produced by breeding that are the equals of the
horses of the days of chivalry. They lack not only in vigor and
hardihood, but in intelligence. As the perfect symmetry of development
by the course of nature has been destroyed by man the intelligence of
the animal lessened. Whenever the hand of man has touched his equine
friend it has been only to mar.

This decrease in the excellence of the horse can not be shifted from man
to time. One instance alone demonstrates the unfairness of this. The
Andalusians are now mere ponies, yet they are the descendants of those
noble beasts ridden to victory by the Spanish chivalry in the days when
the valor of the horse was as important as the valor of the knightly
rider. Taken from their hills and valleys to serve in the haunts of men,
and to be subjected to the arts of breeding, they have sadly
degenerated. But the horses of the Spanish explorers of both North and
South America escaped, and to-day the descendants of these same Spanish
horses are, under the nurture of nature and nature's ways, the superb
wild horses of the new world. They are the work of nature; the
Andalusian ponies are the work of man's art.

As this degeneracy is the necessary co-existent of man's breeding, so
far as it is produced by this cause it can not be escaped. But a good
part of the evil is not the necessary sequence of breeding per se. It is
also attributable to errors in treatment so palpable and easy of
correction that it behooves us to note and avoid them. In my next I
shall briefly mention a few of the most important of these.

       *       *       *       *       *

Breeder and Sportsman: The old story of the countryman and his deceptive
plug was recently repeated in Jersey, where people are supposed to have
their eye-teeth cut. It was an old gray pacer this time, attached to a
dilapidated wagon by cords and odd ends of harness. The astute hotel
proprietor refused to give $20 for the outfit. Owner then replied that
he would pace the horse over a good track in three minutes. Landlord
bets $100 to $50 that he can't do it. Money was then put up, and owner
wanted to draw, as the track was a good way off, and he could not spare
the time to attend to the matter. Landlord insisted that the horse must
pace or pay forfeit. A sulky and harness were borrowed, and judge placed
in the stand, according to Hoyle. Owner claims the right to three
trials, according to National Association rules. Point conceded. Old
crowbait is scored up and given the word. Works off the mile very slick
in 2:43. Landlord feels small, and $100 goes into owner's pocket.
Another greenhorn bets $100 that horse can't beat 2:43. Rips off another
mile 2:42, and owner pockets the money. Landlord feels better; owner
better yet. Latest advices: same old side-wheeler won two or three
hundred same way at Flemington, some more at Paterson, and has had a
little pacing circuit all to himself. "What fools these mortals be!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The following by Richard White in the New York Sun, might very
properly have been dedicated to those trichinae-frightened twins,
Bismarck and Paul Bert.

    Sing, heavenly muse, the noble quadruped,
      Whom Orientals oft presume to scorn,
    Who glorifies the food that he is fed,
      Extracting carbon from convenient corn.

    Peaceful his life, his death almost sublime,
      His end a grand effect of modern art;
    Scarce has he bid a sharp adieu to time,
      When he is packed and ready for the mart.

    He goes abroad, our land to represent;
      The earth, from pole to tropic, is his range;
    He fills the bill for use and ornament,
      Greases the world, and regulates exchange.

    Though ministers abroad may lightly treat
      The rights that only appertain to men,
    They must protect our Western corn-fed meat,
      Defending our four-footed citizen.

    If Bismarck bars our barrels, tubs, or cans,
      Forcing our pork to make its way incog,
    Upset his schemes, and overthrow his plans,
      And clear a pathway for the native hog.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Detmers, V.S., stationed at the Union Stock Yards at Chicago, by the
Department of Agriculture for the purpose of inspecting swine, alleges
that during the last four months he has examined at one packing-house
not less than four thousand hogs and has seen at least ten times that
number, but has not seen the slightest trace of disease, as he certainly
should if any had existed. During the last two years but very little
swine plague has prevailed anywhere, and, as far as he knows, no
diseased hogs have been shipped; nearly if not all the small rendering
tanks having been closed.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. Pasteur, the eminent French scientist, says epizootic hog-cholera,
even of the most virulent type, can be prevented by inocculation with
the attenuated virulent virus. He also says it is proven that the period
of immunity is more than a year; that, consequently, this is long enough
for the requirements of hog-raising, since the period of fattening does
not generally exceed a year. Yet, in spite of these happy results, I
repeat that the question of the use of vaccination for different breeds
needs new investigation, so that the vaccination of swine may be made
general.




THE DAIRY

Dairymen, Write for Your Paper.


WINTER FEED FOR COWS.


The increasing demand for milk in our cities and villages, and for
gilt-edged butter during the winter season, is leading some of our most
intelligent farmers to study more carefully the problem of winter
dairying. "It costs more to make butter in winter than in summer," says
the American Agriculturalist, "but if a select class of customers in
cities or elsewhere, are willing to pay for the increased cost of
producing it fresh in zero weather, then there is no good reason why
they should not be gratified. Its feasibility is already established on
a small scale, and there seems to be no discernible limit to the demand
for a first-class article during the six months when the pastures are
barren. The farmer who has the capital can readily provide a barn that
will make his cows nearly as comfortable and healthy in winter as in
summer, and shelter all the food they need to keep up a constant flow of
rich milk. We have not attained, perhaps, all the information necessary
to secure the best rations for winter milking, yet we are approximating
toward that knowledge. Some think they have found in ensilage the one
thing needful. Yet, some of the parties dealing in gilt-edge butter
begin to complain of that made from rations consisting largely of
ensilage. We shall probably have to put down early cut hay with the
flavor of June grass in it as an essential part of the winter rations
for first-class butter. We doubt if the bouquet of the June made article
can be found elsewhere. Another ration will be Indian meal, our great
national cereal, which is abundant and cheap and likely to continue so.
Then we want green, succulent food with the dry fodder to sharpen the
appetite and help the digestion. This suggests roots as another ration.
We have carrots, mangolds and sugar beets; all easily raised, and
cheaply stored in barn cellars or pits. And from our own experience in
using them during several winters in connection with dry feed, we judge
them to be a safe ration in butter-making. Cabbage also is available,
and in districts remote from large markets, might be grown for this
purpose. Near cities it is probably worth more for human food than for
fodder. The whole subject is yet in the tentative state, and all are
looking for further light!"




CHURNING TEMPERATURE.


A correspondent of the New England Homestead found difficulty in making
the butter "come" from cream raised in the Cooley Creamer. In a later
issue several correspondents tried to help her through the difficulty.
One said:

First of all be sure your cream is ready to come before you churn it. If
you have no floating thermometer, please get one right away. Deep set
cream needs not only to be ripened, but the temperature must be
right--not less than 62 degrees, and 65 degrees is better. Don't guess
at it, but be sure. Mix each skimming with the others thoroughly, and
keep the cream pail in a warm place at all times.

Another said: Keep the cream at 60 degrees to 65 degrees all the time
before it goes into the churn. Take care to thoroughly mix the different
skimmings. Sometimes in cold weather the butter will nearly come, and
then hold on without any advance. In such cases, put into a thirty-quart
churning, half a cupful of salt and four quarts of water heated to 55
degrees; it will cut the butter from the buttermilk in five minutes. My
butter sells for fifty cents a pound and this is the way I manage.

Another: Sour your cream before churning and have it as near 62 degrees
as you can, and you will have no trouble. The first fall we had the
Cooley we had one churning that would not come into butter. I found it
was perfectly sweet. Since then I have been particular to have it ripe
and have had no trouble.




SEAS OF MILK.


A newspaper correspondent contributes the following which is of course
made up of a mixture of facts and guesses. But as it is somewhere near
the truth, as a general thing, we do as all the rest of the papers are
doing, print it.

"There are nearly $2,000,250,000 invested in the dairying business in
this country," said an officer of the Erie Milk Producers' Association
yesterday. "That amount is almost double the money invested in banking
and commercial industries, it is estimated that it requires 15,000,000
cows to supply the demand for milk and its products in the United
States. To feed these cows 60,000,000 acres of land are under
cultivation. The agricultural and dairy machinery and implements in use
are worth over $200,000,000. The men employed in the business number
700,000 and the horses nearly 1,000,000. The cows and horses consume
annually 30,000,000 tons of hay, nearly 90,000,000 bushels of corn meal,
about the same amount of oat-meal, 275,000,000 bushels of oats,
2,000,000 bushels of bran, and 30,000,000 bushels of corn, to say
nothing of the brewery grains and questionable feed of various kinds
that is used to a great extent. It costs $400,000,000 to feed these cows
and horses. The average price paid to the laborers necessary in the
dairy business is probably $20 a month, amounting to $168,000,000 a
year.

"The average cow yields about 450 gallons of milk a year, giving a total
product of 6,750,000,000 gallons. Twelve cents a gallon is a fair price
to estimate the value of this milk at, a total return to the dairy
farmer of $810,000,000. Fifty per cent of the milk is made into cheese
and butter. It takes twenty-seven pounds of milk to make one pound of
butter, and about ten pounds of milk to make one pound of cheese. There
is the same amount of nutrition in three and one half pounds of milk
that there is in one pound of beef. A fat steer furnishes fifty per cent
of boneless beef, but it would require about 24,000,000 steers, weighing
1,500 pounds each, to produce the same amount of nutrition as the annual
milk product does."




VETERINARY.


ABOUT SOUNDNESS.


It may be supposed that the hackneyed term "sound" is so explicit as to
need no comment,--and most people conceive it to be so; but the term
"sound" really admits of as much contrariety of opinion as the word
"tipsy;" one man considers another so if, at ten at night, he is not
precisely as cool and collected as he was at one in the day. Another one
calls a man so when he lies on the floor and holds himself on by the
carpet. So,--as to soundness, some persons can not see that a horse is
unsound, unless he works his flanks like the drone of a bagpipe, or
blows and roars like a blacksmith's bellows; while some are so
fastidious as to consider a horse as next to valueless because he may
have a corn that he never feels, or a thrush for which he is not, nor
likely to be, one dollar the worse.

So far as relates to such hypercritical deciders on soundness, we will
venture to say that, if they brought us twenty reported horses in
succession, we would find something in all of those produced that would
induce such persons to reject them, though, perhaps, not one among the
lot had anything about him of material consequence. To say the least, we
will venture to assert that nine-tenths of the horses now in daily use
are more or less unsound. We make no reservation as to the description
of horse, his occupation, or what he may be worth. We scarcely ever had,
indeed scarcely ever knew, a horse that had been used, and tried
sufficiently to prove him a good one, that was in every particular
unequivocally sound. We have no doubt that there are thousands of owners
of horses who will at once say we are wrong in this assertion, and would
be ready to produce their own horses as undeniable proofs, whereby to
back their opinion and refute ours. They may, perhaps, say that their
horses are never lame--perhaps not; that is, not lame in their
estimation or to their eye; but we daily see horses that go to a certain
degree indubitably lame, while their owners conceive them to be as
indubitably sound. These horses, perhaps, all do their work perfectly
well, are held as sound by owners, servants, acquaintances, and casual
observers; but a practical eye would detect an inequality in their
going, as a watchmaker would do the same in the movement of a watch,
though we might look for a week, or listen for the same length of time,
without being able to either see or hear the variation. The watch might,
however, on the average keep fair time; but it would not be a perfect
one; and what matters, if it answers all the purposes for which we want
it? A really bad watch that can not keep time is a different affair;--it
is pretty much the same with a horse. If the unsoundness is such as to
render him unable to do his work, or even to do it unpleasantly to
himself or owner, or if it is likely to bring him to this, our advice is
to have nothing to do with him. If, however, this is not the case, or
likely to be so,--if you like him--buy him.

It is not improbable that a man may say, I begin to believe that few
horses that have done work are quite sound; but a sound one I will have;
I will, therefore, buy a four-year old, that has never done a day's
work. We will acknowledge that if he does so, he may probably get his
desideratum; but do not let him make too sure of this. There are such
things as four-year olds, unsound, as well as worked. But, supposing him
to have got this sound animal; what has he got? An animal that he has to
run the risk of making useful, so far as teaching him his business goes;
and by the time this is effectually done, and the colt has arrived at a
serviceable age, he will probably be quite as unsound as many of those
he has rejected; independent of which, and supposing him to continue
sound, the breeder of this horse must have better luck or better
judgment in breeding than his neighbors, if more than one in five or six
that he does breed turn out desirable horses in every respect. If he
turns out but a middling sort of beast, it is but small satisfaction to
know that he is sound; in fact, so little satisfaction should we feel,
that, if we were compelled to keep and use him, so far from rejoicing
that he was sound, we should only regret that he was not dead.

In relations to the doings of dealers in horses, it is not our present
object to expose the tricks of the trade, or to prejudice the
unsophisticated buyer against all horse dealers. There are honest horse
dealers, and there are dishonest ones; and we are sorry to say that, in
numbers, the latter predominate; that honesty in horse dealing is not
proverbial. But horse dealers, like other mortals, are apt to err in
judgment; and all their acts should not be set down as willful
wrong-doings. However, be their acts what they may, the general verdict
is against their motives. Therefore, supposing we could bring any person
or number of persons to believe the fact that a man conversant with
horses might sell, as a sound horse, one that might, on proper
inspection, be returned as unsound, all that we could say or write,
would never convince the majority of persons that a dealer could
innocently do the same thing. If his judgment errs, and leads him into
error as to the soundness of his horse, it is set down, not as willful
or corrupt perjury as to oath, but most undoubtedly as to his word and
honesty.




QUESTIONS ANSWERED.


Glanders, Chronic Catarrh, and "Horse Distemper."--H.P.W., Peotone,
Ill.--Query--What are the symptoms whereby a person may know the
difference between glanders, catarrh, and ordinary horse distemper?

Reply--Among the prominent symptoms of glanders may be mentioned a
discharge of purulent matter from one or both nostrils; one or both
glands on the inside of the lower jaw bones are more or less swollen,
hard and knotty. One or both nostrils are sometimes swollen and glued up
by a sticky, unhealthy looking pus, sometimes streaked with blood. On
opening the nostrils, pustules and ulcers are seen on the inner surface.
The nose may sometimes bleed. The eyes are often prominent and watery;
the coat rough and staring if the horse is in lean condition; and the
voice more or less hoarse. The appetite is not often impaired. Sooner or
later, farcy buds may appear on the head, neck, body or limbs, generally
along the inner side of the thighs. In chronic nasal catarrh or
so-called gleet, the glands between the jaw bones are very slightly, if
at all, enlarged; they are loose, not hard and knotty, as in glanders.
This ailment, which is apt to persist for months, unless properly
treated, may leave an animal in an unthrifty state, with a staring coat,
disturbed appetite, dullness at work, cough and discharge from one or
both nostrils; but there are no pustules or ragged sores or ulcers
within the nose, as in glanders. Chronic nasal gleet, however, is apt to
run into glanders; and, as there is no telling when the beginning is,
such a horse, with chronic discharge from the nose, should always be
looked upon with suspicion, and be kept away from other horses. The
difference between glanders and influenza or ordinary horse distemper,
is so marked that a mistake is not easily made. The more prominent
symptoms of distemper are as follows: With signs more or less prominent
of a general febrile condition, there is great dullness and debility,
frequent and weak pulse, scanty discharge of high-colored urine,
costiveness, loss of appetite, and a yellow appearance of the membranes
of the mouth and the eyes. The eyes appear more or less sunken, upper
lid drooping and lips hanging, giving the animal a sleepy look; there is
cough, soreness of the throat, and labored breathing; the mouth is
filled with frothy slime, the legs are cold and sometimes more or less
swollen below the knees and hocks. In the advanced stages of distemper,
there is a free discharge from both nostrils.

Brittle Hoofs.--I.F.C., Camden, Ill. If the animal is shod, the shoes
should be removed and reset at least once a month, to allow the feet to
be properly pared and trimmed. If habitually brittle, it will be proper
to keep such feet off from much moisture, and instead provide dry floor
of whatever kind. Once or twice a week such feet should be given an
ample coat of some simple hoof ointment, such as equal parts of tar,
tallow and beeswax, carefully melted together, and stirred till cold.

Lung Disease in Swine.--A.J.T., Emery, Ill. Most internal diseases of
swine, especially inflammation of the lungs, which is often given the
wrong name of thumps, are very intractable and apt to prove fatal when
occurring during the winter months. Prevention is the sheet anchor for
these troubles, and it must be a poor farmer indeed who can not manage
to provide clean, comfortable and dry housing for his live stock during
this season, or who can not comprehend that such is necessary for the
well-doing of animals as well as of himself. Any animal, even a hog,
will of course suffer more, or less severely when constantly exposed to
chilly winds, draft of cold air, wet ground and damp surroundings, icy
or frozen drink or food, etc.

Blindness After Lockjaw.--M.J.G., Los Angeles, Cal. Let the animal go
loose in a comfortable, roomy, well-bedded shed, from which strong light
is excluded. Apply, once daily, to the hollow space above the orbit of
the eyes, a small portion of fluid extract of belladonna. Give food
which does not require much hard chewing.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _one year, and the
subscriber gets a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED
STATES, FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any
first-class weekly agricultural paper in this country._




HORTICULTURAL

[Illustration]

Horticulturists, Write for Your Paper.


THE HEDGE QUESTION.


At one of the December meetings of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society a prize essay from the pen of John J. Thomas, of Union Springs,
N.Y., was read on the subject "Hedge Plants and Hedges."

The subject of the essay was proposed in the form of a question, "Are
live hedges to be recommended either for utility or ornament, and if
they are, what plants are most suitable?" The answer to this question
was given from the experiments of the essayist during the last forty
years. The deciduous plants tried were the buckthorn, Osage orange,
honey-locust, privet and barberry. The evergreens were the Norway
spruce, hemlock, and American arbor-vitae.

The buckthorn has the advantage of great hardiness, thick growth, and
easy propagating and transplanting, and requires but a moderate amount
of cutting back. But the growth is not stout enough to resist unruly
animals, unless in very rich soils, and even a moderate amount of
cutting back is an objection to farmers.

The cost of buckthorn hedges, including the preparation of a strip of
soil five feet wide, purchase of plants, setting, and occasional horse
cultivation on each side, was about twenty-five cents a rod the first
year. The yearly cultivation and cutting back, until the hedge had
reached full size, was three or four cents a rod. Though the buckthorn
has nearly passed out of use on account of its inefficiency, it is not
impossible that it may be extensively planted when cultivators find that
it may be converted into an efficient barrier by inclosing two or three
barbed wires extending its length through the interior--these wires,
supported on occasional posts, being successively placed in position as
the hedge increases in height, the branches growing around the wires and
holding them immovably in position. Galvanized wire should be always
used, on account of its durability.

Osage orange hedges require more care than buckthorn, in assorting
plants of equal size and vigor, and the rejection of feeble plants. Like
all other hedge plants, they should be set in a single line, and eight
inches apart is a suitable distance. For the first few years the ground
must be kept well cultivated. It is partly tender and will not endure
the winters at the North, unless on a well-drained soil. Hence the
importance of placing a good tile drain parallel to the hedge and within
a few feet of it. Thus protected, good hedges have stood for twenty-five
years where the thermometer has often shown ten or twelve degrees below
zero, and sometimes lower.

No hedge is more commonly mismanaged than the Osage orange. It is
planted in imperfectly prepared ground; vigorous and feeble plants are
planted indiscriminately, cultivation and pruning are omitted or not
done thoroughly, resulting in broken and irregular lines. When more care
is given, the hedge is nearly spoiled by being pruned too wide at the
top, the heavy shade above causing meagre growth and openings below. It
should be pruned in wedge shape, but shearing is objectionable as
causing a thick and short growth of leaves at the exterior, excluding
light from the inside and causing bare branches there. Cutting back more
irregularly with a knife allows the growth of interior foliage, and
gives more breadth to the hedge. The sheared hedge presents an unnatural
stiffness in ornamental grounds; but skillfully cut back with the knife
it has more of the beauty of natural form. The manner of pruning is very
important, both as regards utility and beauty. For farm barriers hedges
do not require so elaborate care. Another mode of treatment has been
adopted in the Western States. The trees are trimmed and the main stems
trained upright for a few years. They are then cut half off at the
ground and bent over at an angle of thirty degrees with the ground, a
tree being left upright at distances of four or five feet, and the
inclined ones interwoven among them, a straight line of trees being thus
formed. The tops are then cut off about three feet high. New shoots
spring up in abundance and form an impenetrable growth, as many as
fifty having been counted from a single plant the first year. The top is
cut to within a few inches each year of its previous height. Hedges made
in this way have no gaps.

A similar treatment may be adopted when a hedge becomes too high by long
years of growth. The trees are first partly trimmed with a light axe or
hook with a long handle, and then half cut off at the ground and bent
over. A new growth will spring up and form a new hedge. This course was
adopted by the essayist with a hedge planted twenty-eight years ago, and
which has been a perfect farm barrier for more than twenty years. The
cost of this hedge was about twenty-five cents a rod the first year, and
the three subsequent cuttings for sixty rods cost about twenty dollars,
averaging less than a dollar a year. But it was usually too tall and
shaded, and occupied too much ground, to be recommended where land is
valuable.

Ninety rods of Osage orange hedge, properly trimmed, cost about the same
for the first four years of cultivation, but more for annual cutting
back. It was planted twenty-four years ago, and has been a perfect
barrier for about twenty years. The yearly cost of pruning was about
four cents a rod for ten or twelve years, and since it has become larger
and higher nearly double. For cutting back a stout hook with a handle
two and a-half feet long or a stout scythe was used. Hedge shears are
too slow except for ornamental hedges, and even for these the knife is
preferable.

The Honey locust has been extensively used for hedges of late years on
account of its hardiness. Seed should be selected from the most thorny
trees. The trees have a tall, slender, and not hedgy growth, and require
thorough cutting back to secure a thick mass of branches at the bottom,
and very few have received this treatment when young. The care in
planting and rearing is similar to that required by the Osage orange.

Many hedges have been injured or even destroyed by pruning after the
summer growth has commenced. The pruning must be done in spring before
the buds swell, if vigorous growth is to be preserved. But
strong-growing hedges, that are likely to become too high, may be
checked by summer pruning.

Though the cost of planting and starting a hedge is less than that of
building a good board fence, they are not adapted to farmers who will
not give them the continued care required to keep them in good order.
This conclusion is justified by observing how few have succeeded with
hedges, and many have allowed them to be ruined by neglect.

The evergreens which have been employed have been exclusively for
ornamental screens, and not for farm barriers. The Norway spruce may be
placed at the head on account of its rigid growth, hardiness, and the
freedom with which it may be cut back, it will bear more shade than many
other evergreens, and hence the interior of the screen is green with
foliage. The cutting back should be done with a knife, and not with
shears. Next to the Norway spruce is the hemlock, which excels the
former in its livelier green in winter, while it is unsurpassed for
retaining interior foliage. It will bear cutting back to an almost
unlimited extent in spring before growth commences. But it is not so
stiff as the Norway spruce as a barrier. The American arbor-vitae, though
much used, becomes destitute of foliage inside, and is browned by
winter.

By the introduction of barbed wire an important change is likely to take
place in planting hedges. Barbed wire makes a cheaper fence for its
efficiency than any other material. A serious objection to it is the
danger of animals being lacerated against it, the wires being nearly
invisible. This objection may be obviated by inclosing the wires in
visible hedges. Efficiency may also be thus imparted to small-growing
hedge plants, such as privet, barberry and small evergreens, which will
require but little labor in pruning and would become handsome ornaments.
The purple barberry, for example, would present an attractive appearance
during a large portion of the year. A new value may thus be given to
hedges by rendering moderate growers and those easily kept in shape
efficient barriers for farm and fruit gardens.




YOUNG MEN WANTED.


Perhaps one of the greatest needs of horticulture at the present day, is
young men to engage in the work--intelligent, patient, energetic young
men, who will begin and make it a life-labor and study. What nobler
employment in which young men can engage? What field for study and
investigation can be found for them which offers a more gratifying and
pleasant pursuit, and promises richer and more substantial results?

There are so many open questions connected with the science; so many
points that need investigation, so many problems to be solved; so much
to learn that is yet unknown--that the needs for more laborers are great
and pressing; and the wonder is that more of our young men are not
entering upon the work.

That young men are needed, rather than the old or middle aged, is
because many of the investigations to be undertaken require a lifetime
to perfect, and can only be brought to a profitable issue in a long
series of years. Such, for instance, as the production of new varieties
of fruits; the relative hardiness and longevity of trees; the effects of
soil and climate, heat, cold, etc., upon plant life; the degeneracy of
species, etc.;--all of which require a long series of experiments to
determine. Older men, here and there, are engaged in these
investigations; but they are passing away in the midst of their work
only partially accomplished, and their labors are thus in a degree lost.

Our farmers' sons--stout, healthy, energetic young men--are the ones
upon whom this labor and high duty more properly devolves. To them
belongs, or should belong, the honor and glory of pushing forward this
noble work. Many of these, however, are mistakenly leaving the farms to
engage in trade and speculation; while others who remain at home mostly
incline to other branches. The agricultural colleges are doubtless
developing a few faithful workers for these too neglected fields; but
these munificently endowed institutions are believed to fall far short
of their duty in this respect.

I will close by recommending this matter to the thoughtful consideration
of the young readers of THE PRAIRIE FARMER, who, as a class, I believe
to be as capable and intelligent as the country affords, and with the
remark that I know of no business in life to which I would sooner urge
any young friend of my own to devote his talents and his energies.

    T.G.




POSSIBILITIES IN IOWA CHERRY GROWING.


Prof. Budd, of Iowa, sends THE PRAIRIE FARMER the following copy of his
address before the Eastern Iowa Horticultural Society, remarking that
its appearance in this paper may lead the Bloomington nurserymen to look
up this very important line of propagation:

The topic assigned me is, as usual, experimental horticulture. I select
the division of the work implied in the heading for the reason that it
is, as yet, mainly an unoccupied field of inquiry. If the idea occurs
that my treatment of the question is speculative rather than practical
permit me to suggest that thought and investigation must always precede
the work of adapting fruits to a newly occupied country, especially if
that country is as peculiar in climate and soil as the great Northwest.

In the summer of 1882, I was fortunate in having a fine opportunity for
studying the varieties and races of cherries in Continental Europe. The
fruit was ripening when we were in the valley of the Moselle in France,
and as we went slowly northward and eastward it continued in season
through Wirtemberg, the valleys and spurs of the Swabian Alps to Munich
in Bavaria, through the passes of the Tyrol in Saltzburg to Austria,
Bohemia, Siberia, Poland, and Southwestern Russia. Still farther north
of St. Petersburg and Moscow we met the cherries from Vladimir on every
corner, and our daily excursions to the country permitted the gathering
of the perfectly ripened fruit from the trees.

Still again when we passed six hundred miles east of Moscow we had
opportunities for picking stray cherries of excellent quality from trees
standing near the 56th parallel of north latitude.

To undertake to tell of the varieties of the fruit and the relative
hardiness of the trees--as estimated from the behavior of varieties we
knew something of--of the many varieties and races we studied on this
extended trip would make too long a story. On the plains of Silesia,
north of the Carpathian mountains we first began to be intensely
interested in the cherry question. Here the cherry is the almost
universal tree for planting along division lines and the public
highways. As far as the eye could reach over the plains when passing
over the railways, the cherry tree indicated the location of the
highways and the division of estates. As we passed the highways running
at right angles with the track we could get a glimpse down the avenues
to a point on the plain where the lines seem to meet, and we were told
that unbroken lines along the highways were often found thirty to fifty
miles in length.

As a rule these street and division trees are of a race wholly unknown
in this country excepting a few trees of the Ostheim in Iowa and
Minnesota. They are classed in the books as Griottes with colored juice
and long, slender, drooping branches. The trees are smaller than our
English Morello with low stems, and neat round tops. While some other
races are hardy on this plain as far north as Warsaw in Poland and
Russia the Griottes are grown for three main reasons. (1) The trees are
deep rooted and so small in size that they do little shading of the
street or cultivated fields. (2) They rarely fail to bear full crops as
the fruit buds are hardier and the fruit buds expand later than the
Kentish and the other and more upright forms of the Morello. (3) The
fruit is less acid and richer in grape sugar than the Kentish forms
making it more valuable for dessert, culinary use, and above all for
making the celebrated "Kirsch wasser" which here takes the place of
wine. Some of the thin twigged Griottes with dark skins and colored
juice are as large in size as our Morello and nearly or quite as sweet.
That they will prove hardy and fruitful with us we can hardly doubt as
they grow on the dry plains of Northeast Europe where the Kentish forms
utterly fail. Why have they not been introduced? I once asked this
question of Mr. George Ellwanger, of Rochester, N.Y. He replied that in
the early days of their nursery some varieties of the Weichel type were
introduced in their collection. But the Eastern demand ran in the line
of the Heart cherries and the Dukes, and if sour cherries were wanted
for pies the Kentish forms with uncolored juice seemed to be preferred.
I suspect the difficulty of propagation and the inferior look of the
little thin twigged trees in the nursery had something to do with the
ignorance of our people of the merits of this hardy and fruitful race.
In the trying climate of the Swabian Alps, the Tyrol, and the east plain
of Silesia, Hungary, Poland, and South Russia, the trees are on their
own roots mainly, and the sprouts are used for propagation. When small
they are placed in the nursery with the tops and roots cut back in the
form of root-grafts. For the use of methodic growers and or planting on
private grounds where sprouts are not wanted the trees are budded or
inarched on Prunus Padus.

How will we propagate this valuable race of the cherry? The scions are
too small for profitable grafting, and budding on our Morello seedlings
hardly answers, as the slow-growing top favors sprouting from the root.
Perhaps we shall find that our bird cherry (Prunus Pennsylvanica) is
best suited for our use. The question of propagation of this race is
important, as the cherries grown in immense quantities in the Province
of Vladimir, one hundred and fifty miles east of Moscow, and in all the
provinces of the upper Volga are of this thin twigged race. Beyond all
doubt it is the coming cherry for universal use in Central and Northern
Iowa, and even in Dakota and the far Northwest. Yet it is not the only
race of the cherry which will thrive on our prairies and prove
longer-lived, more fruitful, and far better in quality than any we now
have.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the grounds of the Pomological Institute, at Proskau, Silesia, we saw
many varieties of the Amarelle and Spanish cherries that will bear more
summer heat, an aridity of air, and a lower summer temperature than our
Richmonds or English Morello. In leaf and habit of growth these Amarells
of Austria and South Russia are much like our Carnalion, but some of the
varieties bear large fruit, as nearly sweet as is desirable for dessert
use. The race known as Spanish bears sweet fruit, much like our tall
growing Hearts and Bigarreaus, but the leaves are smaller, firmer, and
thicker, and the habit of the tree is nearly as low and spreading as
that of the Amarells. In Austria we are told that the original stock of
these round-topped, sweet cherries came from Spain, but as we went east
to Orel, Veronish, and Saratov we met varieties of this race on the
grounds of amateurs and proprietors who told us that the race was
indigenous to Bokara and other parts of Central Asia. While these
varieties are hardier than the Richmond the trees are lightly protected
with straw during the winter for protection of the fruit buds, when
paying crops are secured. North of Orel the Griottes alone are grown on
the bush plan, with from three to six stems springing up from the crown.
In Vladimir tens of thousands of acres are covered with these bush
cherry orchards, producing many train loads annually of fruit of
surprising excellence, considering the far northern and inland location
of the plantations.

On the college farm we have some specimens growing of the Ostheim,
Vladimir, double Natte, and other forms of the Griottes, and a few
specimens from Orel and Veronish of the Amarells and the Spanish races.
We have now orders out, of which we have received a part, for perhaps
fifty other varieties from Austria, Poland, and South Russia.

For the present these will be planted in experimental orchard with a
view to noting their behavior in our climate. Until scions are grown
here we can not make much advance in propagation. The work is
necessarily slow, but it can not fail, I think, to finally demonstrate
that so far we have been on the wrong track in attempting to grow
cherries on the prairies of the Northwest.




PRUNINGS.


If turnips or other vegetables to be fed to stock become frosted, place
them in a cool cellar, cover lightly with straw, and let them remain
frozen. If they do not thaw they will be little harmed for feeding.

Snow should not be allowed to accumulate on evergreens. If so, and it
partly thaws and then freezes, it can not be removed, but will catch the
snow and wind, often to the entire destruction of the tree.

A frost proof vegetable house is described as made with walls fifteen
inches thick, double boarded, the space between the boards being filled
with sawdust. The ceiling is also boarded, with about ten inches of
sawdust between the boards.

New England Homestead: The early black cranberry is the popular early
berry on Cape Cod. It escapes the early frosts and so the crop produces
better prices. A larger, lighter and longer berry is the James P.
Howley, which is being introduced in Essex county. The latter variety is
not so early as the former, but bears well, and in the protected bogs
along shore is frequently preferred.

Northwest Farmer: Mr. Edison Gaylord, of Floyd county, Iowa, advocates
setting trees in a leaning posture, to prevent them from being killed by
the combined effects of the wind and sun on their southwest side. Prof.
J.L. Budd, of the Iowa Agricultural College, says, in confirmation of
Mr. Gaylord's view, he saw hundreds of the finer cherry and plum trees
in Russia planted at an angle of forty-five degrees towards the one
o'clock sun. He says that only for a short time will trees thus set have
an awkward appearance.

The most convenient boxes in which to start seeds and cuttings are those
known as "flats" among gardeners. A good size for the kitchen garden in
which to start tomato seeds, etc., or for the ordinary conservatory, is
two feet long, sixteen inches wide, and three inches deep. These shallow
boxes are easy to handle, take up little room, and allow of much better
drainage to the young plants. Salt or soap boxes can be easily cut up
into three or four boxes three inches deep. Neat leather handles on each
end of the box will increase its handiness. The bottom is better if made
of several pieces of board, as the cracks insure good drainage.

James Vick's plan of catching slugs is as follows: "Take some pieces of
slate, or flat stones, or flat pieces of tin, and lay them about in the
garden among the plants, distributing them very liberally; just at
sundown go out and place a teaspoonful of bran on each piece of slate or
tin, and the slugs will soon become aware of it, and begin to gather and
feed on it. In about two hours, when it is dark, go out again with a
lantern and a pail containing salt and water, and pick up each piece on
which the slugs are found feeding, and throw slugs and bran into the
brine, where they instantly die. It is well, also, to go around in the
morning, and many slugs will be found hiding under the pieces of slate,
and can be destroyed in the brine. By following up this method
persistently for a few weeks the garden may be effectually rid of the
nuisance."

A correspondent of the Iowa Register advises us as to the proper manner
of performing this operation: "To heel trees in properly, a trench
should be dug on high, dry ground from two and a half to three feet
deep; one side of which should slope from the bottom at an angle of 35
to 45 degrees. The trees should then be set against the sloping side of
the trench and sufficiently apart to allow of fine earth being brought
in close contact with every part of every root. When the roots and
bodies of the trees are carefully covered, the trench should not only be
filled but rounded up so as to form a mound over them. When air spaces
are left among the roots they are liable to mould and rot. And very
frequently, when they have not been buried sufficiently deep, the
outside bark becomes detached from them and will slip off when they are
being taken from the trench."

A correspondent of Gardening Illustrated (England), says this is the way
to make an asparagus bed: Trench the soil at once two spits deep, and
work in stable manure as the work proceeds, or if procurable, seaweed
and plenty of sand, or any gritty substance, such as road scrapings. It
should be left as rough as possible on the surface until April next,
when the young plants will be in the best condition for planting, viz.,
with shoots a few inches long; then draw wide drills, and spread the
roots of the plants out, covering with fine sandy soil, leaving the tips
of the shoots just peeping through the soil, and if mild showery weather
prevails the growth will be rapid. Put some pea-sticks to support the
growth and keep it from suffering by wind waving. Merely keeping from
weeds is all the other attention required until November, when the old
tops may be cut off, and a dressing of rotten manure spread on the
surface of the bed, to be lightly forked in during the following spring.

The Rural New Yorker says as follows: We plant the Cuthbert raspberry
for late, the Hansel for early--both are of a bright red color, and
suitable for market as well as for home use. For a yellow plant the
Caroline. It is hardy and productive, though not of the first quality.
For canning, or for table use, if you like a fruit full of raspberry
flavor though a little tart, Shaffer's Colossal. It is rather dark in
color for market, and perhaps a little soft. For a hardy, early, red
raspberry that is sweet and delicious for home use, plant the Turner.
For a raspberry that is excellent in every way, plant the new Marlboro.
For the earliest and most productive of blackcaps, plant the Souhegan.
For a larger and later blackcap, plant the Gregg. For currants, plant
the Fay's Prolific for red, and the White Grape currant for white. For
grapes, plant the Lady for earliest white, Moore's Early and Worden for
early black. For later, plant the Victoria or Pocklington, for light
colored; the Vergennes, Jefferson. Brighton or Centennial for red, and
the Wilder, Herbert or Barry for black. For strawberries, try the
Cumberland Triumph, Charles Downing, Sharpless, Manchester (pistillate),
Daniel Boone, James Vick, Mount Vernon, Hart's Minnesota, and Kentucky.
You can not select a better list for trial unless by experience you know
already what varieties will succeed best on your land.




FLORICULTURE

Gleanings by an Old Florist.


PROPAGATING HOUSES AND OTHER THINGS.


In the days of our boyhood the propagating house was, in the more
pretentious nurseries, a very sacred place, under lock and key, and some
of its mysteries supposed to be so profound that prying eyes of other
establishments were not welcome.

Bell glasses in those days were thought to be indispensable, and some of
the plants desired to be propagated were found to require months,
sometimes nearly a year, before they could be transferred from the
cutting pots. The hot-water tanks, and other bottom heat appliances of
the present day were then unknown; and these appliances have resulted in
greater simplicity of management. Still we are bound to admit that the
demands here generally embrace a class of plants that, as a rule, are
found to root the most readily, while those that have always been known
to tax the propagator's skill, as the Heaths, New Holland, and others
called hard wooded plants, are but little called for in this market.

At that time nearly everything was placed in pots of almost pure white
sand, surrounded by the ordinary atmosphere of the house; while nowadays
the establishment must be small indeed if it does not contain some place
where the bed is so arranged that the heat at the bottom is from ten to
fifteen degrees above that of the house proper. Here lies the whole
secret as to whether it is a part of a single green-house or a house
devoted exclusively to propagating purposes. For the purpose of being
able at all times to control the temperature of the top, the propagating
house has often a northern exposure, except in the very dead of winter.
With a bright, clear sun above it is almost impossible in the daytime to
keep down the temperature of the house sufficiently to prevent the young
cuttings from wilting, after which disaster is very likely to follow in
their final rooting. Given a top temperature never above 55 or 65
degrees, with a bottom always from 10 to 15 degrees higher, if the
cuttings are in good shape it is a simple matter to root them in from
seven to fifteen days; though the time it takes depends, of course, upon
the plant and condition of the wood. At first efforts used to be
contrived to get this bottom heat by means of the old flue system, with
plenty of material covering the bricks, to break, in part, the dry
burning nature of the heat.

Then hot water came in and furnished what was thought the acme of a
propagator, and tanks of elaborate workmanship, and made of the finest
material down to the commonest wood, were made so a circulation of hot
water was kept up over as large an area as the necessity of the owner
might require.

The results seemed excellent, but lo, every now and again, disastrous
failures would occur. A material would spread all around called by the
florist the cutting bench fungus, that would sweep through his crop like
a plague; all sorts of theories would be given, and numberless articles
appear in the horticultural periodicals of the day on its cause and
cure. Presently it was found that those who did not use a tank of water,
but had inclosed a space to be heated by hot water pipes, did not seem
to suffer so much from the invidious foe. Much moisture was found an
excellent remedy for the enemy, though it might have been its first
cause, as it could be best warded off by dousing with the once praised
hot water tank.

Whether a house is used exclusively or not, the ordinary hot water pipes
are simply inclosed in a brick or wood space, with ventilators that may
be opened to let off part of the confined heat into the house at
pleasure. The front benches used are about two feet six inches to three
feet in width, over, say four 4-inch pipes, up to within eighteen inches
or two feet of the glass. On this is a platform over which three to six
inches of sand is put, and in this bed are placed the cuttings where,
with the differences before mentioned, they are kept as uniform as
possible, and the sand kept decidedly wet. Almost everything we called
soft wooded, or that can be got from the soft wood, even including most
of our hardy shrubs, can be rooted with almost unerring certainty in the
larger establishments by the hundreds of thousands.

As modern ideas demand large propagating, even in the summer, when it is
next to impossible to keep these proportions of top and bottom heat, if
in an ordinary propagating house, such firms as Miller & Hunt, strike
out with another idea to overcome the difficulty. This is none other
than instead of glass, they have a muslin canvas-covered house, in which
they have again pits, where mild bottom heat can be obtained by the use
of spent hops, tan bark, manure, or other material. Of course, it would
be idle to talk of a summer bottom heat of 60 deg., but instead of that,
they get one of about 80 deg., and depend upon a close, uniform, high,
moist temperature to carry out the same results.

With this, rose plants can be and are raised by the hundreds of
thousands from the single eye to a cutting, with a loss of not five per
cent in the aggregate, and often not one per cent. It is very evident
that with new or scarce plants this is an enormous average, as by its
means firms can import the new European plants in the spring, at perhaps
very high rates, start them into immediate, rapid growth, and from half
a dozen plants to work on, maybe in the next spring markets have
hundreds for sale.

This is all new as managed by us old 'uns in former times, but he who
expects to be up with the present day and cater for that class of
patronage, must take the new and not the old way of doing things, or he
will, in the vernacular of the streets, "get left."

As we are on this particular topic, however, and as the amateur window
plant-grower may want to propagate some little stock as well, even if
not on these "high-falutin" ways, it might not be amiss to say that
beyond the methods of "slipping" here and there cuttings in and among
others growing in pots, or, mayhap, in a pot all by themselves, they can
readily root lots of plants in a water and sand bath, which is nothing
more than taking a deep saucer, putting half an inch of sand in the
bottom, filling up the saucer full of water, and keeping it full; stick
your cuttings into this, place right in the sunniest spot of your
window, and they will grow about as certain, many of them, as if treated
by the florist's more portentious method. Likely the reason of all this
is, the water keeps the cuttings from wilting long enough for them to
put forth their efforts for existence in the shape of new roots,
obtained from the stored up material in the cuttings, and as soon as
this is done they become new individual plants, requiring only to be
transferred into a suitable medium of earth to go on as an independent,
but similar existence to the plant from which they were obtained.

    EDGAR SANDERS.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR NEW CLUBBING LIST FOR 1884.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER IN CONNECTION WITH OTHER JOURNALS.

We offer more liberal terms than ever before to those who desire to
take, in connection with THE PRAIRIE FARMER, either of the following
weekly or monthly periodicals. In all cases the order for THE PRAIRIE
FARMER and either of the following named journals must be sent together,
accompanied by the money; but we do not require both papers to be sent
to the same person or to the same post-office.

We send specimen copies only of THE PRAIRIE FARMER.

Our responsibility for other publications ceases on the receipt of the
first number; when such journals are not received within a reasonable
time, notify us, giving date of your order, also full name and address
of subscriber.


WEEKLIES.

                                    Price of  The two
                                     the two.   for

Harper's Weekly                        $6 00  $4 60
Harper's Bazar                          6 00   4 60
Harper's Young People                   3 50   2 55
New York Tribune                        4 00   2 50
Toledo Blade                            4 00   2 20
Chicago Times                           3 25   2 50
Chicago Tribune                         3 50   2 50
Chicago Inter-Ocean                     3 15   2 50
Chicago Journal                         3 25   2 50
Peck's Sun                              3 75   3 00
Milwaukee Sentinel                      3 00   2 50
Western Farmer (Madison, Wis.)          3 00   2 00
Burlington Hawkeye                      4 00   3 00
The Continent (Weekly Magazine)         6 00   5 00
Detroit Free Press, with Supplement     4 00   2 50
Detroit Free Press, State edition       3 50   2 20
Louisville Courier-Journal              3 75   3 00
St. Louis Globe-Democrat                3 00   2 15
St. Louis Republican                    3 00   2 15
Scientific American                     5 20   4 15
Interior (Presbyterian)                 4 50   3 60
Standard (Baptist)                      4 70   3 60
Advance (Congregational)                5 00   3 35
Alliance                                4 00   3 00
New York Independent                    5 00   4 00
Christian Union                         5 00   4 00
Boston Pilot (Catholic)                 4 50   3 50
American Bee Journal                    4 00   3 50
Florida Agriculturist                   4 00   2 75
Breeder's Gazette                       5 00   3 50
Witness (N.Y.)                          3 50   3 00
Methodist (N.Y.)                        4 00   3 50
Chicago News                            3 00   2 50
Globe (Boston)                          3 00   2 75
Youth's Companion                       3 75   3 00
Weekly Novelist                         5 00   4 25
Ledger (Chicago)                        3 00   2 90
American Bee Journal                    4 00   3 25


MONTHLIES.

Harper's Monthly                        $6 00  $4 50
Atlantic Monthly                         6 00   4 50
Appleton's Journal                       5 00   4 25
The Century                              6 00   4 50
North American Review                    7 00   5 50
Popular Science Monthly                  7 00   5 50
Lippincott's Magazine                    6 00   4 50
Godey's Lady's Book                      4 00   3 00
St. Nicholas                             5 00   3 50
Vick's Illustrated Magazine              3 25   2 25
Am. Poultry Journal (Chicago)            3 25   2 75
American Bee Journal                     3 00   2 25
Gardener's Monthly                       4 00   3 00
Wide Awake                               4 50   3 00
Phrenological Journal                    4 00   3 00
American Agriculturist                   3 50   2 50
Poultry World                            3 25   2 75
Arthur's Home Magazine                   4 00   3 00
Andrews' Bazar                           3 00   2 40
Frank Leslie's Popular Monthly           5 00   4 00
Frank Leslie's Sunday Magazine           5 00   4 00
Frank Leslie's Ladies' Magazine          4 50   4 00
Our Little Ones                          3 50   3 00
Peterson's Magazine                      4 00   3 30
Art Amateur                              6 00   5 00
Demorest's Magazine                      4 00   3 00
Dio Lewis' Monthly                       4 50   3 50

For clubbing price with any publication in the United States not
included in the above list send us inquiry on postal card.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.


ONE CENT

invested in a postal card and addressed as below

WILL

give to the writer full information as to the best lands in the United
States now for sale; how he can

BUY

them on the lowest and best terms, also the full text of the U.S. land
laws and how to secure

320 ACRES

of Government Lands in Northwestern Minnesota and Northeastern Dakota.

ADDRESS:

JAMES B. POWER,

Land and Emigration Commissioner,

ST. PAUL, MINN.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSUMPTION.

I have a positive remedy for the above disease; by its use thousands of
cases of the worst kind and of long standing have been cured. In deed,
so strong is my faith in its efficacy, that I will send TWO BOTTLES
FREE, together with a VALUABLE TREATISE on this disease, to any
sufferer. Give Express & P.O. address. DR. T.A. SLOCUM, 181 Pearl St.,
N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOW is the time to Subscribe for THE PRAIRIE FARMER. Price only $2.00
per year is worth double the money.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLISHERS' NOTICE.

_THE PRAIRIE FARMER is printed and published by The Prairie Farmer
Publishing Company, every Saturday, at No. 150 Monroe Street.

Subscription, $2.00 per year, in advance, postage prepaid.

Subscribers wishing their addresses changed should give their old as
well as new addresses.

Advertising. 25 cents per line on inside pages; 30 cents per line on
last page--agate measure; 14 lines to the inch. No less charge than
$2 00.

All Communications, Remittances, &c., should be addressed to_ THE
PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY, _Chicago, Ill._

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prairie Farmer

ENTERED AT THE CHICAGO POST OFFICE AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER.

CHICAGO, JANUARY 12, 1884.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber's Note: Original location of Table of Contents.]

       *       *       *       *       *

RENEW! RENEW!!

Remember that every yearly subscriber, either new or renewing, sending
us $2, receives a splendid new map of the United States and
Canada--58x41 inches--FREE. Or, if preferred, one of the books offered
in another column. It is not necessary to wait until a subscription
expires before renewing.

       *       *       *       *       *

1841.        1884.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER

PROSPECTUS FOR 1884.

SEE INDUCEMENTS OFFERED

SUBSCRIBE NOW.

For forty-three years THE PRAIRIE FARMER has stood at the front in
agricultural journalism. It has kept pace with the progress and
development of the country, holding its steady course through all these
forty-three years, encouraging, counseling, and educating its thousands
of readers. It has labored earnestly in the interest of all who are
engaged in the rural industries of the country, and that it has labored
successfully is abundantly shown by the prominence and prestige it has
achieved, and the hold it has upon the agricultural classes.

Its managers are conscious from comparison with other journals of its
class, and from the uniform testimony of its readers, that it is
foremost among the farm and home papers of the country. It will not be
permitted to lose this proud position; we shall spare no efforts to
maintain its usefulness and make it indispensable to farmers,
stock-raisers, feeders, dairymen, horticulturists, gardeners, and all
others engaged in rural pursuits. It will enter upon its forty-fourth
year under auspices, in every point of view, more encouraging than ever
before in its history. Its mission has always been, and will continue to
be--

To discuss the most approved practices in all agricultural and
horticultural pursuits.

To set forth the merits of the best breeds of domestic animals, and to
elucidate the principles of correct breeding and management.

To further the work of agricultural and horticultural organization.

To advocate industrial education in the correct sense of the term.

To lead the van in the great contest of the people against monopolies
and the unjust encroachments of capital.

To discuss the events and questions of the day without fear or favor.

To provide information concerning the public domain, Western soil,
climate, water, railroads, schools, churches, and society.

To answer inquiries on all manner of subjects coming within its sphere.

To furnish the latest and most important industrial news at home and
abroad.

To give full and reliable crop, weather, and market reports.

To present the family with pure, choice, and interesting literature.

To amuse and instruct the young folks.

To gather and condense the general news of the day.

To be, in brief, an indispensable and unexceptionable farm and home
companion for the people of the whole country.

The style and form of the paper are now exactly what they should be. The
paper used is of superior quality. The type is bold and clear. The
illustrations are superb. The departments are varied and carefully
arranged. The editorial force is large and capable. The list of
contributors is greatly increased, and embraces a stronger array of
talent than is employed on any similar paper in this country. We
challenge comparison with any agricultural journal in the land.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER is designed for all sections of the country. In
entering upon the campaign of 1884, we urge all patrons and friends to
continue their good works in extending the circulation of our paper. On
our part we promise to leave nothing undone that it is possible for
faithful, earnest work--aided by money and every needed mechanical
facility--to do to make the paper in every respect still better than it
has ever been before.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPECIAL NOTICE

To each Subscriber who will remit us $2 00 between now and February 1st,
1884, we will mail a copy of THE PRAIRIE FARMER FOR ONE YEAR, AND ONE
OF OUR NEW STANDARD TIME COMMERCIAL MAPS OF THE UNITED STATES AND
CANADA--showing all the Counties, Railroads, and Principal Towns up to
date. This comprehensive map embraces all the country from the Pacific
Coast to Eastern New Brunswick, and as far north as the parallel of 52
deg., crossing Hudson's Bay. British Columbia; Manitoba, with its many
new settlements; and the line of the Canadian Pacific Railway, completed
and under construction, are accurately and distinctly delineated. It
extends so far south as to include Key West and more than half of the
Republic of Mexico. It is eminently adapted for home, school, and office
purposes. The retail price of the Map alone is $2.00. Size. 58x41
inches. Scale, about sixty miles to one inch.

       *       *       *       *       *

READ THIS.

ANOTHER SPECIAL OFFER.

[Illustration]

"THE LITTLE DETECTIVE."

WEIGHS 1/4 OZ. TO 25 LBS.

Every housekeeper ought to have this very useful scale. The weight of
article bought or sold may readily be known. Required proportions in
culinary operations are accurately ascertained. We have furnished
hundreds of them to subscribers, and they give entire satisfaction.
During January, 1884, to any person sending us THREE SUBSCRIBERS, at
$2.00 each, we will give one of these scales, and to each of the three
subscribers Ropp's Calculator, No. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sorghum-growers of Kansas are invited to meet at Topeka, the second
Wednesday in February. The Kansas wool-growers meet on the 15th of this
month.


Do not forget the Mississippi Valley Horticultural Society meeting at
Kansas City, January 22-25. This will prove one of the important
horticultural events of the year.


If any of our friends have Vols. I to XIV, and the years 1861, 1863 to
1873, and 1875 to 1883, of THE PRAIRIE FARMER, they would like to
dispose of, we should be glad to hear from them.


The fifteenth annual exhibition of the Montana Agricultural, Mineral and
Mechanical Association, will be held at Helena, September 8th-13th,
1884. President, S.H. Crounse; Francis Pope, Secretary.


The twenty-fifth annual fair of the Linn County (Iowa) Agricultural and
Mechanical Society will be held on the fair grounds at Cedar Rapids,
September 9, 10, 11, and 12, 1884. C.G. Greene, Secretary, Cedar Rapids.


If you are in need of a first-class wind mill, find out all about the
Nichols' Centennial as advertised in our columns by Nichols & Daggett,
and see if you do not think it just fills the bill. It is strong,
durable, steady, and it takes and uses all the wind there is going.


Hon. E.B. David, member of the Illinois State Board of Agriculture from
Mercer county, made a brief call at THE PRAIRIE FARMER office last week.
From him we gathered the facts regarding the late meeting of the Board
mentioned elsewhere. Mr. David has long been a staunch friend of THE
PRAIRIE FARMER, and his call was a very welcome one.


Immigration at the port of New York fell off last year to the amount of
66,405 persons, or about 14-1/2 per cent from that of 1882. The total
number landed this last year was 388,342. The greatest decrease was from
Sweden and Russia. From England came 30,818; Ireland, 52,555; Germany,
164,036; Italy, 24,101; Norway, 11,536; Hungary, 11,448; Switzerland,
9,447; Denmark, 7,770; Bohemia, 4,652. Last year the arrivals were
182,893. It is not unlikely that there will be a greater falling off
this year for times are not sufficiently promising here to greatly
stimulate emigration from Europe.


The Crystal Palace Company, of London advertise the holding for six
months, from April 3 next, of an "exhibition of arts, manufactures, and
scientific, agricultural, and industrial products," and invite the
participation of American exhibitors. A court in a central position on
the main floor has been set aside for expected American contributions,
and the ordinary charge for space is two shillings per square foot. This
will probably seem a trifle steep to American exhibitors who are not
accustomed to pay for space in their own exposition buildings.


Last year was not a very surprising one in the matter of railway
extension within the limits of Illinois. The report of the Railway and
Warehouse Commissioners will show that but 135 miles of track were laid.
But there are 10,456 miles of track in use in the State. The companies
among these lines numbering sixty-four, operate 29,370 miles of road or
nearly 20,000 miles outside of Illinois. The total net income of these
companies was $81,720,256 and the dividends amounted to $36,374,474. In
1882 the dividends amounted to but $29,000,000. The average freight
charges in 1883 were 1.09 cents per mile, while the year before they
averaged 1.20 cents, hence it must follow that the amount of traffic
greatly increased over that of 1882.


A lecture course for farmers at the Nebraska Agricultural College, will
be given from February 4-15, by the regular instructors in the college.
One or more lectures will be given on the following topics: Breeds of
cattle and swine; breeding, improving, and care of stock; care of farm
machinery; health on the farm; adulteration of food; economical farming;
tame grapes; ensilage; what to feed; meteorology and plant growth;
sorghum-growth and manufacture; horticulture; principles of pruning; the
digestive organs of domestic animals; injurious insects. A number of
leading farmers of the State have been invited to lecture upon their
specialties. All the facilities of illustration and study owned by the
college will be at the disposal of the students attending the course.
These include several compound microscopes, a good agricultural
library, meteorological apparatus, six breeds of cattle and four of
swine, orchard, nursery, arboretum, vineyard, etc., etc. A limited
number will be boarded at the college farm for a price not to exceed
three dollars per week. Persons attending will be aided in securing
cheap board in the city. Persons expecting to attend or desiring further
information should write to S.R. Thompson, Dean Agricultural College,
Lincoln, Neb.


Some of our readers may wish to paste this item in their scrap books. It
cost to run the United States Government last year the sum of
$251,428,117, expended as follows: To supply deficiencies, $9,853,869;
legislative, executive, and judicial expenses, $20,332,908; sundry civil
expenses, $25,425,479; support of the army, $27,032,099; naval service,
$14,903,559; Indian service, $5,219,604; rivers and harbors,
$18,988,875; forts and fortifications, $375,000; military academy,
$335,557; post-office department, $1,902,178; pensions, $116,000,000;
consular and diplomatic service, $1,256,655; agricultural department,
$427,280; expenses District of Columbia, $3,496,060. The interest on the
public debt amounted to $59,160,131 and the amount of principal paid off
was $134,178,756. The receipts from internal revenue were $144,720,368,
and from custom duties $214,706,496.


The Minnesota State Horticultural Society will hold its seventeenth
annual meeting at the College of Agriculture, Minneapolis, four days,
beginning with January 15th, and with the Minnesota State Forestry
Association on the 18th. A cordial invitation is given to all persons
interested in horticulture and forestry to be present. A large number of
papers and reports are to be read, followed by discussions. These
reports are by persons who possess a thorough practical acquaintance
with the subjects presented, including such men as Peter M. Gideon, J.C.
Plumb, Dr. T.H. Hoskins, Prof. C.W. Hall, Prof. J.L. Budd, Dr. F.B.
Hough, H.J. Joly, J.F. Williams, and others. A number of premiums are
offered for apples, grapes, plants, and flowers, vegetables, seeds, and
miscellaneous objects. John S. Harris, of La Crescent, is President, and
Oliver Gibbs, Jr., of Lake City, is Secretary.




ILLINOIS STATE BOARD.


The Illinois State Board of Agriculture held a business session in
Springfield last week. All the members were present at one time or
another during the meeting. The premium list was revised for the fair of
1884. The premiums for speed were somewhat increased over last year. In
cattle sweepstakes classes it was decided that no animals can be allowed
to compete except the winners of a first prize in other classes in which
they had been entered, except in the case of the grand sweepstakes, to
which will be permitted animals not previously entered for any prize.

The Board is to make a laudable attempt to stimulate corn culture and to
benefit the corn growers of the State. It offers $100 for the best
bushel (ears) of corn grown in each of the three grand divisions of the
State, and a second prize of $50 for the next best sample in the three
divisions. The premium samples are to become the property of the Board,
and the winners of prize premiums must deliver on cars directed to the
agricultural rooms, Springfield, twenty-five bushels (ears) of same
variety that shall equal in merit the premium bushel. The winners of the
second premiums must send the samples and fifteen bushels of same
variety and of equal quality. The premiums will not be paid until the
comparisons of the premium corn with the larger lots are made by a
committee of the Board at its winter meeting in January next. The corn
thus donated to the Board will be distributed to farmers throughout the
State for planting in 1885.

Premiums are to be offered for tools, implements and appurtenances used
in the coal mining and handling industry of the State.

Premiums for poultry have been increased, and an expert will be selected
to do all the judging in the poultry department.

The chicken exhibit at the Fat Stock Show will not be continued.

The committee of dairymen appointed at the late meeting of the Illinois
Dairymen's Association did not present themselves at the State Board
meeting to confer about holding a dairy exhibit either at the State Fair
or the Fat Stock Show, as instructed to do. No explanation of the
failure was made. The State Board, however, to leave nothing undone to
establish its desire to meet the dairymen half way or more, appointed a
committee consisting of Messrs. David, Chester, and Griffith, to confer
with the DeKalb committee, in Chicago, at some convenient time to be
agreed upon.

It was decided to hold the next Illinois State Fair at Chicago the week
beginning September 8th, and the Fat Stock Show at the Exposition
Building, Chicago, beginning November 11th.




SORGHUM AT WASHINGTON.


Prof. Wiley, of the Department of Agriculture at Washington, will soon
issue his report upon the sorghum business of 1883. Newspaper
correspondents have been permitted to make a digest of the report. He
pronounces erroneous the prevalent impression that every farmer may
become his own sugar-maker. Sorghum, unlike sugar beet, contains various
non-crystallizable sugars, the separation of which demands much skill
and scientific knowledge. Sorghum-sugar will have to be made in large
factories. The existing factories have shown that it can be made, but
how profitably or unprofitably can not be stated by Prof. Wiley, who
suggests that farmers near factories may, in effect, make their own
sugar by raising the cane and trading it at factories for sugar. Cane
giving sixty pounds of sugar per ton ought to bring the farmer
thirty-five pounds, the rest of the sugar and molasses going to the
manufacturer to pay expenses and yield profit. The profitableness of
making sugar from sorghum depends largely on utilizing all waste
products. The scums and sediments make manure hardly inferior to guano.
Bagasse, or crushed cane, can be turned into manure by being thrown into
hog-pens, as at Rio Grande, N.J., or it will make a fair quality of
printing paper. It is not economical to burn it. If the manufacture of
sorghum-sugar is proved to be profitable, it will result in supplying to
a large extent our demand for sugar, but as sorghum makes a great deal
more molasses in proportion to sugar than sugar-cane does, the Professor
concludes that when there is enough sugar there will be a great deal
more molasses than can be disposed of.

Prof. Wiley has made experimentally some fair samples of rum and alcohol
from sorghum molasses. Under favorable circumstances one gallon of
molasses weighing eleven pounds would give 2.75 pounds absolute alcohol,
3.03 pounds of 90 per cent, and 5.5 whisky or rum. Thus each gallon of
molasses would give nearly half a gallon of commercial alcohol and two
thirds of a gallon of whisky or rum. As it has been abundantly proved,
he says, that sugar can be made from sorghum, the Government should make
no further experiments in this direction. Prof. Wiley has tried the
diffusion process, and finds it yields 20 per cent more sugar, but at a
somewhat higher cost than grinding. The Government, he thinks, should
purchase machinery for large experiments in the diffusion process, and
should raise its cane somewhere else than near Washington, as land there
is expensive and not adapted to the purpose. The Government should also
make arrangements with agricultural colleges or other agencies in
various States for experimenting with sorghum-culture to determine what
parts of the country are most favorable to the culture of
sugar-producing plants. Prof. Wiley suggests in each State the trial of
two acres divided into ten plots--five for sorghum, four for beets, and
one for corn--to test for purposes of comparison the general fertility
of the soil and the character of the season. The Government ought to
carry on for a series of years the process of selection of sorghum seed
in order to secure an improvement in the quality of the cane.




THE COLD SPELL.


The cold weather of last week seems to have extended over nearly the
entire North American Continent. Nothing for severity has been known to
equal it during a long series of years. East, West, North, and South it
was all the same, differing in degree of course, but uniformly colder
than scarce ever known in the same latitude.

The greatest loss to stock so far as heard from was in that in transit
to market. On some of the roads the losses were heavy. A dispatch from
Independence, Mo., says a train of fifteen cars, loaded with mules from
Texas via the Iron Mountain and Southern road, arrived there on the 5th,
when it was discovered that at least 100 of the mules had frozen to
death, and the others were in a freezing condition. The mules were two
years old and direct from grass. They had been three days without food.

Many trains arriving at Chicago had scores of frozen animals.

No great disaster is yet reported from the far West or from Minnesota
and Dakota. Still there must have been great suffering not only among
the dumb brutes, but among human beings as well. It is fortunate that
polar waves do not visit us more frequently.

The effect upon fruit, buds, trees, and shrubs is not yet ascertained.
It will be a marvel if many localities are not barren of fruit of nearly
all kinds next year.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER will be very glad if its readers will favor it with
their ideas and the results of their observations in regard to the
damage of all sorts done by the intense cold of the first week of the
year.




QUESTIONS ANSWERED.


William Miller and F. Myrick, Peotone, Ill.--1. What are the laws in
regard to drainage passed by the last Legislature? 2. Who is the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court and who his associates?

Answer--1. This is a question probably neither lawyers nor judges in
Illinois are competent to answer. It you doubt it procure from the clerk
of your County Court a copy of the public laws of 1883 and read the
fifteen pages relating to drainage. 2. The Chief Justice of the United
States Supreme Court is M.R. Waite, and his associates are S.F. Miller,
S.J. Field, J.P. Bradley, J.M. Harlan. W.B. Woods, S. Mathews, H. Gray,
and S. Blatchford.

Samuel Snodgrass, Meade Co., Ky.--1. I have some large, old, and
apparently healthy, apple trees, but they are comparatively barren. What
can I do for them? 2. I have others which appear to be going to decay
and will soon die. Had I better anticipate their death by cutting them
down, or try to save them as I would like to do, for their associations
with the past.

Answer--1. We know no better course for you to take than to dig a deep
ditch all around the trees, say three feet wide and as many deep, and
just within the outer reach of the limbs, and fill this in with half the
earth removed and the other half made up of vegetable matter, ashes,
road dirt, and such manure from the barn and stable as you can spare.
Having done this make an arrangement about each tree that will retain
all the rainfall which comes down to the earth beneath and collect as
much more from the open spaces about as possible. 2. Your old and
decaying trees may be saved if decay has not gone too far. But the
remedy is an heroic one, and rather expensive as you will find. First
treat the decaying trees as described for the healthy ones, with the
exception you add a greater proportion of fertilizers and manure when
you fill in the ditch with half new material. Then (and all this work
should be done, as it can readily be done, in your latitude during the
cold months when vegetation is at a stand) give the old trees a thorough
pruning, even going as far as to remove 90 per cent of all the leaf and
fruit buds on the tree. Then wait for results, looking for nothing more
than a new growth of wood the first year, but fruitfulness thereafter
and a new lease of life. But remember as in the first place, care must
be taken to supply abundant water, indeed as much more as the average
rainfall, so much being absolutely necessary to afford the roots the
amount of manurial plant food, in solution, the new departure demands.
Every fruit-grower knows when a dwarf pear has borne a certain number of
crops, fruit buds cease to form and the tree becomes nearly barren. If
at this stage the dwarf is deprived of every bud, whether fruit or leaf,
and the limbs are left to resemble bare sticks, and at the same time the
earth about the roots is fortified with wood ashes and well rotted
manure, a handsome growth of branches will be made the first year and a
crop of fruit result the second. This, the writer has tried with
perfectly satisfactory results twice on the same dwarfs, and has others
which, having been submitted to this course of treatment, in the fall of
1882, made a handsome growth in 1883, and have set fruit buds for a good
crop in 1884. The life of an average apple tree in Illinois is scarcely
more than 35 or 40 years; but there is no doubt if, when they begin to
show signs of decrepitude or decay, they are treated as above, they may
be made to live and bear fruit for perhaps a hundred years.




AMERICAN ASH.


There are five well-known species of this genus (Fraxinus Americana),
and they occupy an important place as valuable timber trees. This is
especially true of the white ash, more commonly called the American ash.
Of this tree the late Arthur Bryant, Sr., said in his Book on Trees: "It
is one of the most valuable and worthy of culture for the quality of its
wood and the rapidity of its growth. When full grown it is one of the
largest of the trees of our forests. * * * * The prairie soils of Iowa
and Central and Northern Illinois are well adapted to the growth of the
white ash."




WAYSIDE NOTES.

BY A MAN OF THE PRAIRIE.


It is a strange and almost an unheard of thing for any one to say a good
word for the "tree peddler" but I am going to say it if it breaks the
heart of every horticultural baby in the land. Since a time to which the
memory of man runneth not back, the poor "tree peddler" has been abused
and maligned by horticultural speakers and writers. In conventions he
has been ridiculed and denounced. Every cross-road nursery-man not
possessed of stock sufficient to warrant a line of advertising even in
his local paper, nor business force enough to send an agent through his
own neighborhood to take orders for trees, has spoken in a horticultural
meeting or written a letter to his favorite paper, warning the farmers
against the wiles of the oily tongued fellow with colored fruit plates,
specimens of preserved fruits, and an order book for trees, shrubs, and
vines. And I think I have known of some of the big fish in the nursery
business who with one end of their tongues have lashed some other big
fish in the same business for employing irresponsible agents to sell
stock for them, while with the other end they were commanding a small
army of the same class of agents to go forth into all the world and
preach the gospel of tree planting and--sell trees. Others have sold and
continue to sell trees to peddlers without limit, for cash, and of any
and all varieties called for, while they denounced the system of
peddling in unmeasured terms. Now it is just as possible for a tree
peddler to be an honest man as it is for the man who grows trees to sell
to be honest. I do not say that all men belonging to either class are
honest. It would be equally absurd to say that all of either class are
dishonest. I despise the quack, the liar, the deceiver in any business,
and I have no respect or love for the man who will sell worthless
varieties of trees or wrongly named varieties, knowingly. Honesty here
as elsewhere is the best policy. But here is a fact, as I believe: It is
better to plant an inferior tree than none at all, and I know of
neighbors who would go down into their graves without ever planting a
tree if some persuasive peddler had not talked it into them to do so,
and these same neighbors now have quite respectable orchards. Here is
another fact: One half the orders sent to nursery-men by farmers during
the past twenty years have called for varieties utterly worthless for
the localities in which they were to be planted. And the tree peddler
often gratifies the purchaser by pretending to sell to him a sort which
he has made up his mind to have because he knows it was good in his old
home a thousand miles away. But the peddler, not having this variety,
and knowing that if he did have it it would prove worthless, substitutes
a Ben Davis or some other approved variety, and it goes into the ground
and in due time produces an abundance of excellent fruit. In this case
the peddler does a really good thing. If nursery-men will stop
propagating everything but varieties adapted to the country and the
markets, and many of them are doing this, the tree peddler will be
powerless for mischief--will in fact become a great public benefactor.
But so long as nursery-men will continue to grow and sell worthless
varieties, and so long as the people will remain in ignorance regarding
adaptability, so long will the dishonest peddler remain an unmitigated
nuisance and fraud. In brief these three things are wanted: Intelligent
and honest nurserymen; orchard planters who either know what varieties
are best for them to have, or who are willing to trust the selection to
the afore-mentioned intelligent and honest nursery-men; and third,
first-class talkers, intelligent as to varieties and methods of culture,
who buy only of the intelligent and honest nursery-men, to go through
the country and sell trees. It is unfortunate that it takes so many
words to express what I wanted to say, but I am done at last.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have got it! Yes, all the ice I want is now white for the harvest in
our "artificial" pond. It is the only thing that reconciles me to this
fierce visit of polar weather. As soon as a trifle milder wave gets
along our way we shall carefully store away sufficient for the year's
use. By the way, where are the poor deluded woodchucks, muskrats, and
Old Settlers, who told us we were to bask in mild etherialness all
winter long? I am disgusted this morning, with the mercury at 30 degrees
below zero, and still going down, at the whole batch of them, and with
Vennor and Hazen, and all professionally weatherwise men and things. I
have heard of little real suffering in my neighborhood from the cold,
among either humans or brutes. Doubtless, when the weather moderates
and people get out to tell each other all about the cold spell, there
will be many true tales of intense suffering and more than the usual
romancing about the terrible week. And then the Oldest Inhabitant will
thaw out, and with all the self-satisfaction that superior age and
experience crown him with, will tell how much colder it was in such and
such a year, until we wish this little spell had sealed his memory and
mouth, for we do all take a great pride in living in a time that excels
all other times, albeit, if it be only in a storm or a freeze. But in
these things the early times of the Old Settler can never be excelled,
no matter in what century he flourishes. He is always master of the
situation. His experiences are like those of no other settler that ever
lived and died. With him, imagination has gradually usurped the place of
experience and its isothermal dips and dodges carry him through hotter
and through colder seasons than are marked down in any Standard Time
PRAIRIE FARMER, or any other map or chart in existence. But for this
weather business I should like to live next door to the Old Settler, for
he is generally truthful, good, kind, full of practical knowledge and
common sense.




LETTER FROM CHAMPAIGN.


We are having some very sharp winter weather, and sleighing as
uninterruptedly good since the 20th of December as I ever remember. This
morning, January 5th, the mercury reported 28 degrees below zero at 5:30
A.M., and 20 degrees below at 10 o'clock. This is the coldest since
January 29th, 1873, when 36 degrees below was recorded at the Industrial
University here, and 42 degrees below by the spirit thermometer at one
of the Jacksonville institutions. But the wind was west at that date,
and it is so to-day, showing our coldest weather comes from that
direction rather than from the northwest or north. The explanation I
suppose to be, those great fountains of cold storage, the Colorado
mountains, lie west and southwest of us, and are several hundred miles
nearer than the lower peaks and ranges northwest.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is an interesting and important truth to know at this time that an
unexpected source for seed corn has been discovered here at home. It has
been ascertained by experiment and investigation that the early frosted
corn, which has been allowed to stand in the field, has a sound germ,
and though shrunken, will make fairly good seed, whereas corn which was
not frosted till late in October, and ripened in most respects, save
drying out, is wholly unfit for seed, having had the cells of the
kernels ruptured by the freezings it has been subjected to. This rupture
of cells the grain of the frosted corn escaped, having parted with the
surplus water of vegetation before hard weather set in. However, the
early frosted and shrunken cane fit for seed may be confined to this
county or neighborhood, or a narrow area, and therefore I advise every
one who thinks of making use of it to ascertain for himself, by the
usual methods, whether the germ is sound or not.

       *       *       *       *       *

Several parties have written me--one from Missouri, another from
Indiana, and a third from Kentucky, that they have seed corn for sale,
cheap and in quantity. I have no doubt of it, and I have accordingly
advised each to advertise it in THE PRAIRIE FARMER, if they are really
desirous of selling, stating briefly what variety, where grown, and at
what price. I should be glad to advertise it for them gratuitously, but
the contract of THE PRAIRIE FARMER with its contributors contains a
clause to the effect that "they shall neither use its columns to grind
their own axes nor the axes of anybody else." With the recourse of early
frosted corn to go to, and the assistance of appropriately selected seed
from abroad, the gross mistakes and disappointments of 1883 are pretty
certain to be avoided in 1884.

       *       *       *       *       *

No doubt many who are more or less familiar with the Reports on Hog
Cholera in the official publication of the Department of Agriculture,
ask themselves why Dr. Detmers is singled out by Frenchmen as the sole
authority on swine diseases, when his colleagues of the commission, Dr.
Salmon and Laws went nearly as far as he did in their extravagant
statements. But the prominence Dr. Detmers has obtained in the
estimation of Frenchmen is now explained in this: At a late sitting of
the French Academy of Sciences that eminent savant, Pasteur, referred to
him and his investigations in flattering terms. Giving an account of the
discovery of the microbe which causes the rouget of swine in France,
Pasteur said: "Respect for historic truth compels me to state, however,
that in the month of March, 1882, the microbe of the rouget was
discovered at Chicago, in America, by Professor Detmers, in a series of
investigations which did great honor to their author." With the
indorsement of one of the most eminent scientists in the world, before a
body equally distinguished, Dr. Detmers may find some compensation in
being singled out as the scape goat for an unfortunate commission which
has cost the country many millions.

    B.F.J.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _one year, and the
subscriber gets a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED
STATES, FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any
first-class weekly agricultural paper in this country._




POULTRY NOTES.

Poultry-raisers. Write For Your Paper.


A DUCK FARM.


You will not find it on the map because it is not mentioned there, and I
shall not tell you where it is because I promised the little woman who
owns it, and who gave me permission to tell other women what she had
done, that I would not mention her name or the name of the place where
she lives and works. How did I happen to find her? I didn't find her; it
just happened--i.e., if anything ever happens in this queer old world of
ours. We bumped our heads together once in a railway accident, and we
have been firm friends ever since.

Her farm is only a bit of land, some thirty acres, but for the last five
years she has made from ten to twelve hundred dollars a year from it,
and most of the money came from the ducks. She sells eggs for hatching,
and ducks for breeding and for exhibition, but the main object is ducks
and feathers for market. She thinks ducks are less trouble and quite as
profitable as hens. She keeps twenty-four stock ducks, eight males and
sixteen females, through the winter. The ducks commence laying from the
middle of February to the first of March, and lay from 100 to 125 eggs
each in a season. The first laid eggs are set to get ducks to sell for
breeding stock and for the early summer market. For this purpose the
eggs from the ducks that are two or three years old are used, and when
hatched the ducklings from those eggs are marked by punching a small
round hole in the web of the feet. She thinks, and rightly, too, that
the eggs from the older ducks procure larger and more vigorous birds
than the first eggs from the young ducks.

As soon as the weather gets warm enough to ship without danger of
chilling on the way, she sells eggs for hatching at $3 per dozen, and
finds no difficulty in disposing of as many as she cares to spare at
that price. Her sales of eggs for hatching amount to about $100 yearly.
Besides the eggs used and sold for hatching she generally sends a
twenty-four-dozen case to New York just before Easter. These large,
finely-shaped, pure white eggs sell readily for Easter eggs, and bring
from forty to fifty cents per dozen.

From the eggs set on her own place during the season she raises from ten
to twelve hundred ducks each year. The ducklings are hatched from the
first of April up to about the first of August. Most of the ducklings
are raised by hen mothers, and she keeps some fifty hens for that
purpose. The hens are all pure Buff Cochins, and are kept until they are
two years and a half old. Besides raising two broods of ducks each
season, each hen pays her owner an average profit of seventy-five cents
a year from the sale of eggs for market. When fattened for market at the
end of the second season, these Cochin hens are large and heavy, and the
carcass of the old fowl generally sells for enough to pay for a pullet
to take her place. No chickens are raised on the farm; the pullets are
bought of a neighbor who keeps the Buff Cochins.

She aims to set several hens and the incubator at the same time; when
the eggs hatch the incubator ducklings are divided up among the hens;
one hen will care for twenty ducklings until they are old enough to care
for themselves. The eggs hatch well--those in the incubator quite as
well as those under hens, and when the incubator ducklings are once
mixed up with the others she finds it impossible to distinguish "which
from 'tother."

When the ducklings are ten or twelve hours old they are moved with the
mother hen to coops and safety runs, which are placed in an orchard near
the house. This orchard contains about four and a half acres, and the
coops are scattered over it a few rods apart. On the side of the orchard
that leads to the "pond lot," the bottom board of the fence is a foot
wide and comes close to the ground in order to keep the ducklings from
taking to the water too early in life.

When the ducklings are four weeks old the hens are taken away, but the
ducklings are kept in the orchard until they are six weeks old, or until
they are well feathered on the breast and under part of their bodies,
when they are turned into the pond lot, where they "take to the water
like ducks."

The pond lot contains nearly thirteen acres, five of which are covered
with water. Originally, this lot was a piece of low, rocky, bushy
pasture land, between two low ranges of hills. A stream of clear,
sparkling water, a famous trout brook, ran through the center. The woman
who proposed to raise ducks saw at once the advantage of such a
situation, and had a dam constructed near the upper end of the lot, and
later another was made lower down, so that the lot contained two large
ponds. Where the fences which separate my friend's land from that of her
neighbor cross the stream, water-gates are put in, which keep the ducks
from swimming out with the water; and the bottom boards of the fence
around the rest of the lot keep them from getting out that way. Two
well-trained dogs guard this lot at night, and woe to the two-footed or
four-footed prowler who intrudes.

The duck houses are simply long, low sheds--with the exception of the
one where the breeding stock is wintered, which is inclosed--placed on
the slope a few rods back from the water. They were built of refuse
lumber, and the cost was comparatively trifling. Connected with the
house for the breeding-stock is a small yard where the ducks are shut in
at night through the laying season. From the time when they are twelve
hours old till within twenty-four hours of the time when they are killed
for market, the ducklings are well fed with a great variety of food.
From the first meal until they are turned into the pond lot they are fed
every two hours between daylight and dark. "Little and often," is the
motto. Before they take to the water the ducklings are fed a little
cooked meat once each day, and doubtless this ration of meat has much to
do toward making the fine large ducks that my friend has a reputation
for raising. After they are turned into the pond lot the ducklings are
fed but three times a day till within two or three weeks of the time
when they are to be marketed; then they are confined in the fattening
yards and fed oftener.

The fattening yards are situated between the two ponds, and so arranged
as to inclose a portion of the stream.

The ducklings are marketed as fast as they reach a suitable age and
size. She commences sending them to market about the middle of June and
keeps it up till about the middle of September, when she quits till near
the middle of January. These prime young ducks, getting into market at a
time when such poultry is scarce, bring good prices--from 22 to 25 cents
a pound, dressed. By the time the price begins to decline she has
marketed all the earlier ones that she cares to spare, and the
later-hatched she keeps growing till mid-winter, when fine ducks are
again scarce and the price goes up. At Thanksgiving and during the
holidays when the markets are crowded with poultry of all kinds, she
holds on to her ducks, unless she has an order at an extra price.

At first my friend kept the Rouens; then she tried the Aylesburys, but
now she keeps only the pure Pekins, and is so well satisfied with them
that she has no desire to change for anything else. She says, "For
laying qualities, quick growth, great size, fine flesh and fine
feathers, the Pekins can not be excelled."

On her place I have seen six-weeks old Pekins that weighed six pounds a
pair alive, and those that dressed from three to four pounds each at ten
or twelve weeks. At five and six months her ducks dress from six to
eight pounds each. For the feathers, the best and finest of which are
carefully saved by themselves, my friend obtains forty cents per pound.

All the work connected with the duck-raising, except now and then some
heavy work which is necessary in the pond lot, is now performed by my
friend and her three children, a boy of fifteen, and two girls of
thirteen and eighteen.

There is a moral to this, but if you can't find it it will not do you
one bit of good.

FANNY FIELD.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSUMPTION CURED.

An old physician, retired from practice, having had placed in his hands
by an East India missionary the formula of a simple vegetable remedy for
the speedy and permanent cure of Consumption, Bronchitis, Catarrh,
Asthma and all throat and Lung Affections, also a positive and radical
cure for Nervous Debility and all Nervous Complaints, after having
tested its wonderful curative powers in thousands of cases, has felt it
his duty to make it known to his suffering fellows. Actuated by this
motive and a desire to relieve human suffering, I will send free of
charge, to all who desire it, this recipe, in German, French, or
English, with full directions for preparing and using. Sent by mail by
addressing with stamp, naming this paper.

W.A. NOYES, _149 Power's Block, Rochester, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *

A GUILT frame--the prison window.




THE APIARY.


APIARY APPLIANCES.


In the last issue of THE PRAIRIE FARMER the "Italian and German Bees"
were described true as life, by that prince of writers, L.L. Langstroth.
After a careful perusal of the article named, in which the good and bad
traits of each race are delineated, any person ought to be able to
choose intelligently which bee is best, all things taken into
consideration, for him to procure.

In starting an apiary, there is another item of equal importance, and
that is what kind of dwellings should be erected for the occupants of
this future city. The wants of the future tenants should be considered;
provide them with all modern conveniences, as to pantry and larder, and
don't forget, as some architects do, that abodes should be ventilated as
well as warm. Some bee-masters prefer houses that are high between
ceilings, others low; some prefer large houses, many again those that
are smaller. The size has to be made according to the frame chosen.
There are five different sizes of movable frames now in use among
bee-keepers, and those are equally successful who use either size. The
Langstroth is more in common use than any other. Some object to it,
claiming that it is too shallow.

[Illustration]

In looking at the plates of the five different sizes of frames, an idea
is gained how minds differ. Each one has its advocates, and its votaries
claim that the frame they use is the very best for all purposes. We were
once looking out of the window of a friend's house on her neat,
well-kept apiary, and remarked what baby hives. And we found no fault
with the baby, when this lady showed us her beautiful white sections of
comb-honey, and ate her delicious peaches, canned, with extracted honey
for sweetening.

It must be fun to handle the little Gallup, but the Langstroth has an
advantage over all others; it consists in this: that it is most used,
and if a person desires to sell his hives and frames, he can more
readily do so. It is also easily obtained, as it is kept in stock by
supply dealers, and can be quickly sent forward when ordered, but if it
was an off size wanted, a delay would occur; some change might have to
be made in the machinery, and it would cost more, as well as the delay
occasioned, which, if in the midst of the honey harvest, might cause
great loss.

Other appliances of the apiary, to suit this frame, are kept by supply
dealers; such as extractors, comb-baskets, uncapping cans, etc. With any
of these frames a hive can be made large or small, by regulating the
number of frames. If the hives are bottomless, as many make them, a tall
hive can be made by tiering up, as is practiced by those who work for
extracted honey. The Adair frame was formerly used in a hive called the
"New Idea, or Non-swarming Hive." Its non-swarming qualities consisted
in its being a long hive, and if empty frames were always kept in front,
so that the bees had to pass through empty space to reach the brood
nest, they would not swarm.

Frames should be placed in a hive an inch and one-half from center to
center, and should have three-eighths of an inch space between them and
the hive. This last item was considered of enough importance to have a
patent issued for it. If the distance from the top of the frames to the
honey board, or between the frames and the hive, is less than
three-eighths of an inch, the bees will propolis it together, and if it
is more, they will build comb between.

    MRS. L. HARRISON.




WHAT SHOULD BE WORKED FOR.


As publishers, says the Weekly Bee Journal, we should,

1. Encourage planting bee-pasturage, that there may be, every season, a
crop of honey to gather, in order to make apiculture a certain
occupation.

2. Foster district and local societies to afford mutual instruction, and
strengthen fraternization.

3. Institute large and attractive honey and apiarian exhibits at all
fairs, to educate the community to the desirableness of a superior
product.

4. Cultivate a discriminating domestic market, to encourage superiority
and excellence.

5. Sell at all times, and in all places, an honest article under an
honest name.

       *       *       *       *       *

BROWN'S BRONCHIAL TROCHES for Coughs and Colds: "I do not see how it
is possible for a public man to be himself in winter without this
valuable aid."--_Rev. R.M. Devens, Pocasset, Mass._

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prairie Farmer

and

Youth's Companion

One Year, $3 for the two.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB. CO., 150 Monroe Street, Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

RAILROADS.

A MAN WHO IS UNACQUAINTED WITH THE GEOGRAPHY OF THIS COUNTRY WILL SEE BY
EXAMINING THIS MAP THAT THE

[Illustration]

CHICAGO, ROCK ISLAND & PACIFIC R'Y

By the central position of its line, connects the East and the West by
the shortest route, and carries passengers, without change of cars,
between Chicago and Kansas City, Council Bluffs, Leavenworth, Atchison,
Minneapolis and St. Paul. It connects in Union Depots with all the
principal lines of road between the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans. Its
equipment is unrivaled and magnificent, being composed of Most
Comfortable and Beautiful Day Coaches, Magnificent Horton Reclining
Chair Cars, Pullman's Prettiest Palace Sleeping Cars, and the Best Line
of Dining Cars in the World. Three Trains between Chicago and Missouri
River Points. Two Trains between Chicago and Minneapolis and St. Paul,
via the Famous

"ALBERT LEA ROUTE."

A New and Direct Line, via Seneca and Kankakee, has recently been opened
between Richmond, Norfolk, Newport News, Chattanooga, Atlanta, Augusta,
Nashville, Louisville, Lexington, Cincinnati, Indianapolis and
Lafayette, and Omaha, Minneapolis and St. Paul and intermediate points.

All Through Passengers Travel on Fast Express Trains.

Tickets for sale at all principal Ticket Offices in the United States
and Canada.

Baggage checked through and rates of fare always as low as competitors
that offer less advantages.

For detailed information, get the Maps and Folders of the

GREAT ROCK ISLAND ROUTE,

At your nearest Ticket Office, or address

R.R. CABLE, Vice-Pres. & Gen'l M'g'r,

E. ST. JOHN, Gen'l Tkt. & Pass. Agt.

CHICAGO.

       *       *       *       *       *

STANDARD BOOKS.

NOW READY FOR DISTRIBUTION.

VOLUMES ONE AND TWO
OF THE
NATIONAL REGISTER NORMAN HORSES

The most reliable, concise, and exhaustive history of the horse in
general, and by far the most complete and authentic one of the Norman
horse in particular, ever published in the United States.

PRICES:

Volume I.........................................$ 2.00

Volume II........................................  1.50

When the two volumes are sent in one package to one address, $3.00.
Sent, postpaid, on receipt of price.

Address your orders to

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago

       *       *       *       *       *

REMEMBER _that_ $2.00 _pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _one year and, the
subscriber gets a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED
STATES, FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any
first-class weekly agricultural paper in this country._




SCIENTIFIC.


THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM.


"We have seen his star in the East," said the wise men. From what remote
region of antiquity may we suppose that this fancy came, that important
events to the world of man were heralded by marvelous phenomena of the
heavens? To the ignorant man, there can never be any world outside of
that with which he is concerned. So the primitive man had no use for
planets, comets, and the like, that were not in some way concerned with
his destiny. And we no doubt own our magnificent modern science of
astronomy to the quack system of astrology, which was only a device to
induce the heavenly bodies to minister to the importance and conceit of
man.

The accepted Scriptures tell us that the birth of the Savior of mankind
was heralded by the appearance of a remarkable star in the sky. Taking
this assertion to be true, it might be a matter of some interest to
consider what explanations have been made of this phenomenon. A large
majority of religious teachers, we admit, even to the present day, have
attempted no explanation whatever, but have settled the subject by
calling the star a miraculous appearance, concerning whose true nature
we can know nothing. But two solutions of the phenomenon have been given
by well-known astronomers, either of which, if accepted, will place the
miracle in the list of purely natural occurrences.

Kepler held that the Star of Bethlehem was simply a conjunction of the
planets. Astronomy, which, more fortunate than history, can bring
unimpeachable witnesses to its record of past events, assures us that
there was a remarkable conjunction, or rather three conjunctions of the
planets Jupiter and Saturn, in the year of Rome 747, or seven years
before the Christian era. It is now generally admitted that Christ was
probably born at least four years before the date fixed upon as the
first "year of our Lord," and remembering how much uncertainty hangs
about this date we might consider ourselves fully justified in placing
it, as Kepler did, in the year 7 B.C. This being granted, let us see how
the occurrence of the conjunctions in this year explains the miracle of
the "Star."

In the first place, note that the Magi, or Wise Men, of the East
(presumably the country of Chaldea) were the first to call attention to
the star as indicating the birth of the "King of the Jews." The
Chaldeans were devoted to astrology, and it is only reasonable to infer
that whatever remarkable appearance they saw in the sky, they would
endeavor to explain it by their astrological laws. On the 29th of May, 7
B.C., a conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn occurred, in the 20th degree
of the constellation Pisces, close to the first point of Aries; on the
29th of September of the same year, another conjunction of these planets
took place, in the 16th degree of Pisces; and on the 5th of December, a
third, in the 15th degree of the same sign. (These are not conjectures
or inferences, but known astronomical facts.) If we suppose that the
Magi, intent on their study of the heavens, saw the first of these
conjunctions, they actually saw it _in the East_, for on May 29, it
would rise three and one half hours before sunrise. It is not necessary
to suppose that the planets approached near enough to each other to
appear as one star, for they probably did not--it was their conjunctions
that gave their astrological significance. It plainly indicated to these
observers that some important event was impending, and what could be
more important than the birth of a great man? But where was this one to
appear? The sign Pisces was the most significant one for the Jews, for
according to astrological legend, in the year 2865 A.M. a conjunction of
Jupiter and Saturn in this sign had heralded the birth of Moses; the
proximity to Aries indicated that the hero foretold was of kingly
lineage; the Jewish expectation of a great king had become a well-known
story in Chaldea during the captivity, ergo, the inference was prompt
and sure, this conjunction indicated the birth of the expected King of
the Jews. That they might be among the first to do honor to so great a
personage as they believed this king to be, the wise men soon set out
for Judea. The journey probably took them five months or more. On their
way they witnessed the second conjunction, which no doubt only
strengthened their faith. If they performed the journey from Jerusalem
to Bethlehem at the time of the third conjunction, December 5, in the
evening, as the narration implies, the stars would be some distance east
of the meridian, and would seem to move from southeast to southwest, or
towards Bethlehem. Their standing over the house we may regard as an
additional statement that crept into the narration probably through its
repetitions.

Such is Kepler's explanation of the Star of Bethlehem. But before he had
given this to the world, indeed while he was an infant in his cradle,
Tycho Brahe had connected the phenomenon with that of one of the great
variable stars of the solar system.

The latter astronomer discovered, in 1572, what appeared to be a new
star in the constellation, Cassiopeia. It was a star of the first
magnitude when first perceived, and daily it increased in brilliancy,
till it out-shone Sirius, equaled Venus in lustre, and could be
perceived, even by the naked eye, at noonday. For nearly a month the
star shone; at first it had a white light, then a yellow, and finally it
was a bright red. Then it slowly faded, and in about sixteen months had
disappeared.

Amidst all the conjecture concerning this remarkable appearance, some
regarding it as a new world in process of creation, others as a sun on
fire, Tycho Brahe held to the belief, though unable to prove it, that it
was a star with a regular period of light and of darkness, caused
possibly by its nearness to, or distance from, the earth. When the
telescope was invented, forty years later, the accuracy of this theory
was known. At the spot carefully mapped out by Tycho Brahe, a telescopic
star was found, undoubtedly the same one whose brilliant appearance had
so startled the world in 1572. Upon this, astronomers began to study the
annals of their science for similar appearances, and found that a very
brilliant star had appeared and disappeared near the same spot in the
heavens in 1264, and also in 945. The inference was that this star had a
period of about three hundred years, and counting back, imagination
might place one of its periods of brilliancy very near the time of
Christ's birth. For this reason it received the name of the Star of
Bethlehem, and many have fully accepted the theory which makes this
variable luminary identical with the "Star of the East."

This second theory has especial interest just now, for if astronomical
calculations are correct, we may look for the reappearance of this
remarkable star during the coming year. If it does fulfill the
prediction of its return it must be reckoned as one of the most
noteworthy phenomena of the century.

For the benefit of amateur observers, who are as likely as any to be the
first to perceive this remarkable sight, we may say that Cassiopeia, the
constellation in which it will appear, lies very near the North Star.
You all know how to find the Polar Star by the pointers of the Great
Dipper; continue this line beyond about an equal distance, and you will
strike Caph, the largest star in Cassiopeia, or the Chair, so-called
because the stars form the outline of an inverted chair. Near one of
these the wandering luminary will probably flash out, "to amaze a
wondering world."

We may remark, in conclusion, that though there are quite a number of
variable stars, their nature and the cause of their changes are but
imperfectly understood. The Star of Bethlehem has no doubt an orbit,
which brings it much nearer the earth at some times than others. But
astronomers do not believe that the mere fact of distance explains all
changes. There is a star known as Mira, which for eleven months is
wholly invisible to the naked eye, then flames forth as a star of the
first magnitude, and is visible for a period of nearly three months,
fading at its close into darkness again. The star Algol, in the
constellation Perseus, is usually of the second magnitude, but every two
and a-half days it begins to decline in brilliancy, becomes very faint,
and remains thus for about three hours, and then waxes bright again.
Possibly this may be caused by the shadow of another star. In 1866 a
star of the eighth magnitude, in the Northern Crown, suddenly flamed up
into extraordinary brilliancy, remained thus for several months and
gradually subsided. This star was examined with the spectrum, and showed
lines of burning hydrogen. This led to the theory, now held, that the
increase in brilliancy of these stars is caused by the incandescence of
this gas. These fixed stars are all supposed to be suns of other
systems, and to be surrounded--like our sun--with envelopes of fiery
gases; from some cause not at all understood these gases may, at
regular periods, flame up with fiercer heat than usual, and produce this
appearance of greatly increased light. This is a very inadequate
explanation, no doubt, but it is the best that astronomers have yet been
able to devise in the matter.

    A.C.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKS.

Books Free!

Good books are valued by intelligent men and women more than silver and
gold. They are treasures in every home. They are to the mind what light
and heat are to plants. They

_Store the Mind with Useful Knowledge;_

the mind directs the hands. An intelligent man has an advantage over one
who is ignorant, whether he is a farmer, or mechanic, or merchant, and
is surer of success in his occupation. Think how

_Losses of Time and Money may be Saved_

by having some book at hand containing just the information desired in
some line of the rural industries. We offer an excellent opportunity for
any one to obtain BOOKS FREE for himself or family, and also for
societies, farmers' clubs, and associations to make additions to a
library, or to start one.

These books comprise standard works, and the latest and best books for

Farmers,    Stockmen,
  Dairymen,   Fruit-Growers,
    Gardeners,   Florists,
      Poultrymen,  Apiarists,
        Silk-Culturists,  Housekeepers,
          Architects,    Etc., Etc.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY will give to any person,
association, or club, who will obtain and send subscribers to THE
PRAIRIE FARMER (including both new subscribers and renewals), at the
regular price of the paper ($2) each, any of the books contained in our
Book List on the following terms:

For THREE subscribers, books to the amount of $1.50.

For FOUR subscribers, books to the amount of $2.00.

For FIVE subscribers, books to the amount of $2.50.

For SIX subscribers, books to the amount of $3.00.

For SEVEN subscribers, books to the amount of $3.50.

For EIGHT subscribers, books to the amount of $4.00

For TEN subscribers, books to the amount of $5.00.

_For Twelve Subscriptions and Upward,_

A Dollar's Worth of Books for Every Two Subscriptions sent at $2.00
each.

All books given under these offers will be delivered at our office, No.
150 Monroe street.

If it is desired that they shall be forwarded by express, they will be
packed and delivered at the express office by us, the receiver to pay
cost of carriage.

Sent by mail to any part of the United States or Canada, the postage
will be seven cents on each dollar's worth of books.

It is necessary that parties to whom the books are given shall remit us
the postage before the books are sent.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Dictionary Free!

This is no catchpenny affair, but a valuable lexicon. It is the popular

AMERICAN DICTIONARY,

on the basis of Webster, Worcester, Johnson, and other eminent American
and English authorities. It contains over 32,000 words, with accurate
definitions, proper spelling, and exact pronunciation; to which is added
a mass of valuable information. It is enriched with 400 illustrations.

REMEMBER,

every subscriber at the regular price of THE PRAIRIE FARMER gets this
Dictionary FREE, if preferred to our commercial map.

       *       *       *       *       *

HERE IS ANOTHER.

ROPP'S CALCULATOR

And Account Book for 1884.

This is the most useful thing in the way of a memorandum book and
calculator ever issued. It is a work of nearly 80 pages of printed
matter and an equal number of blank leaves, ruled, for keeping accounts.
The contents include a vast array of practical calculations, 100,000 or
more in number, arranged for reference like a dictionary, so that a
farmer or business man may turn to the figures, and find the answer to
any problem in business.

There are three kinds. We use No. 3. Full leather; assorted colors, with
flap, slate pocket, and a renewable account book, ruled with divisions
or headings especially adapted to farmers' use. The retail price of this
book in leather is $1. We will send it FREE to every subscriber to THE
PRAIRIE FARMER who sends us $2. Or we will send THREE copies of No. 1,
the cheaper issue.

       *       *       *       *       *

AND YET ANOTHER.

American Etiquette and Rules of Politeness.

It is the latest and best standard work recommended and endorsed by all
who have read it. The acknowledged authority. Beautifully and
appropriately illustrated; handsomely and substantially bound. It
contains 38 chapters, treating on all subjects relating to etiquette. We
send this book--plain edition, to any subscriber desiring it who sends
$2.00 for THE PRAIRIE FARMER year, or for two subscribers to THE PRAIRIE
FARMER at $2 each, we will send American Etiquette bound in English
cloth, burnished edges.

Our large and varied premium list will be issued in a few days. Send for
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.

TO PRESERVE THE HEALTH

Use the Magneton Appliance Co.'s

MAGNETIC LUNG PROTECTOR!

PRICE ONLY $5.

They are priceless to LADIES, GENTLEMEN, and CHILDREN with WEAK LUNGS;
no case of PNEUMONIA OR CROUP is ever known where these garments are
worn. They also prevent and cure HEART DIFFICULTIES, COLDS, RHEUMATISM,
NEURALGIA, THROAT TROUBLES, DIPHTHERIA, CATARRH, AND ALL KINDRED
DISEASES. Will WEAR any service for THREE YEARS. Are worn over the
under-clothing.

CATARRH, It is needless to describe the symptoms of this nauseous
disease that is sapping the life and strength of only too many of the
fairest and best of both sexes. Labor, study, and research in America,
Europe, and Eastern lands, have resulted in the Magnetic Lung Protector,
affording cure for Catarrh, a remedy which contains No DRUGGING OF THE
SYSTEM, and with the continuous stream of Magnetism permeating through
the afflicted organs, MUST RESTORE THEM TO A HEALTHY ACTION. WE PLACE
OUR PRICE for this Appliance at less than one-twentieth of the price
asked by others for remedies upon which you take all the chances, and WE
ESPECIALLY INVITE the patronage of the MANY PERSONS who have tried
DRUGGING THEIR STOMACHS WITHOUT EFFECT.

HOW TO OBTAIN This Appliance. Go to your druggist and ask for them. If
they have not got them, write to the proprietors, enclosing the price,
in letter at our risk, and they will be sent to you at once by mail,
post paid.

Send stamp for the "New Departure in Medical Treatment WITHOUT
MEDICINE," with thousands of testimonials,

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO., 218 State Street, Chicago, Ill.

NOTE.--Send one dollar in postage stamps or currency (in letter at our
risk) with size of shoe usually worn, and try a pair of our Magnetic
Insoles, and be convinced of the power residing in our Magnetic
Appliances. Positively _no cold feet where they are worn, or money
refunded_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLICATIONS.

MARSHALL M. KIRKMAN'S BOOKS ON RAILROAD TOPICS.

DO YOU WANT TO BECOME A RAILROAD MAN

IF YOU DO, THE BOOKS DESCRIBED BELOW POINT THE WAY.

The most promising field for men of talent and ambition at the present
day is the railroad service. The pay is large in many instances, while
the service is continuous and honorable. Most of our railroad men began
life on the farm. Of this class is the author of the accompanying books
descriptive of railway operations, who has been connected continuously
with railroads as a subordinate and officer for 27 years. He was brought
up on a farm, and began railroading as a lad at $7 per month. He has
written a number of standard books on various topics connected with the
organization, construction, management and policy of railroads. These
books are of interest not only to railroad men but to the general reader
as well. They are indispensable to the student. They present every phase
of railroad life, and are written in an easy and simple style that both
interests and instructs. The books are as follows:

"RAILWAY EXPENDITURES--THEIR EXTENT,
OBJECT AND ECONOMY."--A Practical
Treatise on Construction and Operation.
In Two Volumes, 850 pages.                         $4.00

"HAND BOOK OF RAILWAY EXPENDITURES."--Practical
Directions for Keeping
the Expenditure Accounts.                           2.00

"RAILWAY REVENUE AND ITS COLLECTION."--And
Explaining the Organization of
Railroads.                                          2.50

"THE BAGGAGE PARCEL AND MAIL TRAFFIC
OF RAILROADS."--An interesting work
on this important service; 425 pages.               2.00

"TRAIN AND STATION SERVICE"--Giving
The Principal Rules and Regulations governing
Trains; 280 pages.                                  2.00

"THE TRACK ACCOUNTS OF RAILROADS."--And
how they should be kept. Pamphlet.                  1.00

"THE FREIGHT TRAFFIC WAY-BILL."--Its
Uses Illustrated and Described. Pamphlet.            .50

"MUTUAL GUARANTEE."--A Treatise on Mutual
Suretyship. Pamphlet.                                .50

Any of the above books will be sent post paid on receipt
of price, by

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
150 Monroe St.          CHICAGO, ILL.

Money should be remitted by express, or by draft check or post office
order.

       *       *       *       *       *

CUT THIS OUT & Return to us with TEN CTS. & you'll get by mail A GOLDEN
BOX OF GOODS that will bring you in MORE MONEY, in One Month, than
anything else in America. Absolute Certainty. Need no capital. M. Young,
173 Greenwich St. N. York.

       *       *       *       *       *

40 (1884) Chromo Cards, no 2 alike, with name, 10c., 13 pks, $1.
GEORGE I. REED & CO., Nassau, N.Y.




HOUSEHOLD.

    For nothing lovelier can be found
    In woman than to study _household_ good.--Milton.


HOW THE ROBIN CAME.


    Happy young friends, sit by me,
    Under May's blown apple-tree;
    Hear a story, strange and old,
    By the wild red Indians told,
    How the Robin came to me:

    Once a great chief left his son,--
    Well-beloved, his only one,
    When the boy was well-nigh grown,
    In the trial-lodge alone
    Left for tortures long and slow
    Youths like him must undergo,
    Who their pride of manhood test,
    Lacking water, food and rest,
    Seven days the fast he kept,
    Seven nights he never slept.
    Then the poor boy, wrung with pain,
    Weak from nature's overstrain,
    Faltering, moaned a low complaint;
    "Spare me, Father, for I faint!"
    But the chieftain, haughty-eyed,
    Hid his pity in his pride.
    "You shall be a hunter good,
    Knowing never lack of food;
    You shall be a warrior great,
    Wise as fox, and strong as bear;
    Many scalps your belt shall wear,
    If with patient heart you wait
    One day more!" the father said.
    When, next morn, the lodge he sought,
    And boiled samp and moose-meat brought
    For the boy, he found him dead.

    As with grief his grave they made,
    And his bow beside him laid,
    Pipe and knife, and wampum-braid--
    On the lodge-top overhead,
    Preening smooth its breast of red
    And the brown coat that it wore,
    Sat a bird, unknown before.
    And as if with human tongue,
    "Mourn me not," it said, or sung;
    "I, a bird, am still your son,
    Happier than if hunter fleet,
    Or a brave, before your feet
    Laying scalps in battle won.
    Friend of man, my song shall cheer
    Lodge and corn-land hovering near.
    To each wigwam I shall bring
    Tidings of the coming spring;
    Every child my voice shall know
    In the moon of melting snow,
    When the maple's red bud swells,
    And the wild flower lifts its bells.
    As their fond companion
    Men shall henceforth own your son,
    And my song shall testify
    That of human kin am I."

    Thus the Indian legion saith
    How, at first, the robin came
    With a sweeter life from death,
    Bird for boy, and still the same.
    If my young friends doubt that this
    Is the robin's genesis,
    Not in vain is still the myth
    If a truth be found therewith:
    Unto gentleness belong
    Gifts unknown to pride and wrong:
    Happier far than hate is praise--
    He who sings than he who slays.

    _--J.G. Whittier in St. Nicholas._




AFTER TWENTY YEARS.


The following tale of love and faithful waiting is told the New York
World by its Canton, Ohio, correspondent:

At the residence of Thomas Barker, three miles from this village, two
people were to-day made man and wife. William Craig left his pretty girl
sweetheart in a fit of jealous anger on the eve of Dec. 9, 1863,
returned a week or two since, found his betrothed still single and true,
and this afternoon the long deferred marriage was consummated. All the
surviving friends of their youth were present, and many half forgotten
associates came from neighboring towns and farms to join in the
merrymaking.

Twenty years ago Will Craig worked on his father's farm near here during
the day and spent his evenings at the residence of a farmer neighbor.
The attraction was Mary Barker, a pretty seventeen-year old girl. Craig
was deeply in love and so was Mary, but like many other girls she liked
to play the coquette occasionally.

Their wedding-day was set for Christmas, 1863, and the prospective bride
felt secure. One evening, however, the pretty Mary pushed her coquetry
too far. On December 7, 1863, Farmer Barker gave an old-fashioned
"sociable" in honor of his daughter's approaching wedding. Craig was
there, of course, but his happiness was marred by the presence of a
Pittsburg youth--a new comer. Mary allowed this young man to pay her
many attentions.

Craig was madly jealous. After all his attention he thought his
betrothed showed too much regard for his rival, and as she only laughed
at his pleadings he grew angry and threatened to leave. Her seeming
indifference made him desperate, and he declared:

"If you dance once more with that fellow you will not see me again for
twenty years."

"You couldn't leave me for even twenty hours if you tried ever so hard,"
she replied, and with a coquettish smile she went off to dance with his
rival.

Craig went home alone that night and the next day was missing. The most
careful search failed to reveal any trace of him. The old couple
continued to till the farm without the aid of the strong-armed son, and
at the neighbor's down the road pretty Mary Barker went about her
household labors with a demure air that told plainly how she regarded
her lover's disappearance. She refused to "keep company" in the
old-fashioned way with any of the young farmers who would willingly have
taken young Craig's place. She went out very little, kept a cat and grew
domestic in her habits. She had an abiding faith that Craig would
return, and to all entreaties would only shake her head and say: "I am
waiting for Will." The firm contour of the cheek grew somewhat less
rounded, the springing step less elastic, but she would not think of
marriage.

Friday, December 7, of this month (December) was just twenty years since
the disappearance of William Craig. In the twilight a bearded man of
forty came up the walk and as Miss Barker opened the door he put out
both hands and said:

"Mary, I have come again."

"I am sorry you waited so long Will," was the quiet reply, as she led
him into the house, where each told the story of the weary waiting, and
Christmas was fixed upon once more as the day for the wedding.

To the eager questions of old friends as to where he spent the time, he
told them, as he had already told his wife, how he had at once gone to
Philadelphia, enlisted in the army under an assumed name, then, after
the war, gone to Nebraska and taken up a tract of valuable land. This he
had diligently cultivated until at present he is in more than
comfortable circumstances. The Craigs will leave early in January for
their Nebraska home.




WILL READERS TRY IT.


The other day, says an exchange, we came across the following recipe for
making ink in an English archaeological journal. Archaeology is the
"science of antiquities," and surely this recipe is old enough to be
good. It occurred to us that during the summer vacation many of our boys
who are longing for something to do, might earn some money by
manufacturing some of this ink and selling it in their neighborhood. At
any rate the recipe is a good one and worthy of a trial by old folks as
well as young people. Here is the recipe, and the way it was discovered,
as told by a writer in Notes and Queries:

While examining a large number of MSS. of an old scribe some twenty
years ago, I was struck with the clearness and legibility of the
writing, owing in a great measure to the permanent quality of the ink,
which had not faded in the least, although many of the MSS. were at
least two hundred years old. It was remarkable, that the writer must
have been celebrated in his day for the excellence of his calligraphy,
for I met with a letter or two from his correspondents in which there
was a request for the recipe of the ink he used. I found his recipes,
which I copied, and from one of them, dated in 1654, I have, during the
last fifteen years, made all the ink I have used. The recipe is as
follows:

Rain water, one pint; galls, bruised, one and one-half ounces; green
copperas, six drachms; gum Arabic, ten drachms. The galls must be
coarsely powdered and put in a bottle, and the other ingredients and
water added. The bottle securely stoppered, is placed in the light (sun
if possible), and its contents are stirred occasionally until the gum
and copperas is dissolved; after which it is enough to shake the bottle
daily, and in the course of a month or six weeks it will be fit for use.
I have ventured to add ten drops of carbolic acid to the contents of the
bottle, as it effectually prevents the formation and growth of mold,
without any detriment to the quality of the ink, so far as I know.




THE SECRET OF LONGEVITY.


A French medical man who has just died at the age of one hundred and
seven, pledged his word to reveal the secret of his longevity, when no
more, for the benefit of others. It was stipulated, however, that the
precious envelope containing the recipe for long life was not to be
opened until he had been buried. The doctor's prescription, now made
known, is simple enough; and easy to follow; but whether it is as
available as he pretends, the Journal of Chemistry says, is extremely
doubtful. He tells his fellow-men, that, if they wish to live for a
century or more, they have but to pay attention to the position of their
beds. "Let the head of the bed be placed to the north, the foot to the
south; and the electric current, which is stronger during the night in
the direction of the north, will work wonders on their constitutions,
insure them healthier rest, strengthen their nervous system, and prolong
their days." It is, he adds, to scrupulous attention to the position of
his bed that he ascribes his longevity, the enjoyment of perfect health,
and the absence of infirmity.




HOW THE INVENTOR PLAGUES HIS WIFE.


A facetious chap connected with one of our daily newspapers gave the
following amusing burlesque on the trials of an inventor's wife:

"It is all very well to talk about working for the heathen," said one,
as the ladies put up their sewing, "but I'd like to have some one tell
me what I am to do with my husband." "What is the matter with him?"
asked a sympathetic old lady. "William is a good man," continued the
first, waving her glasses in an argumentative way, "but William will
invent. He goes inventing round from morning till night, and I have no
peace or comfort. I didn't object when he invented a fire escape, but I
did remonstrate when he wanted me to crawl out of the window one night
last winter to see how it worked. Then he originated a lock for the door
that would not open from midnight until morning, so as to keep burglars
out. The first time he tried it he caught his coat tail in it, and I had
to walk around him with a pan of hot coals all night to keep him from
freezing." "Why didn't he take his coat off?" "I wanted him to, but he
stood around till the thing opened itself, trying to invent some way of
unfastening it. That's William's trouble. He will invent. A little while
ago he got up a cabinet bedstead that would shut and open without
handling. It went by clockwork. William got into it, and up it went.
Bless your heart, he staid in there from Saturday afternoon till Sunday
night, when it flew open and disclosed William with the plans and
specifications of a patent washbowl that would tip over just when it got
so full. The result was that I lost all my rings and breastpin down the
waste pipe. Then he got up a crutch for a man that could also be used as
an opera-glass. Whenever the man leaned on it up it went, and when he
put it to his eye to find William, it flew out into a crutch and almost
broke the top of his head off. Once he invented a rope ladder to be worn
as guard chain and lengthened out with a spring. He put it round his
neck, but the spring got loose and turned it into a ladder and almost
choked him to death. Then he invented a patent boot heel to crack nuts
with, but he mashed his thumb with it and gave it up. Why, he has a
washtub full of inventions. One of them is a prayerbook that always
opens at the right place. We tried it one morning at church, but the
wheels and springs made such a noise that the sexton took William by the
collar and told him to leave his fire engines at home when he came to
worship. The other day I saw him going up the street with a model of a
grain elevator sticking out of his hip pocket, and he is fixing up an
improved shot tower in our bed-room."




RECIPES.

A hot shovel held over furniture removes white spots.

A paste of equal parts of sifted ashes, clay, salt, and a little water
cements cracks in stoves and ovens.

Fried potatoes: Chop fine cold boiled potatoes; heat some butter in a
frying pan and put the potatoes in. A few minutes before taking them
from the fire stir in some well beaten eggs. Serve hot.

Sardines picked up fine, and mixed with cold boiled ham also minced
fine, and all well seasoned with a regular Mayonnaise dressing, make a
delicious filling for sandwiches.

Rye Bread: Make sponge as for wheat bread; let it rise over night; then
mix up with rye flour, not as stiff as wheat bread. Place in baking
pans; let rise, and bake half an hour longer than wheat bread.

One of the best ways to cure sore throat is as follows: Wring a cloth
out of salt and cold water, and keeping it quite wet bind tightly about
the neck. Cover this with a dry cloth. It is best to use this remedy in
the night.

A delicious hot sauce for puddings is made of six tablespoonfuls of
sugar, two of butter, and one egg; beat the butter, sugar, and the yolk
of the egg together, then add the white beaten to a froth; lastly stir
in a tea-cupful of boiling water and a teaspoonful of vanilla.

A Dish for Breakfast: Take six good cooking apples, cut them in slices
one-fourth of an inch thick; have a pan of fresh, hot lard ready, drop
the slices in and fry till brown; sprinkle a little sugar over them and
serve hot.

A little curry-powder in chopped pickle gives a delicious flavor to it.
A tablespoonful of the powder to four quarts of pickle is about the
right quantity to use, unless you like to use the curry in place of
pepper; then at least twice this quantity should be put in.

A good way to extract the juice of beef for an invalid is to broil the
beef on a gridiron for a few minutes, and then squeeze the juice from it
with a lemon-squeezer. Put a little salt with it. This may be given, as
the sick one prefers, cold or hot, or it may be frozen, and given in
small lumps.

Rolls: Flour, two quarts; sugar, one tablespoonful; one half cup of
yeast; one pint of scalded milk, or water if milk is scarce, and a
little salt. Set to rise until light; then knead until hard, and set to
rise, and when wanted make in rolls. Place a piece of butter between the
folds and bake in a slow oven.

For Earache.--A writer in the Druggists' Circular says: "The remedy
which I here offer has, after repeated trials, never failed to afford
almost instant relief. It is perfectly simple, easy of application,
costs but little, and can be procured at any drug store: Olive oil, 1
ounce; chloroform, 1 drachm. Mix, and shake well together. Then pour
twenty-five or thirty drops into the ear, and close it up with a piece
of raw cotton to exclude the air and retain the mixture."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRAIRIE FARMER AND YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address Prairie Farmer Pub. Co.,

150 Monroe Street Chicago.




PAMPHLETS, ETC., RECEIVED.


Gunnison, Colorado's Bonanza County, by John K. Hallowell, Geologist,
Denver, Col. Price 50 cents, postpaid.

Midland Florida: The Eden of the South. By "Carl" Webber, New York.

United States Consular Reports, No. 35, for November, 1883.

The Saskatchewan Fife Wheat: Its history, from its first importation
from the Saskatchewan Valley, in Manitoba, six years ago, till the
present time. By W.J. Abernethy.

Price list of Huntsville nurseries, Huntsville, Ala.

Oscar Close, Greendale. Catalogue of nurseries, Worcester, Mass.

Price list of L.R. Bryant's cider vinegar works, Princeton, Ill.

Vich's Floral Guide. Here it is again, brighter and better than ever;
its cover alone, with its delicate tinted background and its dish of
gracefully arranged flowers, would entitle it to a permanent place in
every household. The 1884 edition is an elegant book of 150 pages, three
colored plates of flowers and vegetables, and more than 1,000
illustrations of the choicest plants, flowers, and vegetables, with
directions for growing. The price, only 10 cents, can be deducted from
the first order sent for goods. Rochester, N.Y.

The Great Rock Island Cook Book, dedicated to the women of America,
Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railway. This book contains a selection
of the most useful recipes and other valuable information in the
culinary art. It will be found especially valuable for the young
housekeepers, as they can hardly fail to become good cooks with such a
guide.

Buist's Almanac and Garden Manual for 1884, Philadelphia. This little
book is in its fifty-sixth year, and is one of the best of its kind
published. It contains a full descriptive list (with cuts) of all kinds
of vegetables, and many kinds of flowers.

Report of the crops of the year, December, 1883. Department of
Agriculture, Washington, D.C.

The Household Magazine for January comes to us in its usual bright,
readable form. It is an unusually good number and will be enjoyed by the
ladies.

Catalogue of Clydesdale and Cleveland Bay horses. Imported and bred by
the Door Prairie Live Stock Association, Door Village, La Porte, Ind.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMEMBER _that_ $2.00 pays _for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _one year and, the
subscriber gets a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED
STATES, FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any
first-class weekly agricultural paper in this country._




OUR YOUNG FOLKS.


THE CITY CAT.


    He is gaunt and thin, with a ragged coat,
      A scraggy tail, and a hunted look;
    No songs of melody burst from his throat
      As he seeks repose in some quiet nook--
    A safe retreat from this world of sin,
      And all of its boots and stones and that--
    For the life of a cat is a life of din,
                If he is a city cat.

    He is grumpy and stumpy, and old and gray,
      With a sleepy look in his lonely eye,
    (The other he lost at a matinee--
      Knocked out by a boot from a window high.)
    Wherever he goes, he never knows--
      Quarter or pause in the midnight spree,
    For the life of a cat is a life of blows,
                If he is a city cat.

    He is pelted by boys if he stirs abroad,
      He is chased by dogs if he dares to roam.
    His grizzled bosom has never thawed
      'Neath the kindly blare of the light of home.
    His life's a perpetual warfare waged
      On balcony, back yard fence, and flat;
    For the life of a cat is a life outraged,
                If he is a city cat.

    The country cat is a different beast.
      Petted, well-housed, demure, and sleek;
    Three times a day he is called to feast,
      And why should he not be quiet and meek?
    No dreams of urchins, tin cans, and war,
      Disturb his sensuous sleep on the mat;
    Ah! cat life is a thing worth living for,
                If he isn't a city cat.

    And even when dead, the cat
      With strident members uneasy lies
    In some alley-way, and seems staring at
      A coming foe with his wild wide eye,
    Nobody owns him and nobody cares--
      Another dead "Tom," and who mourns for that,
              If he's only a city cat.

    --_Providence Press._




AMUSING TRICKS.


THE FRUIT CANDLE.

Procure a good, large apple or turnip, and cut from it a piece of the
shape to resemble the butt-end of a tallow candle; then from a nut of
some kind--an almond is the best--whittle out a small peg of about the
size and shape of a wick end. Stick the peg in the apple and you have a
very fair representation of a candle. The wick you can light, and it
will burn for at least a minute. In performing you should have your
candle in a clean candlestick, show it plainly to the audience, and then
put it into your mouth, taking care to blow it out, and munch it up. If
you think best, you can blow the candle out and allow the wick to cool,
and it will look, with its burned wick, so natural that even the
sharpest eyes can not distinguish it from the genuine article.

Once, at a summer resort in Massachusetts, I made use of this candle
with considerable effect. While performing a few parlor tricks to amuse
some friends, I pretended to need a light. A confederate left the room,
and soon returned with a lantern containing one of these apple
counterfeits.

"Do you call that a candle?" I said.

"Certainly," he replied.

"Why, there is scarcely a mouthful."

"A mouthful? Rather a disagreeable mouthful, I guess."

"You have never been in Russia, I presume."

"Never."

"Then you don't know what is good."

"Good?"

"Yes, good. Why, candle ends, with the wick a little burned to give them
a flavor, are delicious. They always serve them up before dinner in
Russia as a kind of relish. It is considered bad taste in good society
there to ask a friend to sit down to dinner without offering him this
appetizer."

"The bad taste would be in the relish, I think."

"Not at all. Try a bit."

I took the candle out of the lantern, and extended it toward my
confederate, who shrank back with disgust.

"Well," I said, "if you won't have it, I'll eat it myself." And so
saying, I put it into my mouth and munched it up, amid the cries of
surprise and horror of the assembled party. Two old maids insisted on
looking into my mouth to see whether it was not concealed there.

Having soaked a piece of thread in common salt water, tie it to a small
finger-ring. When you apply the flame of a candle to the thread it will
burn to ashes and yet sustain the ring.


A DIFFICULT CIRCLE TO JUMP FROM.

Take a piece of chalk, and ask, if you make a circle, whether any boy
standing in it thinks he can jump out of it. As soon as one proposes to
do so, bring him into the center of the room, draw a circle with the
chalk around his jacket, and say, "Now jump out of it!"


AN IMPOSSIBLE WALK.

Ask one young lady in the company whether she thinks, if she clasped her
hands, she could walk out of the room. On her saying she could, request
her to pass her arm round the leg of the table or piano, join her hands,
and walk away.


THE HAT TRICK.

Fill a small glass with water, cover it with a hat, and profess your
readiness to drink it without touching the hat. Put your head under the
table, make a noise, as if drinking, rise, and wipe your lips. The
company, thinking you have drunk the water, one of them will certainly
take up the hat to see. As soon as the hat is removed, take up the glass
and drink its contents. "There!" say you, "you see I have not touched
the hat."


THE INCOMBUSTIBLE THREAD.

Wind some linen thread tightly round a smooth pebble, and secure the
end; then, if you expose it to the flame of a lamp or candle, the thread
will not burn; for the caloric (or heat) traverses the thread, without
remaining in it, and attacks the stone. The same sort of trick may be
performed with a poker, round which is evenly pasted a sheet of paper.
You can poke the fire with it without burning the paper.


AN IMPOSSIBLE JUMP.

Take a ruler, or any other piece of wood, and ask whether, if you laid
it down on the ground, any of the company could jump over it. Of course
one or two will express their readiness to jump over so small an
obstruction. Then lay the ruler on the ground, close against the wall,
and tell them to try.


A DIFFICULT LOAD TO CARRY.

Take a piece of wood, such as a lucifer match, and say to one of the
company, "How long do you think it would take you to carry this piece of
wood into the next room?" "Half a minute." perhaps one will reply.
"Well, try, then," say you; "carry it." You then cut off little pieces,
and give them to him one by one. He will soon be tired of the
experiment.


TO TURN A GLASS OF WATER UPSIDE DOWN WITHOUT SPILLING ITS CONTENTS.

Fill a glass carefully, place a piece of paper on the top, place your
hand on the paper, and tilt the glass round sharply, when it will be
found that the pressure of the air upward on the paper will retain the
water. The glass may then be held by the bottom.

Health and Home says: I want to tell you of something very funny to do,
if you have a little brother or sister who does not mind dressing up and
standing still for a few moments. My aunt showed me how to do it the
other day, when sister Nelly had a birthday party. We took little
brother Tommy out into the library and stood him upon a high wooden
stool, and dressed him up very finely in mamma's clothes. The stool made
him so full that the dress was of just the right length. Then Uncle Ned,
telling him to stand straight and firm, carried him, stool and all, into
the parlor. I wish you could have heard the girls and boys laugh! He had
such a comical look--with his tall body and little round face--just like
some of those French Parian figures. One little girl handed him a fan,
and then it was too funny to see the tall lady fan herself affectedly
with her very small, dimpled hands. All the boys and girls just
shouted.--_Young People._




BRIGHT SAYINGS.


A writer in the School-Boy Magazine has gathered together the following
dictionary words as defined by certain small people:

Bed time--Shut-eye time.

Dust--Mud with the juice squeezed out.

Fan--A thing to brush warm off with.

Fins--A fish's wings.

Ice--Water that staid out in the cold and went to sleep.

Nest-Egg--The egg that the old hen measures to make new ones.

Pig--A hog's little boy.

Salt--What makes your potato taste bad when you don't put any on.

Snoring--Letting off sleep.

Stars--The moon's eggs.

Wakefulness--Eyes all the time coming unbuttoned.

       *       *       *       *       *

If you would have good health, go out in the sunshine. Sickness is
worse than freckles.

       *       *       *       *       *

HYPOCHONDRIA.

THE MYSTERIOUS ELEMENT IN THE MIND THAT AROUSES VAGUE
APPREHENSIONS--WHAT ACTUALLY CAUSES IT.

The narrative below, by a prominent scientist, touches a subject of
universal importance. Few people are free from the distressing evils
which hypochondria brings. They come at all times and are fed by the
very flame which they themselves start. They are a dread of coming
derangement caused by present disorder and bring about more suicides
than any other one thing. Their first approach should be carefully
guarded.

_Editors Herald_:

    It is seldom I appear in print and I should not do so now did
    I not believe myself in possession of truths, the revelation
    of which will prove of inestimable value to many who may see
    these lines. Mine has been a trying experience. For many
    years I was conscious of a want of nerve tone. My mind seemed
    sluggish and I felt a certain falling off in my natural
    condition of intellectual acuteness, activity, and vigor. I
    presume this is the same way in which an innumerable number
    of other people feel, who, like myself, are physically below
    par, but like thousands of others I paid no attention to
    these annoying troubles, attributing them to overwork, and
    resorting to a glass of beer or a milk punch, which would for
    the time invigorate and relieve my weariness.

    After awhile the stimulants commenced to disagree with my
    stomach, my weariness increased, and I was compelled to
    resort to other means to find relief. If a physician is
    suffering he invariably calls another physician to prescribe
    for him, as he cannot see himself as he sees others; so I
    called a physician, and he advised me to try a little
    chemical food, or a bottle of hypophosphates. I took two or
    three bottles of the chemical food with no apparent benefit.
    My lassitude and indisposition seemed to increase, my food
    distressed me. I suffered from neuralgic pains in different
    parts of my body, my muscles became sore, my bowels were
    constipated, and my prospects for recovery were not very
    flattering. I stated my case to another physician, and he
    advised me to take five to ten drops of Magende's solution of
    morphine, two or three times a day, for the weakness and
    distress in my stomach, and a blue pill every other night to
    relieve the constipation. The morphine produced such a
    deathly nausea that I could not take it, and the blue pill
    failed to relieve my constipation.

    In this condition I passed nearly a year, wholly unfit for
    business, while the effort to think was irksome and painful.
    My blood became impoverished, and I suffered from incapacity
    with an appalling sense of misery and general apprehension of
    coming evil. I passed sleepless nights and was troubled with
    irregular action of the heart, a constantly feverish
    condition, and the most excruciating tortures in my stomach,
    living for days on rice water and gruel, and, indeed, the
    digestive functions seemed to be entirely destroyed.

    It was natural that while in this condition I should become
    hypochondrical, and fearful suggestions of self-destruction
    occasionally presented themselves. I experienced an
    insatiable desire for sleep, but on retiring would lie awake
    for a long time, tormented with troubled reflections, and
    when at last I did fall into an uneasy slumber of short
    duration, it was disturbed by horrid dreams. In this
    condition I determined to take a trip to Europe, but in spite
    of all the attentions of physicians and change of scene and
    climate, I did not improve, and so returned home with no
    earthly hope of ever again being able to leave the house.

    Among the numerous friends that called on me was one who had
    been afflicted somewhat similarly to myself, but who had been
    restored to perfect health. Upon his earned recommendation I
    began the same treatment he had employed but with little hope
    of being benefited. At first, I experienced little, if any,
    relief, except that it did not distress my stomach as other
    remedies or even food had done. I continued its use, however,
    and after the third bottle could see a marked change for the
    better, and now after the fifteenth bottle I am happy to
    state that I am again able to attend to my professional
    duties. I sleep well, nothing distresses me that I eat, I go
    from day to day without a feeling of weariness or pain,
    indeed I am a well man, and wholly through the influence of
    H.H. Warner & Co's Tippecanoe. I consider this remedy as
    taking the highest possible rank in the treatment of all
    diseases marked by debility, loss of appetite, and all other
    symptoms of stomach and digestive disorders. It is
    overwhelmingly superior to the tonics, bitters, and dyspepsia
    cures of the day, and is certain to be so acknowledged by the
    public universally. Thousands of people to-day are going to
    premature graves with these serious diseases, that I have
    above described, and to all such I would say: "Do not let
    your good judgment be governed by your prejudices, but give
    the above named remedy a fair and patient trial, and I
    believe you will not only be rewarded by a perfect
    restoration to health, but you will also be convinced that
    the medical profession does not possess all the knowledge
    there is embraced in medical science."

    A.G. RICHARDS, M.D.,
    468 Tremont street, Boston, Mass.




COMPILED CORRESPONDENCE.


E.B.F., Scotia, Neb., writes: The weather, so far this winter, has been
extremely warm. No snow to exceed one inch since October. Cattle and
hogs doing finely. Corn planted early is a good crop both as to quality
and quantity, but late planted is soft. Wheat and oats were an extra
good crop, wheat yielding from 25 to 35 bushels per acre, and oats from
50 to 75 bushels.

    E.B.F.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cobden, Ill., Jan. 6.--We have been through the coldest weather ever
experienced here since weather records have been kept, which is
twenty-five years or more. Yesterday morning the mercury reached 24
degrees below at my house, which is 200 feet higher than the village.
Reports from lower situations run down to 26, 28, with one of 30. This
is six degrees lower than the lowest record ever made here, which was
twenty years ago, when on the 1st of January it marked 18 below at my
house, with some other records two or three degrees lower. At that time
peach orchards were badly killed. There can be no doubt that such is the
case now. And if it has been proportionately cold north, I fear that the
injury to all kinds of fruit trees must have been very serious.

    PARRER EARLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kane Co., Jan 7.--The weather has been intensely cold here since the 3d
instant. The thermometer has been from 4 to 28 degs. below zero at 7
a.m., and from 2 to 16 degs. below at 2 p.m. The 5th was the coldest.
The mercury dropped to 28 degs. below at sunrise; in some places 32
degs. below. On the 6th, 22 degs. below at 7 a.m.; at 12 m. 4 degs.
below; at 5 p.m. 10 degs. below. Domestic animals were kept closely
housed, except while being watered. Where they were exposed to the
weather, they froze. We have not had such continued cold weather since
January 1864, when for ten successive days it was intensely cold. Some
farmers are short of coarse feed, and are shipping bran and middlings
from Minneapolis, and corn from Kansas and Nebraska. Many farmers who
were shipping milk to Chicago, are now taking it to the cheese
factories. There has been an over supply of milk in the city. The
dividends for October were from $1.16 to $1.25 per cwt.

    J.P.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB. Co., 150 Monroe Street, Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

BREEDERS DIRECTORY.

The following list embraces the names of responsible and reliable
Breeders in their line, and parties wishing to purchase or obtain
information can feel assured that they will be honorably dealt with:

CATTLE.

Jersey.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

HORSES.

Clydesdales.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

SWINE.

Berkshire.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

Chester Whites.

W.A. Gilbert......................Wauwatosa Wis.

SHEEP.

Cotswold.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

       *       *       *       *       *

LIVE STOCK, ETC.

Jerseys for Sale.

One heifer, 2 years old in May, due to calve in April. Heifer, 2 years
in June, and due to calve in April. Cow, 4 years old, due to calve in
May. Bull calf 5 months old, and one good yearling bull. Address

L.P. WHEELER. Quincy, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCOTCH COLLIE

SHEPHERD PUPS,

--FROM--

IMPORTED AND TRAINED STOCK

--ALSO--

NEWFOUNDLAND PUPS AND RAT TERRIER PUPS.

Concise and practical printed instruction in Training young Shepherd
Dogs, is given to buyers of Shepherd Puppies; or will be sent on receipt
of 25 cents in postage stamps.

For Printed Circular, giving full particulars about Shepherd Dogs,
enclose a 3-cent stamp, and address

N.H. PAAREN,

P.O. Box 326, CHICAGO. ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOUSE PLANS FOR EVERYBODY.

By S.B. REED, Architect.

One of the most popular Architectural books ever issued, giving a wide
range of design from a dwelling costing $250 up to $8,000, and adapted
to farm, village, and town residences. It gives an

ESTIMATE OF THE QUANTITY OF EVERY ARTICLE USED

In the construction, and probable cost of constructing any one of the
buildings presented. Profusely illustrated. Price, postpaid, $1.50.
Address

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago

       *       *       *       *       *

MAP

Of the United States and Canada, Printed in Colors, size 4x2-1/2 feet,
also a copy of THE PRAIRIE FARMER for one year. Sent to any address for
$2.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

AGENTS

WANTED EVERYWHERE to solicit subscriptions for this paper. Write
PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago, for particulars.




LITERATURE


THE WRONG PEW.


    There's one who wrote in years gone by in clear and ringing rhyme--
    A poet of an elder day and of a distant clime--
    Who sang of mortal misery, of sufferers long and lorn,
    "Man's inhumanity to man makes countless thousands mourn!"

    The hand that held that golden pen--that golden tongue--is dust;
    A dust that's dear to hearts that hold his homely truths in trust;
    And you who read this simple tale of wrath, and ruth, and wrong,
    May hear the echo of the sob that breaks upon my song!

    I sat upon the Sabbath-day within the sacred fane,
    The sunlight through the windows poured like rainbow-tinted rain;
    While maids and matrons passing fair, and men of high degree,
    All fashion's proudest votaries, knelt low on bended knee.

    And there was one of stature tall, whose robe of silken sheen
    Draped quiet grace and courtesy that might have shamed a queen,
    Save only that her pallid face, and drooping, tear-dimmed eyes,
    Looked like the Peri's, waiting by the gates of Paradise.

    What is it moves that jeweled throng of dainty worshippers?
    Their hearts have probed the cruel wrong that rankles sore in hers;
    For she who sat beside her there--ah, heart of hardest stone!
    Swept forth with stern and haughty stare, and left her there alone.

    Then one, God bless her woman's heart! the loveliest woman there,
    Stepped down the aisle with stately tread, and calm and steadfast air;
    With gentle voice, and tender eyes distilling heaven's own dew,
    She whispered to the shrinking girl, "I've room, my friend, for you."

    I think earth's sorest sinners need a judge less stern than they
    Who wear their ermine clasped across a breast of common clay!
    I think heaven's loveliest angels come among us circling down,
    To bear the cruel earthly cross, and then regain the crown.

    Alas! alas! for paltry pride arrayed in rich attire,
    And woe is me for priestly praise which is our heart's desire!
    Would we could seek, like pilgrims gray, beside that sunlit sea,
    The simple faith that lit the shores of sacred Galilee!

    Sometimes it seems that ages past our souls have sojourned here;
    But God's great angel guards the gate and stands beside the bier;
    For when some mystic touch awakes the chords of memory,
    His awful hand holds down the note, and clasps the quivering key.

    Bend low, bend low the lofty brow and bring the sack-cloth gown;
    Throw dust and ashes on our heads, and through the sinful town;
    I think the green earth grows more gray, beneath its golden sun,
    Because the good God sits in heaven, and sees such evil done.

    --_Edward Renaud._




YIK KEE.


After father died some ten years ago, I found, that for three years we
had been living on credit. I was eighteen, strong and well, but did not
know how to work. In the little back room of the New York tenement house
(by the way, the landlady seized my clothes for our rent) I considered
my future. I had inherited a great faith in relatives, from my father,
so I wrote to seven. I received six polite notes, telling me to go to
work, and the following letter:

   JONESBORO, COLORADO--JACKSON'S RANCH.

   Dear Nell.--I'm your cousin Jack. Your father once give me
   money to come out West. I've took up land, got a comfortable
   home, no style or frills, but good folks to live with and
   healthy grub. I've got the best wife you ever see and seven
   fine youngsters. The city ain't no place for a friendless
   girl. Wife wants you to come. She'll be a mother to you. Come
   right off. I'll meet you at Denver.

   Jack.

Inclosed was a check sufficient to defray expenses; so I started. Denver
was then only a large town and the depot a barn-like structure. I got
out of the cars and stood bewildered among all the emigrants and their
bundles. Some one touched me on the shoulder--a roughly-dressed,
broad-shouldered man with long, blonde beard and big blue eyes.

"Are you Nell?" he said.

"Yes; and you're Cousin Jack."

"I knew you," he said, as he led the way, "by your black clothes an'
sorrerful look, an' them big blue eyes, like yer father's as two peas.
We'll git the shader outer 'em when we get home. Yer father was a mighty
good man. Bless yer dear heart, don't let them tears come. This 'ere's a
dry country, we don't waste no water."

Comforting me in his kind, rough way, he reached his team, a big green
wagon, drawn by two wild-looking steeds which I afterward knew to be
bronchos. A fat, blonde boy, about twelve, held the reins.

"That's Ted," said Cousin Jack. "Ted, this is Miss Nell, yer cousin;
give her a hug." The fat boy solemnly obeyed.

After this he seemed to have a special claim on my affections because he
met me first. Jack's wife was a jolly, plump woman, with brown eyes and
curly hair. She always had a baby in her arms and another at her heels.
She adored Jack. I never knew them to have a quarrel. I soon grew to
love the life at the ranch. I liked the big, half-finished house, its
untidyness and comfort--its pleasant, healthy atmosphere. I loved the
children, the household pets--Shep, the sagacious dog; Thad, the clever
cat; the hens and sheep; the horses Dolly, Dot, and Daisy, that did the
plowing, and the marketing at Denver, twelve miles away, and were so
gentle and kind we used to ride them without saddle or bridle. I learned
that cattle grew fat on the dry-looking grass and gave the best of milk.
I learned to love the broad plains and the glorious sunsets, and to
watch the distant bands of Indians with half fear, half interest. I
helped Cousin Mary, sewed and cooked, kept the house and children neat,
and lifted many burdens from her weary shoulders. We were so happy. The
children and I took long walks over the plains, and Ted and I took many
rides on Dolly and Dot, and in the long winter evenings I told the
children stories. Occasionally Harry White came over to visit us from
his ranch five miles away. He lived with his old mother; he and Jack
were dear friends. Harry needed a wife, Jack used to say, winking at me.

One day Jack went to Denver for supplies. He went alone, and coming home
later than usual, Ted and I and baby Mame went out to meet him. Jack
looked sober and guilty, and seemed ill at ease. If he ever drank, I
should have thought him intoxicated. In the wagon was a queer-shaped
heap under a horse-blanket. I was sure it moved. When we got behind the
barn Jack said, sheepishly, avoiding my eye.

"Well, Ted, I calkerlate I've got su'thing in that there waggin that 'ul
astonish yer marm."

Little Mame pulled the blanket off the heap; she had been peeping under
it all the while she was in the back of the wagon. There lay a human
being. Such an object; short and squat, dressed in a queer blue blouse
with flowing sleeves, wide trousers and queer wooden shoes. He had
small, black eyes, a shaven poll, from which depended a long thin queue.
His countenance was battered and bruised, his clothes torn and bloody.

"There was a row down to Denver," said Jack; "the Christian folks stove
in these 'ere heathen's winders, tore their houses down, an' killed half
on 'em. I cleared out soon as I could. When I got half way home I heard
a noise back o' me, and out crawled this thing. I was so dumfounded I
couldn't speak. He thought I was going ter send him back, an' he fell
ter cryin' an' jabberin' in that yap of his, an' clingin' onter my han'
an' kissin' of it. It sorter turned my stomach. I told him ter set down,
give him some crackers ter eat, covered him up an' told him he could
live with me. What do you s'pose marm'll say?"

"Oh! Cousin Jack," I said, "of course, she will not care. Your home is a
refuge for all the wretched and unfortunate."

"Now don't, Nell," he said, turning as red as a rose, and busying
himself about the harness. The Celestial looked at us solemnly: Mame
toddled up to him. He looked at her curiously, but did not move.

"Get out, John," said Jack, "you needn't be scared no more; we're to
home."

He got out stiffly, and, to my surprise, turned and lifted the baby
down. She caught his pig-tail, and pulled it in wild delight. He seemed
grieved when I took her away. When Jack told Mary, the good soul found a
thousand reasons why he should stay, and hurried to make him a bed in
the attic. The Celestial did not say much, but when Jack called him
"John," he smiled a sad smile.

"Melican man callee John. Hump. Yik Kee."

So with due consideration for his feelings we addressed him as Yik Kee.
He was of great use. He helped take care of the children, did the
washing (Mary did not fancy his method of sprinkling clothes) and helped
Jack on the farm. We made him one of the family. He was always pleasant
and smiling, but was a man of few words.

Cousin Jack added much to his income by trading in hides. Ranchmen
living at a distance sold their hides to him and Jack sold them to
traders who came around at certain times in the year. Harry White was a
partner in the business. He used to go on a sort of round-up and visit
the ranches all over the country. The cattle of the ranchmen roamed in
vast herds over the plains, protected only by the brand of the owner.
Cattle stealing was frequently practiced. Offenders in this respect were
shown no mercy. They were convicted, tried, and executed only in the
court of Judge Lynch. I never blamed the ranchmen for this; it was
impossible to guard the herds in the vast area over which they
traversed, and the cattle must be protected in some way. Gil Mead was a
wealthy ranchman, who lived about ten miles from us. He owned the
largest herd of cattle on the plains. They were branded with the vowels
of his name. E.A., which could be recognized anywhere. He always shipped
his cattle East to his brother in Chicago. I feared the man. He was tall
and gaunt, with deep-set black eyes and low forehead. His home was
unhappy; his wife cross and ugly, and his children wild and unruly. This
made him more than commonly disagreeable.

I think it was in the fall of '74 that Harry White brought the big load
of hides to Jack. Both were much pleased at the bargain they made. Harry
gave glowing accounts of a new customer--a ranchman from Chicago, who
had taken up an abandoned homestead. He had purchased many cattle from
his cousin, Gil Mead, and hoped to rival him in the number and quality
of his herd. Jack packed the hides away to keep till December, when we
expected the dealer.

One afternoon, not long after this, Gil Mead rode up to the house,
looking very agreeable and pleasant. A couple of strangers, also
ranchmen, were with him. They wanted to look at the hides, one of the
men being a trader, Gil said. Jack was in Denver, so Yik Kee and I went
to the barn with them. They looked the hides over carefully, and
conversed in low tones, Gil with a suppressed oath. Finally they thanked
us courteously and took their leave.

"Hump; no goodee," said Yik Kee, but he wouldn't say any more.

At five that evening, when we were at supper, a crowd of twenty-five or
thirty men rode up on horseback. Jack came out and met them, inviting
them in to take supper, in his generous, hospitable way. They wanted him
to go to Denver with them, there was to be a meeting there of importance
to ranchmen. The meeting would be at eight. They had brought with them
an extra horse for Jack. Mary looked around for Yik Kee to help her, but
he had mysteriously disappeared.

I faintly remembered seeing his white, horrified face peering around the
barn at the horses. I noted the visitors ate little--the food seemed to
choke them. Some of them watched Mary and the baby in a queer sort of
way. When Jack, as was his custom, kissed his wife and babies good-by,
one of the visitors, an oldish man, coughed huskily, and said: "Blest if
I kin stan' this." They all rode off, Jack the merriest of all, waving
his hat till he was out of sight.

When we were clearing up the unusual quantity of dishes, Yik Kee
appeared at the end window and beckoned me. I followed him out. Ted was
with him. Behind the barn were the three horses saddled. Shep was with
them, released from confinement, where he had been secured from
following his master.

"Foller 'em," said Ted in an excited whisper. "Yik's afraid they're up
to something."

"What is it, Yik?" I said, sternly. "No fooling now."

For answer he twisted his long pig-tail around his neck, tying it under
his left ear in a significant manner.

"Hump, he hangee; stealee cow."

"Oh, Mary," I sobbed, remembering Gil Mead's visit, and his strange
actions, and dimly seeing what Yik Kee meant, "I must tell Mary," I
said, wildly.

"Hump, no," said Yik Kee. "Yellee sick," and he closed his eyes in a
die-away sort of manner. "Go now--too latee."

We mounted.

"Mother'll think we're gone to ride," said Ted, as we galloped over the
plains. He was deathly pale, poor little fellow, but he sat erect and
firm. I saw his father's big Colt's revolver sticking out of his pocket.
He was a determined boy. Even in my despair, in my wild hope that I
could save Jack by begging on my knees, that I could cling to him, that
they would have to kill me first, I could not help a smile at the
comical figure Yik Kee presented on horseback. His loose garments
flapped in the wind, his long pig-tail flew out behind, and he bobbed
up and down like a kernel of corn in a corn-hopper.

It was a soft, warm night, lighted only by the pale young moon and the
twinkling stars. We rode as fast as our horses could gallop. Shep was
close at our heels. Way ahead, when we reached the top of a little hill,
we saw the crowd of horsemen. They were riding toward Denver. We
galloped on with renewed zeal. They turned into a cross road leading to
Mead's ranch. On this road was a bridge over Dry Gulch, which was in the
spring a roaring torrent. Beyond the bridge, across the fields, was the
hay-stack of Mead, where was stored sufficient to feed his domestic
cattle through the winter. We at last reached the turn in the road. They
were three miles in advance, riding rapidly. Yik Kee stopped at the
turn. "Hump! Can't catchee. Hangee at bridge. You goee!" He turned his
horse and sped across the field, deserting us basely.

We rode on, Ted and I. He was pale and still; my cheeks were burning. We
neared the bridge. The high mound of earth before us hid us from sight.
We stopped our horses and listened. The men had lighted torches, some
were preparing a rough gallows under the bridge; two were uncoiling
rope; some held the horses of the others beyond the bridge. The men were
masked now, and I could see by the lighted torches that this number was
increased. Jack was very white and sad, but he showed no fear.

"I am innocent, gentlemen," he said, slowly, "but I refuse to tell you
of whom I bought the hides."

I understood him. Could Harry White be a cattle thief? I felt as if I
were going mad.

"What shall we do?" whispered Ted, cocking his revolver?

Suddenly a bright red light illuminated the heavens, followed by clouds
of black smoke and a queer crackling noise. A yell from the men--Gil
Mead's voice above the rest. The hay-stack was on fire. It seemed to me
in the gale around it that I could see a foreign-looking human vanishing
across the plain.

The men mounted their horses, Gil Mead at the head, and set off across
the fields at a mad gallop. They must save the stack. They left Jack,
bound hand and foot, and guarded by one man.

Shep, the wonderful dog, had kept by us until now, slinking in the dark
shadows. Now, gliding sidewise and still, he reached the man on guard
whose back was to us, and with no warning growl caught him by the throat
with strong white teeth that could choak a coyote in a second. The man,
who was in a sitting posture, fell back with a groan. Ted struck him
over the head with the butt of the revolver, and pulled off the dog. I
cut Jack's bonds with a knife. He looked at us wonderingly and staggered
to his feet.

"Never mind how we came, Jack," I said; "quick, mount the horse beyond
the bridge, and ride to Denver for your life. They will not harm a woman
and child."

"Harry White," he muttered, the loyal soul that even now could think of
another's danger.

"I will tell him."

"No, no; not of this--only say, if he stole the cattle, to fly the
country. They will find out, sooner or later."

He galloped down the road. Ted and I mounted, calling off Shep, who sat
on his haunches watching the unconscious man, and then we, too, sped
down the road. The hay-stack was giving out great columns of black
smoke, but the fire was dead.

Ahead of us was a riderless horse, Dolly, who greeted her master with a
joyful whinny. Where was Yik Kee? Then Dot, my horse, shied from the
road at a recumbent black figure. It was the indomitable Yik Kee, who
had crawled all the way from the stack on his stomach, so that he could
not be seen, after lying in the ditch till the blaze had faded out.
"Hump! no catchee Chinee; heap sore," he said, laconically rubbing his
stomach.

He mounted Dolly, and we rode on to White's ranch. Harry rushed out at
the sound of horses' feet, at midnight. There, under the twinkling stars
I looked into his eyes, and I told him the whole story. He showed no
guilt, but only said we must stay the night at his ranch, for the men
would come back to Jack's for him, and then mounting his fleet colt rode
off down the road. I comforted his mother as best I could. At day-break
we rode home.

Mary was in a wild state of alarm. Where had we been? Where was Jack?
and how cruel we were to leave her alone. She said that at one o'clock
three masked men had come to the house and searched it and the
premises, and had not molested her or the children, only asking where
Jack was, very sternly and sharply.

At noon Jack, Harry, the sheriff, and a party of armed men from Denver
rode up, stopping only a moment to tell me they would be back at night.
I dared not tell Mary, and she worried all the afternoon at their
strange conduct. At night Jack and Harry came home, looking tired but
happy. Then Jack told Mary, and she clung to him as though she could
never let him go.

It seemed the pleasing ranchman from Chicago was one of a band of cattle
thieves. He sold the hides to Harry, who, honest and open himself, was
slow to suspect wrong dealings in others. The sheriff had caught the men
skinning a cow that belonged to Mead, and had captured the gang and
taken them to Denver.

The men concerned in the attempt to lynch Jack were sincerely sorry.
Their regrets would not have availed much, however, if they had
succeeded in their purpose. They gave each of the children ten acres of
land; they gave Ted sixty-five, and me, whom they pleased to consider
very plucky, one hundred and fifty acres. I felt rich enough, and time
has made it very valuable land. The man on guard was our warmest
admirer. He thought Ted, Shep, and I wonders of courage. He said when I
came down on the bridge with the open knife, he thought his last hour
had come.

Gil Mead committed suicide not long after this. He was always queer. No
one ever knew that Yik Kee set the stack afire. I tell you Jack rewarded
the faithful fellow--gave him a good farm, taught him to work it, and
built him a house. The funniest thing was Yik Kee had a wife and three
queer little children back in China, and Jack sent for them, and Yik Kee
and his family are as happy as they can be. The children play with
Jack's (he has twelve now) and get along finely together.

In '75 I married Harry White, which, I suppose, was foreseen from the
beginning--at least, Jack says anybody could have seen it. The most
serene and satisfied face at the wedding was that of the Celestial. In
my inner consciousness, notwithstanding he is a "heathen Chinee," I have
the conviction that as great a hero as is seen in modern times is the
man of few words, Yik Kee.--_The Continent._




HUMOROUS


"A LEEDLE MISTAKES."


"I see all how it vhas now," observed Jacob Handonder, as he came out.

"Oh, you do! You are the man who got drunk and raised a fuss on a street
car?"

"I vhas der man, and I tell you how it vhas. You see, I vhas tight. I
took too much beer."

"Can a saloon-keeper take too much beer?"

"Vhell, maype I vhas seek. I shtart to go home. Vhen der sthreet car
comes along I pelief it vhas my house. I got in und look all aroundt,
but I doan' see Katarina. I call out for der shildrens, und eferybody
laughs at me. Maype dot makes me madt, und der drifer calls a boliceman,
und I vhas galloped down here."

"So it wasn't your home?"

"Not oxactly. It vhas a leedle mistake."

"It'll cost you $5."

"Vheel, dot ain't so bad. I pay him oop und go home to preakfast."

"Be careful next time."

"Oh, I vill dot. Next time I vhas tight I go home on some shtreets
midout cars. If I take some ice-wagon for my house I pelief I got cooled
off pooty queek."




SHARPER THAN A RAZOR.


A long-waisted man, with the nose of a fox and an eye full of
speculation, walked up to a second-hand clothier, in Buffalo, the other
day, and said:

"See that overcoat hanging out down there?"

"Of course."

"Well, I've taken a fancy to it. It's rather cheeky to ask you to go
down there, but I'll make it an object; I won't give but $8 for the
coat, but I'll give you $1 to buy it for me. You are also a Jew and know
how to beat him down. Here are $9."

The dealer took the money and started off, and in five minutes was back
with the coat.

"Good!" chuckled the other. "I reckoned you'd lay him out. How much did
you make for your share?"

"Vhell, ash dot is my branch shore, and I only ask six dollar fur de
goat, I was about tree dollar ahead."


A COMING DIVIDEND.


Last fall, when a would-be purchaser of railroad stock called upon
Russell Sage and asked him regarding the outlook of certain stock, Mr.
Sage replied:

"Splendid idea! That stock is certain to raise fifteen per cent."

"Upon what do you base your calculations?"

"Upon the immense crops to be moved along that line."

The other day the same gentleman again interviewed Mr. Sage regarding
the same stock, and the great financier replied:

"Best outlook in the world for that stock! Certain to advance fifteen
per cent."

"Do you base your calculations upon last fall's crops?"

"No, sir; it's going to be an open winter, and the line will save enough
in snow-plows to declare a dividend of five per cent."

       *       *       *       *       *

At a party: Merchant--"Ah! How d'do, Mr. Blank? How is your paper coming
out? I read it daily. By the way, you are getting up a report of this
grand assembly, I suppose?" Editor--"No. By the way, how is your store
coming on? My cook buys a good deal of you. You are here drumming up
custom, I suppose?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes," said Mrs. Towers, as she expatiated upon the beauties of her
flower-garden, "I have given it great care, and if you come over in a
week or two, I expect to be able to show you some beautiful scarlet
pneumonias."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address Prairie Farmer Pub Co.,

150 Monroe Street. Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *

ILLINOIS CENTRAL RAILROAD.

The elegant equipment of coaches and sleepers being added to its various
through routes is gaining it many friends. Its patrons fear no
accidents. Its perfect track of steel, and solid road-bed, are a
guarantee against them.

       *       *       *       *       *

MEDICAL.

DISEASE CURED

Without Medicine.

_A Valuable Discovery for supplying Magnetism to the Human System.
Electricity and Magnetism utilized as never before for Healing the
Sick._

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO.'s

MAGNETIC KIDNEY BELT!

FOR MEN IS

WARRANTED TO CURE Or Money Refunded, the following diseases without
medicine:--Pain in the Back, Hips, Head, or Limbs, Nervous Debility,
Lumbago, General Debility, Rheumatism, Paralysis, Neuralgia, Sciatica,
Diseases of the Kidneys, Spinal Diseases, Torpid Liver, GOUT SEMINAL
EMISSIONS, IMPOTENCY, ASTHMA, HEART DISEASE, DYSPEPSIA, CONSTIPATION,
ERYSIPELAS, INDIGESTION, HERNIA OR RUPTURE, CATARRH, PILES, EPILEPSY,
DUMB AGUE, ETC.

When any debility of the GENERATIVE ORGANS occurs, LOST VITALITY, LACK
OF NERVE FORCE AND VIGOR, WASTING WEAKNESS, and all those Diseases of a
personal nature, from whatever cause, the continuous stream of Magnetism
permeating through the parts, must restore them to a healthy action.
There is no mistake about this appliance.

TO THE LADIES:--If you are afflicted with LAME BACK, WEAKNESS OF THE
SPINE, FALLING OF THE WOMB, LEUCORRHOEA, CHRONIC INFLAMMATION AND
ULCERATION OF THE WOMB, INCIDENTAL HEMORRHAGE OR FLOODING, PAINFUL,
SUPPRESSED, AND IRREGULAR MENSTRUATION, BARRENNESS, AND CHANGE OF LIFE,
THIS IS THE BEST APPLIANCE AND CURATIVE AGENT KNOWN.

For all forms of FEMALE DIFFICULTIES it is unsurpassed by anything
before invented, both as a curative agent and as a source of power and
vitalization.

Price of either Belt with Magnetic Insoles, $10, sent by express C.O.D.,
and examination allowed, or by mail on receipt of price. In ordering
send measure of waist, and size of shoe. Remittance can be made in
currency, sent in letter at our risk.

The Magneton Garments are adapted to all ages, are worn over the
under-clothing (NOT NEXT TO THE BODY LIKE THE MANY GALVANIC AND
ELECTRIC HUMBUGS ADVERTISED SO EXTENSIVELY), and should be taken off at
night. They hold their POWER FOREVER, and are worn at all seasons of the
year.

Send stamp for the "New Departure in Medical treatment WITHOUT
MEDICINE," with thousands of testimonials.

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO., 218 STATE STREET. CHICAGO, ILL.

Note.--Send one dollar in postage stamps or currency (in letter
at our risk) with size of shoe usually worn, and try a pair of our
Magnetic Insoles, and be convinced of the power residing in our other
Magnetic Appliances. Positively no cold feet when they are worn, or
money refunded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Self Cure Free

Nervous Debility Lost Manhood Weakness and Decay

A favorite prescription of a noted specialist (now retired.) Druggists
can fill it. Address

DR. WARD & CO., LOUISIANA, MO.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCALES.

U.S. STANDARD SCALES,
MANUFACTURED EXPRESSLY FOR
THE PRAIRIE FARMER

_Every Scale Guaranteed by the Manufacturers, and by Us, to be Perfect,
and to give the Purchaser Satisfaction._

The PRAIRIE FARMER Sent Two Years Free

To any person ordering either size Wagon Scale at prices given below.

[Illustration]

2-Ton Wagon or Farm Scale (Platform 6 x 12 feet), $35; 3-Ton (7 x 13),
$45; 5-Ton (8 x 14), $55. Beam Box, Brass Beam, Iron Levers, Steel
Bearings, and full directions for setting up.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER SENT 1 YEAR FREE!

To any person ordering either of the following Scales, at prices named
below.

[Illustration]

The Housekeeper's Scale--$4.00

Weighing accurately from 1/4 oz. to 25 lbs. This is also a valuable
Scale for Offices for Weighing Mail Matter. Tin Scoop, 50c. extra; Brass
75c. extra.

[Illustration]

The Family Scale--$7.00.

Weighs from 1/4 oz. to 240 lbs. Small articles weighed in Scoop, large
ones on Platform. Size of Platform, 10-1/2 x 13-1/2 in.

[Illustration]

The Prairie Farmer Scale--$10.00

Weighs from 2 oz. to 320 lbs. Size of Platform 14 x 19 inches. A
convenient Scale for Small Farmers, Dairymen, etc.

[Illustration]

Platform Scales--4 Sizes.
400 lbs., $15; 600 lbs., $20; 900 lbs., $24; 1,200 lbs., $28; Wheels and
Axles, $2 extra.

In ordering, give the Price and Description given above. All Scales
Boxed and Delivered at Depot in Chicago. Give full shipping directions.
Send money by Draft on Chicago or New York Post Office Order or
Registered Letter. Address

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY, CHICAGO, ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS

[Illustration]

THE STANDARD REMINGTON TYPE-WRITER is acknowledged to be the only rapid
and reliable writing machine. It has no rival. These machines are used
for transcribing and general correspondence in every part of the globe,
doing their work in almost every language. Any young man or woman of
ordinary ability, having a practical knowledge of the use of this
machine may find constant and remunerative employment. All machines and
supplies, furnished by us, warranted. Satisfaction guaranteed or money
refunded. Send for circulars. WYCKOFF, SEAMANS & BENEDICT, 38 East
Madison St, Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

Send for Catalogue and Prices.

ATLAS ENGINE WORKS

[Illustration]

INDIANAPOLIS, IND., U.S.A.

MANUFACTURERS OF

STEAM ENGINES AND BOILERS.

CARRY ENGINES and BOILERS IN STOCK for IMMEDIATE DELIVERY

       *       *       *       *       *

SEEDS

ALBERT DICKINSON,

Dealer in Timothy, Clover, Flax, Hungarian, Millet, Red Top, Blue Grass,
Lawn Grass, Orchard Grass, Bird Seeds, &c.

POPCORN.

    Warehouses { 115, 117 & 119 Kinzie St.   OFFICE. 115 KINZIE ST.,
               { 104, 106, 108, & 110 Michigan St. CHICAGO, ILL.




GENERAL NEWS.


Gen. Butler is now out of office.

A verdict of not guilty was rendered in the Emma Bond case.

St. Petersburg, Russia, is in a panic over recent acts of the Nihilists.

Two wolves have lately been killed in the vicinity of Douglas Park,
Chicago.

Another effort is soon to be made in Congress to reinstate Fitz John
Porter.

Brokers in Dubuque have offered $330,000 cash for the B.F. Allen
Homestead.

At Winnipeg on Thursday of last week the mercury was 45 degrees below
zero.

Albert E. Kent, of San Francisco, gives $25,000 for a chemical
laboratory at Yale College.

Judge McCrary, of the Supreme Court, has resigned, and accepted a
position as a railway attorney.

The Government of China has ordered the construction of two more torpedo
boats at the German port of Stettin.

St. Louis had many fires last week. There were nine outbreaks within
forty-eight hours. The firemen were completely worn out.

There were 319 failures in the United States last week--the largest
number yet recorded within the same number of days.

There was strong talk at Hillsboro of lynching the discharged prisoners
in the Emma Bond case, but better counsel prevailed.

Governor Stoneman presided at a meeting in San Francisco, where
arrangements were made to hold a world's exposition in 1887.

The mercury at Charleston, S.C., was 13 degrees below zero January 4th.
Through New England the weather was extremely cold.

Mary, the seventeenth wife of the late Brigham Young, died at Salt Lake
City Saturday from blood poisoning. She has fourteen survivors.

A pie made of tainted meat caused the poisoning of sixteen boarders and
three Sisters at a convent in Montreal. Two of the former are
dangerously ill.

It is announced from Paris that the French government is intending to
sell the railways owned by the Republic. The Rothschilds stand ready to
purchase them.

By a railroad accident near Fort Dodge, on Wednesday last, three persons
were killed and several wounded. Among the killed was Mrs. J.H. South,
of Bureau Co., Ills.

Mrs. Holcomb, daughter of the murdered millionaire Crouch, of Michigan,
has committed suicide. There is some suspicion that she knew something
about the murder.

A nihilist proclamation has been issued threatening the Czar. There is
much anxiety at Gatschina palace. It is now said the Czar's injury in
the shoulder the other day was caused by a bullet.

The United States Consul General at Cairo reports the deaths by the
cholera epidemic at from 65,000 to 70,000. A member of the international
tribunal says there are still from one to three fatal cases each day.

The Gould system of railroads is about to establish a telegraph school
at St. Louis, with a view not only to educating operators, but of
selecting pupils from the acclimated people along the Southwestern
lines.

The Catholic convent at Belleville, Ill., took fire from the furnace
Saturday evening, and in an hour was reduced to ashes. Sixty pupils made
desperate efforts to escape, some of them leaping from the windows.
Twenty-seven lives were lost.

The Secretary of State at Springfield has issued papers of incorporation
to Col. Wood's museum, at Chicago, with a capital stock of $100,000. The
Colonel is said to have secured a lease of his old stand on Randolph
street, and the Olympic Theatre.

Henry Villard closed his business career by handing over to assignees
his mansion on Madison square and other property, with instructions to
dispose of the same, pay a mortgage of $200,000, and discharge any
indebtedness to the Oregon Railway Company, the residue to be given to
his wife.

The directors of the Northern Pacific road held a meeting in New York,
on Friday, of last week. A letter was read from Henry Villard, resigning
the presidency of the company because of nervous prostration and in
deference to the interests of the stockholders. The resignation was
accepted, and a special election was ordered to choose a successor. The
directors voted Mr. Villard $10,000 per annum for his services. Vice
President Oakes reported the line in first-class order except one
hundred miles near the junction west of Helena. It is understood that
the Oregon Navigation company will reduce its dividends to 8 per cent.
The Oregon Transcontinental has raised $3,000,000 in Boston with which
to lift its floating debt.




MARKETS

MARKET REPORTS.


OFFICE OF THE PRAIRIE FARMER,
CHICAGO. Jan 8, 1884.


FINANCIAL AND COMMERCIAL.

The extremely cold weather of the past week interfered with business
very generally. In financial circles, as in others, the arctic wave made
matters rather quiet. Early in the present week, however, business at
the banks was active. The arrival of delayed mail trains added to the
volume of business; but while there was much activity, the monetary
situation remained about the same as usual.

In the loan market quotations were 6@7 per cent.

Eastern exchange sold at 70@75c per $1,000 premium.

Government securities are as follows:

4's coupons, 1907              Q. Apr.      123-1/4
4's reg., 1907                 Q. Apr.      123-1/4
4-1/2's coupon, 1891           Q. Mar.      114-1/8
4-1/2's registered, 1891       Q. Mar.      114-1/8
3's registered                 Q. Mar.      100


GRAIN AND PROVISIONS.

The leading produce markets have been irregular for several days past,
and the tendency, in the main, was downward. Yesterday wheat was
moderately active, but the market was depressed at the close. There was
a drop, also, in corn, oats, mess pork, and lard.

FLOUR was quiet at about the following rates.

Choice to favorite white winters                $5 25 @ 5 50
Fair to good brands of white winters             4 75 @ 5 00
Good to choice red winters                       5 00 @ 5 50
Prime to choice springs                          4 75 @ 5 00
Good to choice export stock, in sacks, extras    4 25 @ 4 50
Good to choice export stock, double extras       4 50 @ 4 65
Fair to good Minnesota springs                   4 50 @ 4 75
Choice to fancy Minnesota springs                5 25 @ 5 75
Patent springs                                   6 00 @ 6 50
Low grades                                       2 25 @ 3 50

WHEAT.--Red winter, No. 2 96 @ 98c; car lots of spring, No. 2, sold at
93-3/4 @ 95c; No. 3, do. 77-1/2 @ 81c.

CORN.--Moderately active. Car lots No. 2, 57-3/8 @ 57-5/8c; rejected,
46-1/2; new mixed, 48 @ 48-1/4c.

OATS.--No. 2 in store, closed 33-1/2 @ 33-5/8.

RYE.--May, in store 58 @ 58-1/2.

BARLEY.--No. 2, 62 @ 63c; No. 3, 44c.

FLAX.--Closed at $1 41.

TIMOTHY.--$1 25 per bushel. Little doing.

CLOVER.--Quiet at $5 90 @ 6 15 for prime.

PROVISIONS.--Mess pork, February, $14 45 @ 14 47-1/2 per bbl; May,
$15 @ 15 05. Green hams, 8-3/8c, per lb. Short ribs, $7 42-1/2 per cwt.

LARD.--January, $8 75; February, $8 85.

LUMBER.

Lumber unchanged. Quotations for green are as follows:

Short dimension, per M                          $9 50 @ 10 00
Long dimension, per M                           10 00 @ 11 50
Boards and strips, No. 2                        11 00 @ 13 00
Boards and strips, medium                       13 00 @ 16 00
Boards and strips, No. 1 choice                 16 00 @ 20 00
Shingles, standard                               2 10 @  2 20
Shingles, choice                                 2 25 @  2 30
Shingles, extra                                  2 40 @  2 60
Lath                                             1 65 @  1 70


COUNTRY PRODUCE.

NOTE.--The quotations for the articles named in the following list are
generally for commission lots of goods and from first hands. While our
prices are based as near as may be on the landing or wholesale rates,
allowance must be made for selections and the sorting up for store
distribution.

BEANS.--Hand picked mediums $2 00 @ 2 10. Hand picked navies,
$2 15 @ 2 20.

BUTTER.--Dull and without change. Choice to extra creamery, 32 @ 35c per
lb.; fair to good do. 26 @ 30c; fair to choice dairy, 25 @ 30c; common
to choice packing stock fresh and sweet, 20 @ 25c; ladle packed
10 @ 13c; fresh made, streaked butter, 9 @ 11c.

BRAN.--Quoted at $11 87-1/2 @ 13 50 per ton; extra choice $13.

BROOM-CORN.--Good to choice hurl 6-1/2 @ 7-1/2c per lb; green
self-working 5 @ 6c; red-tipped and pale do. 4 @ 5c; inside and covers
3 @ 4c; common short corn 2-1/2 @ 3-1/2c; crooked, and damaged, 2 @ 4c,
according to quality.

CHEESE.--Choice full-cream cheddars 12-1/2 @ 13c per lb; medium quality
do. 9 @ 10c; good to prime full cream flats 13 @ 13-3/4c; skimmed
cheddars 9 @ 10c; good skimmed flats 6 @ 7c; hard-skimmed and common
stock 3 @ 4c.

EGGS.--In a small way the best brands are quotable at 25 @ 26c per
dozen; 20 @ 23c for good ice house stock; 18 @ 19c per pickled.

HAY.--No. 1 timothy $10 @ 10 50 per ton; No. 2 do. $8 @ 9; mixed do.
$7 @ 8; upland prairie $8 00 @ 10 75; No. 1 prairie $6 @ 7; No. 2 do.
$4 50 @ 5 50. Small bales sell at 25 @ 50c per ton more than large bales.

HIDES AND PELTS.--Green-cured light hides 8c per lb; do. heavy cows 8c;
No. 2 damaged green-salted hides 6c; green-salted calf 12 @ 12-1/2
cents; green-salted bull 6 c; dry-salted hides 11 cents; No. 2
two-thirds price; No. 1 dry flint 14 @ 14-1/2c. Sheep pelts salable at
28 @ 32c for the estimated amount of wash wool on each pelt. All branded
and scratched hides are discounted 15 per cent from the price of No. 1.

HOPS.--Prime to choice New York State hops 25 @ 26c per lb; Pacific
coast of 23 @ 26c; fair to good Wisconsin 15 @ 20c.

POULTRY.--Prices for good to choice dry picked and unfrozen lots are:
Turkeys 14 @ 15c per lb; chickens 10 @ 11c; ducks 10 @ 12c; geese
9 @ 11c. Thin, undesirable, and frozen stock 2 @ 3c per lb less than
these figures; live offerings nominal.

POTATOES.--Good to choice 35 @ 40c per bu. on track; common to fair
25 @ 30c. Illinois sweet potatoes range at $3 @ 3 50 per bbl for yellow.
Baltimore stock at $2 25 @ 2 75, and Jerseys at $5. Red are dull and
nominal.

TALLOW AND GREASE.--No. 1 country tallow 7@7-1/4c per lb; No. 2 do.
6-1/4 @ 6-1/2 c. Prime white grease 6 @ 6-1/2 c; yellow 5-1/4 @ 5-3/4c:
brown 4-1/2@5.

VEGETABLES.--Cabbage, $8 @ 12 per 100; celery, 35 @ 40c per doz bunches;
onions, $1 00 @ 1 25 $ bbl for yellow, and $1 for red; turnips,
$1 35@ 1 50 per bbl for rutabagas, and $1 00 for white flat.

WOOL.--from store range as follows for bright wools from Wisconsin,
Illinois, Michigan, Indiana, and Eastern Iowa--dark Western lots
generally ranging at 1 @ 2c per lb. less.

Coarse and dingy tub                            25 @ 30
Good medium tub                                 31 @ 34
Unwashed bucks' fleeces                         14 @ 15
Fine unwashed heavy fleeces                     18 @ 22
Fine light unwashed heavy fleeces               22 @ 23
Coarse unwashed fleeces                         21 @ 22
Low medium unwashed fleeces                     24 @ 25
Fine medium unwashed fleeces                    26 @ 27
Fine washed fleeces                             32 @ 33
Coarse washed fleeces                           26 @ 28
Low medium washed fleeces                       30 @ 32
Fine medium washed fleeces                      34 @ 35

Colorado and Territory wools range as follows:

Lowest grades                                   14 @ 16
Low medium                                      18 @ 22
Medium                                          22 @ 26
Fine                                            16 @ 24

Wools from New Mexico:

Lowest grades                                   14 @ 16
Part improved                                   16 @ 17
Best improved                                   19 @ 23

Burry from 2c to 10c off: black 2c to 5c off.


LIVE STOCK MARKETS.

The total receipts and shipments for last week were as follows:

                                    Received.   Shipped.

Cattle                               25,594     13,722
Calves                                  353        166
Hogs                                 45,376     31,864
Sheep                                14,206      8,903

The live stock receipts are increasing, and show a large gain over last
week.

CATTLE.--The receipts for Sunday and Monday were rather large, being
estimated at 6,800 head of cattle, as against 3,700 received in the
corresponding time last week. Shipping grades of cattle were active and
firm yesterday at $5 @ 6 67-1/2, exporters taking a fair number. Common
lots were lower, with sales to dressed-beef buyers as low as $4 25. A
good share of the day's trading was done at $5 70 @ 6 60. Quotations are
as follows:

Fancy fat cattle                             $ 6 75 @ 7 00
Choice to prime steers                         6 05 @ 6 70
Fair to good shipping steers                   5 55 @ 6 00
Common to medium steers                        4 25 @ 5 50
Butcher's steers                               4 50 @ 5 00
Cows and bulls, common to good                 3 00 @ 4 25
Inferior cows and bulls                        2 00 @ 2 95
Stockers                                       3 40 @ 4 40
Feeders                                        4 25 @ 4 75
Milch cows, per head                          25 00 @55 00
Veal calves, per 100lbs                        4 00 @ 7 25

HOGS.--The receipts Sunday and Monday were estimated at 18,000 hogs,
against only 6,700 received in the corresponding time last week.
Although the receipts have been increasing during the last few days,
supplies are still remarkably small for the first half of January. The
great bulk of the crop has undoubtedly been marketed, but there are
known to be a very good number still unmarketed, and it is believed that
farmers are unwilling to ship freely to this market while packers are so
largely inactive, fearing a decline in prices. Shippers have been taking
most of the hogs lately. Butchers took in the neighborhood of 1,900
hogs, leaving a few thousand still unsold. Sales were made of heavy at
$5 10 @ 6 25; light at $5 10 @ 5 75, and skips and culls at $3 50 @ 5.

Note.--All sales of hogs are made subject to a shrinkage of 40 lbs for
piggy sows and 80 lbs for stags. Dead hogs sell for 1-1/2c per lb for
weights of 200 and over and for weights of less than 100lbs.

SHEEP.--The market opened with a good supply, the receipts for Sunday
and Monday being estimated at 2,500 head, as against 1,968 received in
the same time last week. There was an active local and shipping demand
for all desirable offerings, and prices ruled firm at the recent
advance, sales being made of fair to choice at $3 65 @ 5 60.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMISSION MERCHANTS.

J.H. WHITE & CO.,

PRODUCE COMMISSION

106 WATER ST., CHICAGO.

Refers to this paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.

YOUR NAME printed on 60 Cards

ALL NEW designs of _Gold Floral, Remembrances, Sentiment, Hand Floral_,
etc., with _Love, Friendship,_ and _Holiday Mottoes_. 10c. 7pks. and this
elegant Ring, 50 c., 15 pks. & Ring, $1.

12 NEW "CONCEALED NAME" Cards (name concealed with hand holding flowers
with mottoes) 20c. 7 pks. and this Ring for $1. Agents sample book and
full outfit, 25c. Over 200 new Cards added this season. Blank Cards at
wholesale prices.

NORTHFORD CARD CO. Northford, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

Agents Wanted, Male and Female, for Spence's Blue Book, a most
fascinating and salable novelty. Every family needs from one to a dozen.
Immense profits and exclusive territory. Sample mailed for 25 cts in
postage stamps. Address J.H. CLARSON, P.O. Box 2296, Philadelphia, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

$1000 Every 100 Days

Positively sure to Agents everywhere selling our New SILVER MOULD WHITE
WIRE CLOTHES-LINE. Warranted. Pleases at sight. Cheap. Sells readily at
every house. Agents clearing $10 per day. Farmers make $900 to $1200
during Winter. _Handsome samples free._

Address, GIRARD WIRE MILLS, Philadelphia, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

BEST QUALITY.

[Illustration]

80 Cards

New designs in Satin and Gold finish, with name, 10 cts. We offer $100
for a pack of cards any nicer work, or prettier styles. _Samples free_.
EAGLE CARD WORKS, NEW HAVEN, CT.

       *       *       *       *       *

500 VIRGINIA FARMS & MILLS

For Sale and Exchange. Write for free REAL ESTATE JOURNAL. R.B. CHAFFIN;
CO. Richmond, Virginia.

       *       *       *       *       *

PATENT

Procured or no charge. 40 p. book patent-law free. Add. W.T.
FITZGERALD 1006 F St., Washington, D.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

CARDS

50 SATIN FINISH CARDS, New Imported designs, name on and Present Free
for 10c. Cut this out. CLINTON BROS. & Co., Clintonville, Ct.

       *       *       *       *       *

EDUCATIONAL.

MT. CARROLL SEMINARY

And Musical Conservatory, Carroll Co., Ill.,

_Never had an agent_ to beg funds or pupils. The PECUNIARY AID
SYSTEM _is original_, and helps many worthy girls, without means,
to an education. "_Oreads_" _free_.

       *       *       *       *       *

SEWING SILK.

Corticelli Sewing Silk,

[Illustration]

LADIES, TRY IT!

The Best Sewing Silk Made.

Every Spool Warranted.

Full Length, Smooth and Strong.

Ask your Storekeeper for Corticelli Silk.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPECIAL OFFER.

$67 FOR $18!

[Illustration]

A Superb New Family

Sewing Machine!

Combining all the most recent improvements, and now selling for $65, is
offered by THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY to subscribers to THE
PRAIRIE FARMER

FOR $18,

including one year's subscription to the paper.

This exceptional offer will remain open for a few days only.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.

"FACTS ABOUT Arkansas and Texas."

A handsome book, beautifully illustrated, with colored diagrams, giving
reliable information as to crops, population, religious denominations,
commerce, timber, Railroads, lands, etc., etc.

Sent free to any address on receipt of a 2-cent stamp. Address

    H.C. Townsend,
    Gen. Passenger Agt., St. Louis, Mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stock Farm for Sale

Consisting of 565 acres--360 under plow, 35 acres timber, balance in
grass--situated in finest County in Iowa, one-fourth mile from Village,
Station, and Creamery. Or will sell one-half interest to practical
stockman and feeder who will assume management. Write for particulars to

    H.I. SMITH,
    Prest. First National Bank, Mason City, Iowa.

       *       *       *       *       *

Print Your Own Cards

Labels, Envelopes, etc.

[Illustration]

with our $3 PRINTING PRESS. Larger sizes for circulars, etc., $8 to
$75. For pleasure, money making, young or old. Everything easy, printed
instructions. Send 2 stamps for Catalogue of Presses, Type, Cards, etc.,
to the factory.

KELSEY & CO., Meriden, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

We will send you a watch or a chain BY MAIL OR EXPRESS, C.O.D, to be
examined before paying any money and if not satisfactory, returned at
our expense. We manufacture all our watches and save you 30 per cent.
Catalogue of 250 styles free. EVERY WATCH WARRANTED. ADDRESS
STANDARD AMERICAN WATCH CO., PITTSBURGH. PA.

       *       *       *       *       *

PIG EXTRICATOR

To aid animals in giving birth. Send for free circular to WM. DULIN,
Avoca, Pottawattamie Co., Ia.

       *       *       *       *       *

FREE

_By return mail_. Full Description MOODY'S NEW TAILOR SYSTEM of Dress
Cutting MOODY & CO, Cincinnati, O.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRAIRIE FARMER is the Cheapest and Best Agricultural Paper
published. Only $2.00 per year.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Prairie Farmer, Vol. 56, No. 2,
January 12, 1884, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRAIRIE FARMER, VOL. 56 ***

***** This file should be named 17683.txt or 17683.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/6/8/17683/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

