The Project Gutenberg EBook of Thirty Years In Hell, by Bernard Fresenborg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Thirty Years In Hell
       Or, From Darkness to Light

Author: Bernard Fresenborg

Release Date: March 23, 2006 [EBook #18040]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THIRTY YEARS IN HELL ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Geetu Melwani and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: Yours in His name
Bernard Fresenborg.]






                  "Thirty Years in Hell"

                       ... OR ...

                 "From Darkness to Light."

                           BY

              Ex-Priest, Bernard Fresenborg,


  Who for thirty long years tread the slippery and deceitful path
     of abhorrent Catholicism, but who to-day stands at the
       Vatican's door, with the torch of Protestant wisdom,
            and denounces Popery with a tongue
                livid with the power of
                     a living God.

           Like a Meteor From God's Throne,

 This great book has stirred America from center to circumference.

               About 400 Large Pages,

   And each Page a stinging rebuke to Roman Catholicism.


                     Published by
              North-American Book House,
                    St. Louis, Mo.

  Entered according to act of Congress in the year 1904, by
             NORTH-AMERICAN BOOK HOUSE,
 In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, Washington, D.C.




Transcriber's Note: A number of typographical errors found in the
original text have been corrected in this version. A list of these
errors is provided at the end of the book.





Author's Announcement.


A structure of enlightenment is to be built in this land, which to
finish, every man of intellectual power must contribute.

The structure which I refer to, is the structure of "SPIRITUAL
LIBERTY," as the spiritual part of man must have room to expand and
grow the same as any other God-given privilege that man is blessed
with.

Unless we grow in faith we become dwarfs in the worship of God.

Those who go forth into the world and profess to be the teachers of
men should be giants of intellect and fully prepared to contribute to
this monument of "SPIRITUAL LIBERTY."

These giants are the "KNIGHTS OF THE SPIRIT," who stand upon the
summit of righteousness and proclaim an intelligent God to a sinful
world.

Many say they do not feel that they possess the ability to contribute
to this structure of "SPIRITUAL LIBERTY," but I say, none who possess
the power to reason are exempt, for if they cannot place in the arch
of this structure the golden "key-stone" that shall securely bind
this structure together, they can carry mortar or stones, which is as
imperative in this structure, as the polished "Cap stone" which shall
complete this great pyramid of emancipation.

I do not crave to have my name engraven in bold letters upon the "Cap
stone" of this structure, but I do desire to contribute my mite
towards the completion of this grand structure of free thought,
which, when completed, will stand out upon the horizon of time as a
towering monument to Christ and his cause.

Roman Catholicism, as taught by our modern priests and inspired by
the papal power at Rome is naught but the distant rumblings of an
antiquated chariot of darkness, as the teachings of this MONARCHICAL
creed has naught in view but the enslavement of reason for the
financial gain and benefit of the "Robed" few who claim the right to
think for the masses.

For thirty long years I was bound to this bewitching spirit of
darkness by the chords of superstition and never dared to look above
my blind superiors for wisdom, until a "something" which I will call
"fate" broke the windows of my mental dungeon and permitted the light
of "SPIRITUAL LIBERTY" to filter through my being which awoke "reason
and common sense" from her long sleep of lethargy.

Now, what I once thought "Holy" I detest as abominable; What I once
worshipped, I now hate.

It is not the glitter of gold nor the applaudits of the protestant
world that I crave, but it is the Master's approval that I desire.
Therefore I deem it my duty to both God and mankind to proclaim to
the world what I know of the awfulness of Roman Catholicism, and I
know enough to make my poor soul often wonder if I shall ever be
permitted to sing with the blest around that GREAT WHITE THRONE in
the New Jerusalem.

As you peruse these pages, I pray that you may whisper a prayer to
God in my behalf, as I am now fifty-six years old and only a child in
wisdom.

With pity for the blind hosts of Catholicism and a prayer upon my
lips for their deliverance from the trenches of paganism, I dedicate
this book to the world as coming from a heart which poured out its
youth's vitality upon the barren fields of superstition, and wasted
its vigor in serving only the god of myths. With a feeling of
brotherly love for the entire world, I am,

            Yours in His name,

                      BERNARD FRESENBORG.





TABLE OF CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.
                                               Page.
Who I Am, What I Am, and Why I Am What
I Am.                                          15

CHAPTER II.

Some of the Abominations of Catholicism
Carried On in the Name of Our Blessed
Savior.                                        33

CHAPTER III.

All Children of Protestant Parents,
Declared Bastards by Catholicism.              51

CHAPTER IV.

Tear from the Citadel of Reason, the Power
to Reason and You make Slaves of Humanity.     65

CHAPTER V.

Innocent Girlhood at the Confessional Box.     81

CHAPTER VI.

The Nations completely dominated by the Power
of the Pope, are Nations of Illegitimacy.      97

CHAPTER VII.

The Power of the Pope in Cuba, Porto Rica
and the Philippine Islands.                   109

CHAPTER VIII.

Monasteries are often Criminals' Abode, and
Nunneries the Slaughter Pens of Virtue.       127

CHAPTER IX.

Unmarried Cussedness of the Roman
Priest-Craft.                                 149

CHAPTER X.

A Brazen Insult to God.                       171

CHAPTER XI.

The Characters of the Followers of
Catholicism, Compared to the Followers
of Protestantism.                             181

CHAPTER XII.

Why the Teachers in our Public Schools
should not be Selected from the Ranks
of Catholicism.                               193

CHAPTER XIII.

The Influence of the Priesthood in America.   223

CHAPTER XIV.

The Chastity of the Home Invaded by
the Lustfulness of the Priest-Craft.          239

CHAPTER XV.

Nations which have been Disgraced by the
Toleration of Popish Rule.                    255

CHAPTER XVI.

Nearing the Trenches of Physical Strength.    281




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                             Page
Author's Picture.                               2

"What Shall I Do To Be Saved?"                 14

The Two Inspirations--The Holy Bible
and Catholicism.                               33

The Unmarried Life of the Priest-Craft,
compared to the Married Life of
Protestant Ministers.                          50

The Two Ways--"As the Twig is Bent, the
Tree's Incline."                               64

Immorality of the Priest-Hood--With Romish
Lust, the Blossom of Virtue is Destroyed.      80

America's Ruin.                                96

Free in Name Only--Take Their Chains Off
Uncle Sam, or You will always have
Trouble with Them.                            108

Save The Girls--Batter Down the Doors of
Convents, and the Civilized World will
Stand Amazed.                                 126

Take Your Choice--The Christ of Protestantism
Compared to the God of Catholicism.           148

Being Ex-Communicated for Reading the
Bible--"May She Be Damned in her Mouth,
in Her Breast, in Her Heart, Etc., Etc."      170

A Modern Judas--In His Wake, Misery always
Follows.                                      180

Foes to Knowledge--Like a Poisonous
Serpent, Etc., Etc.                           192

Heathenish Practices--A Catholic "Dupe"
Kissing the Supposed Bone of St. Ann.         222

A Catholic Tool--Begging in the Name of
the Lord, but in Reality, to Support the
Priest-Craft, Etc.                            238

Systematic Robbery--The Road to Glory along
the Catholic Highway, Etc.                    254

Uncle Sam--"Here is Your Next Fight Boys."    280




[Illustration: "WHAT SHALL I DO TO BE SAVED"
"The dawn of Protestantism upon Ex-Priest Fresenborg
after thirty years in the Roman Catholic Church."]




Chapter I.

Who I Am, What I Am, and Why I Am What I Am.


My parents were Catholics, and for this reason I suppose, is why I
became a Catholic Priest.

I was born in Germany, in 1847, thus you see I am now almost what the
world would call an old man--56 years old.

A few years ago, I was of the opinion that my life had been well
spent, but to-day I firmly believe that the major part of my life has
been spent in erroneous doctrines and nonsensical teachings, as the
broad light of wisdom and independent thought has penetrated the dark
resources of my bewildered conception of right, and has caused me to
look upon things in general in an intelligent manner. Therefore, I
feel that my youth and the vigorous years of my manhood have been
spent in what one might term idolatry.

From this time forward I am going to endeavor to undo, as near as
possible, what I have helped to accomplish in the past.

In the first place, I desire to give the reader an idea of who I am,
as the reader is entitled to this knowledge, and in the second place
I want the reader to understand what I am, and in the third place to
understand why I am what I am, as there must be a reason for all
things.

My ancestors came from Sweden, but becoming tired of religions
warfare under Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, they settled in a
Catholic colony in Germany, in the southern part of the Dukedom of
Oldenburg, near the River Haase.

The reader, if he be a Protestant, is familiar with Protestant
affiliations, and I am led to believe belongs to one of the many
Protestant denominations, known under the head of Methodist, Baptist,
Christian, United Brethren, Presbyterian, Free Baptist, or some one
of the many other Protestant Churches. Therefore you can easily see
why it was that I became a Catholic, as I was taught it from my
infancy.

My father, like his ancestors, lived in Essen, Oldenburg. Essen is a
town of considerable trade in grain, in fine Oldenburg horses and
Holstein cows, in fact, it is a town noted for its fine stock.

The beautiful town of Essen has a considerable population. Two fine
rivers, which unite their rapid waters in its very midst, make it an
ideal spot to live.

My relatives were among the first and best families of the Dukedom.
These families were by name Dickmann, Meyer, Junker and Mohlenkamp,
who are at the head of the intellectual and material movements of
that place. They are all related by marriage and intermarriage to the
Fresenborgs. My parents had ten children. This, however, may not
interest the reader, so I will confine myself to my own biography.

The school to which I was sent was one of the leading schools and had
a world-wide reputation, especially of sending many scholars and
students to the gymnasium and afterwards to universities for
different branches of sciences.

It seems as though all of those who attended this school became
successful in their individual careers, as lawyers, doctors or some
other of the chosen avocations of life.

I was raised, I might say, under the walls of the free City of
Bremen, and was inspired with the idea of freedom, and this, perhaps,
may be the reason why, when I have come to be an old man, that I have
shaken off this eternal bondage of Catholicism and launched my boat
so late in life upon the broad waters of Protestant freedom.

As the son of a wealthy family, I was sent to the Gymnasium of Vechta
for higher studies, where I received the best education which Germany
could give to her sons, and from there I was dismissed with the
diploma of "Maturity" in 1870, which was a passport to any man
holding such a diploma in any scholarly community, for a diploma from
this institution meant all that it implied.

After I had gone through a perfect study of Gymnasium, and after
having obtained my diploma, I could then decide for any career that
I might choose.

About this time came the disturbance of all of Germany caused by "The
German-French War." Like every patriot, I volunteered as a soldier,
but the officers in the German army were practical men and they had
little use for unseasoned "student soldiers" in the field of action,
and I was left in garrisons where universities were situated, where I
had military practice for a few hours each day, and then could follow
my studies at the same time.

Peace followed quickly after the Waterloo of Napoleon III at Sedan,
and this peace was restored quickly in the "fatherland," as not one
victorious Frenchman had crossed the "Rhine."

I followed my favorite study, forestry and agriculture, for some
time, but as my parents and my forefathers, both on my father's and
mother's side, had been devout Catholics, I had an earnest longing to
become a Catholic Priest, as I desired to go forth in the world and
proclaim the cause of Christ, believing that Catholicism was the
only church which had a right to establish her doctrines, and, of
course, cast my lot with this church, and to-day finds me an old man
with every vestige of childhood's faith shaken from center to
circumference, as I have lived in America so long and seen so much of
the intelligence of Protestantism, and so much of the deception of
Catholicism, I could not remain in the Catholic Church and be true to
my conception of what was right and wrong, therefore I laid aside,
with a degree of regret, the relics of Catholic barbarism.

I discarded the Scapular and everything that has no more intelligent
meaning to it than the cungering devices of the heathen has towards
the uplifting of humanity and the civilization of the world.

Many, many years ago my faith was shaken by what I had seen with my
own eyes and heard with my own ears, but I nursed my religious belief
from my mother's bosom; my religion was born and bred in my bones;
every drop of blood in my person was electrified in childhood by the
cungerings of Catholic legerdemain, and I was taught at my mother's
knee to believe that there was no other church that had a ghost of a
chance of eternal salvation but the Catholic Church, and I was taught
that all Protestants were heretics and abominable in the sight of God
and sure of eternal damnation, unless they turned from their sins and
joined the Catholic Church.

Ofttimes I would have my faith shaken by the actions of some lustful
priest, but I clung tenaciously to the religion of my mother and
refused to look beyond the horizon of Catholic superstition.

About the time that I had fully made up my mind to become a priest, I
had my faith shaken in the priesthood to a great extent by a
scandalous happening near the College of Vechta, which concerned and
strictly involved one of the great dignitaries of Catholicism in my
college town, but I fought this feeling of dislike down and forced
myself to believe that what a priest or bishop did was all right in
the sight of God, but at the same time I had a feeling of distrust,
as I could not reconcile myself to believe that God would look with
compassion upon the acts of a dignitary more readily than he would
upon the transgressions of his blind and duped followers, but
nevertheless I went ahead and prepared myself for the priesthood,
which I followed for thirty years.

Right directly opposite the college which I was attending resided the
Very Rev. Harold. This reverend gentleman was a high dignitary in the
Catholic Church.

We young priests had often heard it whispered about that Priest
Harold had in his house at different times a number of concubines,
which are nothing more nor less than lude women. We often saw ladies
around the mansion, dressed in the very height of fashion, and their
actions led us to believe that they were there at the solicitation of
Rev. Harold, as they were seen there at all times of the day and
night, and this certainly made a very strange impression upon us
young students, as there were so many different faces; one day we
would see two or three young girls, and the next day the same number
would be about the mansion, but different faces. All of we young
students endeavored not to believe the rumor, as we were Catholics
in every sense of the word, and we did not want to believe that
anything so degrading would be tolerated in the very mansion of one
of the officials who were teaching us.

The acts of this dignitary became so flagrant that even the students
who were trying not to believe the scandal were forced to believe
there was something wrong about the mansion of this Catholic
dignitary.

About this time there was a young priest by the name of Wulf, from
Rome, who was sent to Vechta and made secretary of this dignitary's
mansion, who, during the day, worked in the office of the mansion,
where court was held in cases of the Catholic Church and schools.

He was soon familiar in and about the mansion and the surrounding
grounds and was given many privileges, and the dignitary seemed to
like him because he did not meddle with his vile conduct, and the
ladies who frequented this place also seemed to admire him. There was
a large lawn surrounding the mansion and at night-time a number of
vicious dogs were unchained to guard it.

The priest that was sent from Rome was soon on familiar terms with
the dogs and they would mind him and became as obedient as children,
and he was soon on such good terms with these dogs that he could
approach the house at any time, day or night, and one word from him
would cause them to sneak off to their kennels and not molest any who
desired to approach the mansion.

The young priests of this college were determined to learn, if
possible, if this Catholic dignitary was guilty of the immoral
conduct that he was accused of, so they went to Wulf and explained to
him that they desired to make a personal investigation, and got this
young priest to promise that he would let them into the grounds one
night and also see that the dogs did not molest them.

We selected a dark night and a few of us young priests slipped into
the lawn surrounding the mansion and placed a ladder up to the second
story window, as there was a bright light inside, and we determined
to learn, if possible, what was going on in this room.

Dr. Wulf, the secretary, was the first to ascend, and there in this
room was the dignitary of the Catholic Church in a half drunken
condition, with two licentious and lude women, playing cards and
drinking wine, and the trio were in a half nude condition, and
frequently this dignitary of the Catholic Church would kiss these
harlots.

After Dr. Wulf came down the ladder and told what he had seen, of
course the rest of us wished to become eye witnesses to the perfidy
of this vagabond of the Catholic Church.

We would take time about going up the ladder to look at this sight,
and sometimes one would remain so long at the top of the ladder the
others would become restless and urge him to come down and give the
rest of us a chance.

It seemed as though this Catholic dignitary and the women up stairs
within had implicit confidence in the dogs, and had no fear of
detection in their drunken orgy of immorality. This dignitary seemed
very drunk, and the ladies began to undress him preparatory to
putting him to bed. When they had him undressed, one of them pulled
off her clothes and went to bed with him.

The next morning the report in the form of affidavits was presented
to the parents of the girls, which caused a very great sensation, and
this bundle of infamy and abomination was forced to leave the city by
the parents of these daughters whom he had desecrated by his filthy
touch.

It was afterwards learned that this state of affairs had existed in
this Catholic mansion for years past, and all that had transpired in
this mansion would blush the inhabitants of Sodom if it could be
told, but it is so filthy that it could not be repeated by any one
who had much respect for himself.

After this dignitary had left the mansion there were a number of
children's skeletons unearthed in the park belonging to the mansion,
and one child's skeleton was found in the waters surrounding the
palace.

No one was ever arrested for this awful, awful crime, as this
Catholic dignitary fled to some monastery and there was concealed
from the law's clutch, as there is no law whereby these monasteries
can be forced open and their criminals brought to justice.

A monastery is a Catholic institution that may be used for divers
purposes, but for one great purpose, and a very heinous purpose, is
to hide and conceal Catholic officials who break the laws of their
country, as they can flee to these monasteries and there hide
themselves from the wrath of the civil government.

It makes no difference how vile the culprits may be, these Catholic
institutions are always a refuge for them, and especially if the
culprit who has money or friends supply them with same, as the
Catholic Church is and always has been a great money machine, as
money, in the eyes of the Catholic dignitaries, covers up a multitude
of sins.

You may not know it, but it is a fact, nevertheless, that the
monasteries never allow the officers of the civil laws to enter, and
suppose the officers did enter, the culprit would never be found, as
Catholic institutions are built with the purpose of sheltering her
abominable faithless in case these criminals' desire to hide
themselves therein, as the convents, monasteries and cloisters have a
labyrinth which would mystify any one who was not used to these
underground passages.

No one ever learned where the dignitary of this Catholic institution
at Vechta went, but we were thoroughly convinced that he was hiding
somewhere in a monastery.

At this point in my religious training I perceived the nonsense of
celibacy, and the Apostle's injunction: "Nevertheless, to avoid
fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman
have her own husband." (I Cor. 7:2.) But the teachings of my
childhood caused me to believe that it would be sacrilegious upon my
part to even allow myself to believe that the Pope of Rome could
possibly make a mistake, therefore I did as all true Catholics are
expected to do, and forced myself to believe that all of the
abominations practiced by this church were godly.

At this time I would conceal myself in privacy, and endeavor to
reason why a minister of the gospel should be expected to do things
which were unnatural and against the direct teachings of God, as we
find in _Gen. 21:18_ that our Creator said: "It is not good that man
should be alone, I will make a helpmate for him," but whenever I
would undertake to study and try to convince myself of the
erroneousness of the Catholic doctrines, her teachings would loom up
and blind my intelligent conception of things, as I had been taught
that I should not question a single mandate that the Pope of Rome
should see fit to promulgate, therefore I made up my mind that it was
a sin for me to use the intelligence that God had given me, and I
resolved to follow the Catholic doctrine, regardless of what it might
lead me to, consequently I closed my eyes to reason and common sense
and became a blind and superstitious follower of Rome.

When I came to America I beheld her great civilization and at once my
conception of intelligent action presented itself again, but I fought
hard to drive these feelings from my bosom, but the more I fought the
stronger I became convinced that I was wrong and that my early
training was wrong, and that the entire machinery and mechanism of
the Catholic Church was founded upon abominations and superstitions,
but the teachings of my mother would prevail and I would slink back
into the trenches of Catholicism, and there I remained until less
than a year ago, when I resolved to burst the bands of iniquity and
walk out upon the plains of Protestantism, regardless of the deep
feelings of respect that I had for my early training.

If God is an intelligent God, then we are expected to worship Him in
an intelligent manner, and if he is not an intelligent God, it is
impossible for Him to be a God, and if the Lord of Hosts is an
intelligent Creator and expects us, as His children, to worship Him
in an intelligent manner, the Catholic Church and all of her
followers are sinning against God every day, as her mode of worship
is steeped in the drugs of heathenish superstitions.

In this volume I propose to set forth nothing but absolute truths,
and I call upon an intelligent God for my witness, and I am qualified
to make oath before any official that is qualified to bind me under
oath that every word that appears in this volume shall be the truth
and nothing but the truth, so help me God.

I will give $5,000.00 to any charitable institution named by any
state of the United States if any Catholic priest, bishop or cardinal
will prove by any of their church doctrines that I have misstated or
misrepresented the teachings of Catholicism in any letter, word or
sentence.

I want to thoroughly impress the reader with the truthfulness of this
volume, so when he or she has perused these pages they may know that
it has been written by one who has served in the capacity of a
Catholic priest for the past thirty years, but who, to-day, stands
out upon the broad plains of spiritual emancipation, and from this
time forward will always be found upon the side of spiritual liberty
and following the doctrines of an intelligent God, and when my
earthly race is run I hope and pray to be ushered into the presence
of an intelligent God.

[Illustration: "THE TWO INSPIRATIONS."
PROTESTANTISM looks to the Holy Bible _for_
Wisdom--CATHOLICISM to the Pope!]




Chapter II.

Some of the Abominations of Catholicism Carried On in the Name of
Blessed Saviour.


What I will now relate is not hear-say nor something that I have read
about, but it is something that _I know about_, and which I
witnessed.

It is a well-known fact that Catholicism endeavors to impress her
subjects with the miraculousness of latter day miracles, as she will
hold up the bones of some supposed Catholic Saint, and declare to her
benighted followers that if they worship these relics, they will work
wonders and cure the ailment of any affliction they may be possessed
of.

For instance, they will take the bone of some Catholic Saint (?) and
admonish the followers of Catholicism to touch this bone, or to kiss
it, and declare to them that by so doing they will become entirely
cured of any malady that may rack their person with misery.

In fact, Catholicism will resort to all kinds of nonsensical
practices in order to completely keep their subjects in darkest
ignorance, which will enable the officials to "hoodwink" their
followers and make them believe anything the officials see fit to
teach them.

I will now relate what I saw in Munster, Germany. The news spread all
through Germany that the "Mother Superior" of the house of Saint
Clement was living upon "Holy Communion" only.

Now that the reader may understand what "Holy Communion" is, I will
here state that it is a thin wafer, used for sacramental purposes,
which would not weigh more than the one-hundredth part of an ounce,
and this is what they claimed the Mother Superior of the house of
Saint Clement was existing upon, she only taking one of these wafers
every twenty-four hours.

Of course, this was given out by the dignitaries of the Catholic
Church in order to blind their followers, and I desire to state
right here that I also believed that this was the fact until it was
demonstrated thoroughly that it was an infamous lie and that the
instigators were infamous impostors. However, pilgrimages started
from all directions to see this "Mother Superior," and when they
could not see her, they fought for the opportunity of praying in her
chapel. Some stayed for weeks and weeks to see her. Applications for
intercessions of all kinds of misery were sent to her, as these
simple "dupes" of Catholicism actually believed that this impostor
had the power to heal any ailment that might afflict them.

There were thousands of fanatics who visited Munster and hung their
crutches on the chapel walls and declared they were cured of their
ailment. The blind claimed to see by her intercessions. It was
claimed that all, possessed of every kind and description of
ailments, could be cured if the one who was afflicted only had faith
in this Mother Superior's wonderful power?

"The finger of God is in the land!" was the cry, and tens of
thousands of Catholics from all over the country gathered in Munster.

There was a certain man by the name of Friedhoff who doubted the
proclaimed powers of this Mother Superior and boldly declared his
doubt, and the Catholic world was indignant over the audacity of such
a doubt. It was learned that the Mother Superior would allow but one
sister of the institution to come to her room, and also her Father
Confessor. By the way, it might be pertinent to say that the Mother
Superior was an extremely handsome young lady; in fact, very young
for the position she occupied.

The guard that was placed over the Mother Superior was given
instructions by the Mayor of Munster to watch her closely and see
that she lived entirely upon "Holy Communion." The Protestant world
took an active part in this matter and gave close attention to the
guard that was over this "Mother Superior," as they were determined
to learn from whence originated this bold deception, as they were
thoroughly convinced that it was nothing more nor less than a
deception.

The confessor of the "Mother Superior" was changed and the sister who
waited upon her was changed, and in a very short time the "Mother
Superior" asked for food; thus it began to dawn upon the public at
large that they had been grossly deceived, and they began to learn
that all of these miraculous cures (?) were brought about and
promulgated by the leaders of Catholicism. Numerous physicians were
taken into confidence and an examination was made of the "Mother
Superior," and it was learned that she was pregnant, and it was
proven that the child belonged to the priest in charge of the
convent, who, by the way, was the one this "Mother Superior"
confessed her sins to.

This "Mother Superior" sat in her room and gave her orders to at
least two hundred sisters who were inmates of this institution.

The Catholic world advertised this "fake" so thoroughly that every
house in and about Munster was filled to overflowing with pilgrims
who came there on the strength of this well-advertised "fake."

Munster was the Mecca. Every train arriving brought in hundreds and
added great multitudes to the already great crowd. Some claimed that
the sight of the chapel, or even the sight of the hospital, healed
them.

Even the newspapers began to report the wonderful miracles (?) that
were performed by this "Mother Superior."

By this time the Protestants in Munster were getting very active and
denounced this worship in round terms, and set about to have an
investigation made, which was bitterly opposed by the Catholics. The
hotel keepers and shop keepers of Munster were bitterly opposed to
the Protestants' denunciation, as they were anxious for this "fake"
to be advertised as thoroughly as possible, as it was bringing them
in large revenues, as the thousands who were visiting Munster were
compelled to have raiment, food and lodging; but the denunciation of
this "fake" by the Protestants became so great that the bishop was
compelled, greatly against the wishes of the citizens of Munster, to
investigate, and this investigation brought forth enough to startle
the civilized world. However, it is only one of the many, many
colossal "fakes" that are promulgated by Catholicism. However, the
clamor of the Protestant world brought things to a crisis, as the
"Mother Superior" was ordered to stay in strict confinement and a
watch was placed over her.

This brought matters to a climax and the "Mother Superior" confessed
that one of the inmates of the convent had secretly carried her food
during all of this time that she was claiming to exist on "Holy
Communion." Of course, this is only one of the tens of thousands of
such schemes that are practiced by Catholicism all over the world,
and the Protestants were not surprised and stated boldly and above
board that they knew there was some "scull-duggery" attached to all
of this "fake" miracle business.

This "Mother Superior" fled from Munster, and it was learned that she
went to the City Rheine, on the river Ems, and gave birth to a child,
and the father of this child was the Catholic priest in charge of
this convent, who helped and was the prime instigator in giving out
to the world that the "Mother Superior" was performing miracles,
which was a malicious lie made of whole cloth and promulgated in
order to securely bind the followers of Catholicism to their
idolatrous belief.

This is not the end of the "Mother Superior," as she afterwards
practiced in the open what she had practiced in this Catholic convent
at Munster, as she entered a house of ill fame in the City of Rheine
in Germany, and there led a life of shame as a harlot of the world;
however, she was only living the same life she had been living when
she was sailing under the name of "Mother Superior" in this convent
at Munster.

Now, reader, if Catholicism would practice such abominations upon the
ignorant dupes of her followers in Munster, Germany, is it not
reasonable to suppose that she would practice them to-day wherever
she can fasten her hellish belief upon the minds of the people?

Hardly a day passes over our heads but what we see in some newspaper
where Catholicism is brazenly declaring to the intelligent public
that miraculous cures are being performed by some "hoodoo saint" of
their idolatrous creed.

One would believe that in enlightened America the Roman Church could
not wield such an idolatrous influence over her followers, but when
you stop to think that the children of Catholic parents are brought
up from infancy to believe all of this "hoodooism," it is not strange
that they fall into these idolatrous practices.

When America learns that the majority of the convents and monasteries
of this country are used for the purpose of shielding and protecting
Catholic criminals, and for the purpose of Catholic dignitaries to
glut their lust upon the female inmates of these institutions, and
will exact and demand laws that will force a rigid examination every
thirty or sixty days of these institutions, then the world at large
will know and thoroughly understand that these institutions are
practically the homes of depravity and licentiousness.

To give the reader more information in regard to what Catholicism
resorts to to impress their "dupes" with their idolatry, we want to
take up their great magician, "St. Anthony." The Catholic priesthood
teaches their followers that St. Anthony's spirit possesses the power
to answer all prayers, in fact, to perform any favor the supplicant
may ask.

Now, to illustrate what I mean, is this: Suppose you had lost your
pocketbook containing $50.00; the Catholic Church teaches that all
you have to do is to pay a few dimes into the priest's pocket and
then get down and pray to St. Anthony and you will at once learn
where your pocketbook is.

Now, bear in mind that this praying to St. Anthony don't cut any ice
unless you pay something, as every prayer must be backed up by money,
and the more money paid the quicker action you can get on St.
Anthony.

The Catholic Church calls it "St. Anthony's Bread Box," and right by
the side of this box they have a large number of small candles, and
you are supposed to drop the money into this box to pay for the
candles that St. Anthony uses when looking for what is lost, or to
light his path on his road to answer your prayer.

These candles cost the priest from one-half cent to one cent each,
and the "dupe" will drop in from ten cents to ten dollars to have his
prayer answered, so you can see that the Catholic Church is a good
thing for the candle makers.

We will now give you a few idiotic prayers that are offered to St.
Anthony by the followers of blind Catholicism.

    "O, Glorious St. Anthony, noble Sunflower of divine
    conformity, I salute thee in the name of the Queen of Angels
    and of all the angelic choirs; and I thank Almighty God for
    the grace bestowed on thee, that like to this Great Queen and
    the angelic choirs thou wert ever conformed to His holy will.
    I beseech thee that with this glorious Lady and all the
    angelic choirs, thou wouldst approach the throne of God,
    lovingly offer Him this my petition and strengthen it by
    thine intercession.

    "OUR FATHER. HAIL, MARY. GLORY."


    "I salute thee, Blessed Anthony, noble Narcissus-flower of
    knowledge, in the name of all the patriarchs and prophets;
    and I thank the good God for bestowing on thee, like to the
    patriarchs and prophets, the gift of divine knowledge and of
    foreseeing future events. I beseech thee that with the
    patriarchs and prophets thou wouldst approach the throne of
    God and by your united prayers and merits obtain for me this
    my petition.

    "OUR FATHER. HAIL, MARY. GLORY."


    "I salute thee, Blessed Anthony, noble Carnation-flower of
    fervent love, in the name of all the holy apostles and
    disciples of Christ; and I thank the most merciful Lord for
    the great grace bestowed on thee, like unto that of the
    apostles and disciples, when He chose thee to proclaim the
    holy Gospel and to spread the Christian faith. I beseech thee
    that with the apostles and disciples thou wouldst approach
    the throne of God and by your united prayers and merits
    obtain for me this my petition.

    "Our Father. Hail, Mary. Glory."


We will give you an instance of this "St. Anthony's" witchcraft
business that came under my personal observation. A lady was standing
upon a bridge that spans one of the many streams that rushes down
from the Adirondack Mountains, gazing at this crystal stream and
watching the fishes below, and while standing there she was toying
with a beautiful diamond ring that had been given her by her lover.
In a careless manner she allowed this ring to slip from her finger,
and it fell into the waters below.

With a sudden cry those who were near her were attracted to the spot
and she explained to them her misfortune, and it was not long until
there was quite a crowd about her, offering their sympathy and also
their assistance.

Some volunteered to wade into this stream and search for the ring,
which was done, and a number of buckets of mud were carried up out of
the stream from the point the lady had stated she had dropped her
ring, but the ring could not be found.

At this point one of our Catholic "dupes" appeared and explained to
the lady that if she would put her trust in St. Anthony and would pay
$500, that St. Anthony would restore to her her ring.

This lady being a Catholic also, of course, was easily persuaded to
do this, so they knelt down and prayed to St. Anthony and beseeched
him to restore the lost treasure, and it was not long until all of
those in the crowd that belonged to the Catholic Church were in
sympathy with this distressed lady, and they were also kneeling and
supplicating St. Anthony to restore the lost treasure. They prayed
for an hour, but still the lost treasure would not appear; then the
ringleader of this barbarous belief informed this lady that the ring
had been swallowed by a fish. He pretended to be inspired and claimed
that he could catch this identical fish with the bait of St.
Anthony's bread. Everything was soon prepared and the line was let
down into the water, and sure enough a good sized fish was caught
upon this St. Anthony's bait, and the crowd went into rapturous
delight, as they were quite sure they had the identical fish that had
swallowed the ring.

As soon as the fish was caught a collection was raised by a priest
who was in the crowd for the benefit of "St. Anthony's Bread Box."
All of the Catholics in the crowd contributed, of course, as they
were afraid not to, for Catholics believe that if they do not do what
a priest tells them to they are sure to have something awful befall
them, and, of course, all of these Catholics believed in the
witchcraft of St. Anthony and believed that he was the actual
restorer of all lost things.

The Protestants in the congregation were determined to see what was
inside of the fish, so they followed the one that carried it to a
butcher shop and the fish was cut open, but naught was found in it
but what is usually found in any old fish that never saw or heard
tell of a diamond ring.

Now, this is one of the thousands--yea, tens of thousands of such
instances that are forced down the throats of the ignorant,
superstitions followers of Catholicism.

Now, what I relate above is true in every conceivable manner, and not
one sentence or statement is misrepresented.

This belief in the power of St. Anthony is simply abominable and
belongs to the dark ages of heathendom.

I have often wondered when I was acting as priest in the Catholic
Church why it was that Protestants, when they attended my church,
would look on in wonderment and surprise, and I attributed this
wonderment to a desire upon the part of Protestantism to make fun and
villify the teachings of the Catholic Church, but I now realize that
this bewilderment came from minds which had been elevated far above
the cungerings of the Catholic Church, and I am now surprised that
the Protestants who visit Catholic churches are not more bewildered
and mystified, as the teachings of Protestantism are based upon the
inspirations derived from the Word of God and the teachings of
Catholicism are naught but the rumblings of the dark ages.

[Illustration: "A LICENTIOUS PRIEST."
"A PROTESTANT PREACHER'S HOME"
"The unmarried life of the Priestcraft compared
to the married life of a Protestant minister."]




Chapter III.

All Children of Protestant Parents Are
Declared Bastards by Catholicism.


The Catholic Church declares that all of those who contract marriage
otherwise than in the presence of a Catholic Priest, that such
marriages are null and void.

Catholicism further declares that your darling child, which is the
fruit of your marriage, is nothing more nor less than a common
bastard.

How do you Protestants like to hear this? How do you feel when you
know that this is the belief and opinion of all Catholic dignitaries,
and this belief is taught to all the Catholic world by those who
presume to dictate?

Your darling baby boy or girl is branded as an illegitimate offspring
by Catholicism, simply because their parents were not united in
wedlock by a Catholic Priest, who perhaps is as immoral as hell
itself.

The reason why Catholicism so sternly demands that all should be
married by the priestcraft is from a monetary standpoint, as the
Catholic priest gets his fee, as he will not under any circumstances
unite any one in wedlock without a fee, and I have known in many
instances where the contracting parties were unable to pay a money
fee, and the grasping priestcraft would refuse to unite them in
marriage until they had given him some article of intrinsic value,
and I have often seen jewelry, silver-mounted pipes, watches and many
other things confiscated by the priestcraft before they would perform
the ceremony.

It is strange to me, indeed, that America, which is and should be by
every law of justice and right, a Protestant nation, is so
unconcerned and so listless over the insults that Catholicism daily
offers Protestantism, for if it is not a most damnable insult to
stigmatize your offspring as bastards, then we are unable to discern
and distinguish between a brazen insult and a flattering compliment.

Whenever America learns the actual and true meaning of Catholicism
and her teachings, there will be an awakening among the Protestant
world that will make the four corners of the government of the United
States tremble with a righteous indignation.

Now, if the offspring of that dear old mother is a bastard, then she
is nothing more nor less than a common whore, and you cannot arrive
at any other rational conclusion. This is only reasoning from
intelligent deductions; therefore, whenever Catholicism calls the
children of Protestant parents bastards simply because these parents
were not united in wedlock by a Catholic priest, they villify the
sacred name of father and mother, and trail in the slime of disgrace
the sweet memories of that sturdy old father and that angelic old
Protestant mother.

I am at a loss to know and to understand how Protestantism can sit so
unconcernedly by with folded hands and allow this vulturous foe of
human rights and human privileges to brazenly rear its institutions
in Protestant America, and teach such damnable doctrines about those
who have made America all she ever was, and is, or ever will be.

A creed or doctrine that exists upon the dwarfed ambitions of its
followers is undoubtedly an institution which exists upon the carrion
of human miseries, and is a menace to a nation, which possesses the
godly ambitions that permeate the minds of Protestantism.

We have in this country scores--yea, hundreds of Protestant fathers
and mothers who allow their children to attend Catholic schools, when
those who are teaching them in these Catholic institutions brazenly,
flagrantly and openly declare that those children are the offspring
of immorality, as they do not hesitate to say that all children are
bastards whose parents were not married by the priestcraft; but still
these Protestant parents allow their children to be taught by those
who villify and defame their parents' names.

This is one of the strangest things that has ever come under my
observation in the United States, as the Protestant world in general
knows that Catholicism teaches these things, and the Protestant
world also knows that under no circumstances nor conditions would
Catholicism allow their children to attend a Protestant college, but
Protestant parents go right ahead and allow their children to be
taught by a class of men and women who will boldly declare to these
children that their own parents are immoral, and that the teachings
of their youth were erroneous and would lead to everlasting
damnation.

Is it not about time that the Protestant world was arousing
themselves from this lethargetic sleep of unconcern, or do you
propose to allow Catholicism to convince you, by her doctrines of
degeneracy, that she is right, and that you acknowledge her as right
by you sending your children to her institutions of learning?

Catholicism has always made her boast that if she can control the
children until they are 7 to 10 years old, that they will control the
government in the future, and it seems as though Protestant America
is perfectly willing to risk the consequences, but let me sound a
warning in your ears in this chapter, which may not arouse you from
your national stupidity, but which, in after years, will rumble down
the avenues of the future the truthfulness of this assertion that
will make the Protestant world shudder. It is this: "_Unless you
guard the goddess of your American liberty with the patriotism of you
Protestant manhood, it will not be long until you will find this
government face to face with a problem more perplexing than the
government of France is wrestling with to-day, on account of this
Romish beast, whose jaws are dripping with the blood of doomed
ambition._"

Catholicism is like a thief in the night, as she goes about her
devastation of human rights with the tread of a thief and with the
cunning of a bold deceiver, which she is, and this country must
station trustworthy men upon the ramparts of this government to watch
her progress and batter down her foundation of superstition and
ignorance, or within the next fifty years America will find herself
bound hand and foot by this Romish creed of abominations, which has
caused every nation on the face of the earth that she has ever
controlled to wither and decay under her touch, like the tender plant
under the broiling rays of a tropical sun.

I have a right to sound this warning, as I know whereof I speak, as I
have traveled this Romish road of despair for thirty years, and I
know her cunning and dastardly deception so well that her history and
her teachings are to me like the primer is to the school boy or girl.

The warnings that I now sound in the ears of Protestant America are
not sounded by an alarmist, nor one who does not know whereof he
speaks, but these warnings come from one whose back has been lashed
for thirty long years with the whip of a Catholic tyrant, and I know
the history of Catholicism from beginning to end, for if one cannot
learn the history of an institution in thirty years' devout study,
then pray tell me of what use it is for man to apply himself to the
study of anything?

I was once as devout a Catholic as I am to-day a Protestant, and I am
only a Protestant to-day because I was forced to become such, after
having the scales of Catholicism brushed from my eyes, which had
been blinded by the superstition and fearful doctrines of this
abominable creed.

Arouse, ye men and women of America, or else the time will come when
you will not be permitted to make a protest; when your wives and
mothers are declared whores by Catholicism, and your fathers and
brothers are declared whore-mongers and your children bastards!

I have been a careful observer of events through my entire life, and
I never was more thoroughly convinced than to-day that we stand near
the threshold of Popish power in America, and I ask of the reader,
and of the Protestant world at large, Are we about to realize the
prediction made by the father of our country? Are we nearing the time
when liberty shall be bound to the stake by Catholicism? Are we
nearing the great Romish chasm that has swallowed up the hopes of
many nations? Are we nearing the crater of a Roman volcano that pours
out its desolation and devastation upon free men? Are we nearing the
inky night of servitude, where no light is possible, but the dim and
treacherous lamp of idolatrous Catholicism? Are we nearing the
stretch of waste lands that contains no friendly oasis for him who
seeks liberty? Are we building our own sepulchers to bury all the
hopes of liberty cherished by our forefathers? Are we willingly
carrying fuel for our own funeral pyres, there to be consumed by the
greedy and relentless ghouls of Catholicism?

These are questions that demand an answer and demand an answer at
once, as we are far along the road to the end of human rights in
Protestant America, unless we call a halt and kindle anew the fires
of patriotism that have so long been unnoticed by those who have been
left in charge to guard our interests.

Catholicism is a vile deceiver and a rank hypocrite, therefore we
must diligently watch her serpentine movements, for she will appear
where you least expect her, as she wraps about her the American flag
and other symbols of patriotism and goes about as a lamb in wolf's
clothing.

I have no reason for writing this book only a desire to help undo
what I have already done in my fifty-six years of the past, and by
writing this book I have cut every tie that binds me to those whom I
have associated with since my childhood, therefore the reader must
know that what I am doing is being done in the name of right, justice
and the love I bear my fellowman and my adopted country, which is the
"Garden of Eden" of all the universe.

"The fool doubts what a wise man tells him because the information is
new." You may doubt what I am telling you, but your doubt will cost
you your liberty.

I have your cause at heart and I have no ambition to gratify, as I am
an old man and have no other desire than to help those who need help,
and I have come as a friend to talk to you around your firesides,
with no mission but that of truth.

Many of us have never been told to our face that we were fools, but
because no man has been frank enough to tell us the truth is no
reason why we should not investigate what is told us, and which you
have no right nor reason to doubt.

The mission of this book is to get you to _think_ and to examine and
pry into the past history of Catholicism, and when you have examined
the pages of Catholic history and then scrutinize her present, you
must know that her future promises no more than her past and present
would indicate her future to hold.

This book is written from a Protestant standpoint, but by a man who
was a Catholic fifty-six years before he ever became a Protestant,
and we feel absolutely certain that the Catholic world will endeavor
to throttle its circulation, but we have laid aside every vestige of
fear from that standpoint and have made up our mind that we are no
better than Martin Luther, and thousands of Protestants who were
burned at the stake by Catholicism for proclaiming to the world the
awful deeds of that _awful creed_.

We want you to consider this book as a friend, who has called at your
fireside to tell you _truths_ that you should know, and which, if you
do not learn, will lower you and your posterity to the level of the
commonest slave and place over the most brutal despots the world has
ever known, and these despots are nothing more nor less than the
Catholic Church.

This book comes from a man who does not court the friendship of any
sect of class of men; therefore, it comes to you with intentions as
pure as it is possible for a book to come from the hands of a poor
mortal, who fears _nothing_ but the wrath of a living God.

Catholicism is taught her cunning from her childhood, as she is
taught to watch the ranks of Protestantism and whenever she finds a
weak spot, she turns her forces upon this weakened line, and is
further instructed never to weaken in her continual march of
devastation.

Could the tears that have been shed on account of heartless
Catholicism be gathered in one body, the mighty oceans of the earth
would appear as silvery mountain brooks. Could the innocent blood of
Protestants shed by the heartless hand of Catholicism be congealed,
it would build a purple mountain that would cast a shadow the length
and breadth of this land.

The nations of the earth have had wars from the creation of the
world, but the myriads of those who have fallen in all the battles of
the world would only be a small portion compared to the millions who
have laid down their lives that greedy, abhorrent Catholicism might
be appeased.

It is time for us as _American freemen_ to become free men in every
sense the word implies, and exercise both our franchise and our
brains in relegating this "Scarlet-Robed Hag of Rome" to her original
haunts.

Will you perform your American duty and band together and become a
Protestant army and march out under the blood-stained banner of King
Emanuel and help to make America the greatest Protestant nation the
sun has ever shone upon?

Be men, and by your manhood you can, if you make the start now, lull
into _eternal sleep_ this Romish power which villifies your ambitions
and brands your offspring with the stigma of disgrace.

[Illustration:
"LOOK TO JESUS."                "THE POPE AND ME."
"As the Twig is bent         the Tree's inclined."
                   THE TWO WAYS.]




Chapter IV.

Tear from the Citadel of Reason, the Power to Reason,
and You Make Slaves of Humanity.


The men and women of the world, who have caused nations to advance
and prosper, have never been, nor never will be Catholics, unless she
discards her present mode of procedure, and this she will never do.
Whenever you tear the cloak of superstition and idolatry from the
form of Catholicism, you have naught left but the skeleton of
abominations.

The men of science and of reason, all over the world, boldly accuse
the Roman Catholic Church of being the enemy of science, detesting it
and desiring to spread the mantle of ignorance over all those whom
she controls.

The Church seems not to understand that everything finds its source
at the fountain of reason, as all things must originate from God,
and most assuredly the Supreme Being is an intelligent, reasonable
and rational God. The Catholic Church must resist, as a matter of
life or death, the progress of modern civilization, or else go down
in disgrace, for civilization and reason is a nightmare and an
everlasting enemy to Catholicism, as "scientific thought" makes her
doctrines and dogmas stand out as abominations.

If the world is to depend upon the Romish Church for her
intellectuality, and for her philosophy, and for her scientific
resources, she will always be groping her way in darkness, as the
Popish church has never advanced one-hundredth part of an inch from
the trenches of ancient ignorance and superstitions, nor has she in
any material way been instrumental in advancing a single interest of
the masses which elevates, as her every cry and her combined efforts
have been to paralyze progress and scientific research, as she well
knows that to have the searchlight of reason turned upon her
mystified labyrinths of hoodooism, the world will behold the marks
of ignorance, superstition and barbarism upon her degraded form.

Whenever an institution comes to believe that it is infallible and an
impossibility to err, then she settles back into the ruts of tyranny,
and whenever you find an individual or a body of individuals who
believe whatever they do is right, no matter what it may be, you will
find those who believe themselves ordained rulers of men, and
whenever this happens, the individual who believes this becomes a
tyrant, and tyranny belongs to the dark ages of heathendom, whence
Roman Catholicism originated.

To demonstrate to the reader and give him or her some idea of the
tyrannical rule of Romanism, we will take the history of Galileo,
which every child, perhaps, is acquainted with.

Galileo declared that the sun did not move, and this declaration
greatly insulted Pope Urban, who grew very angry, as this pope had
taught that the sun did move and that the earth stood still.

The teachings of Galileo so angered the pope that he called together
an inquisitorial board and had Galileo tried by this Romish
tribunal, and Galileo was sentenced to imprisonment for what
Catholicism termed a heretical doctrine.

Who was right--Catholicism or Galileo? Not a school boy or girl six
years old in this land but what knows that Catholicism was wrong, as
she usually is, but she would not have acknowledged her wrong had not
the world-at-large been thoroughly convinced of her error, which
would have brought her to the very feet of ridicule had she persisted
in teaching the doctrine promulgated by Pope Urban that "the sun did
move, and that the earth stood still."

The Catholic Church is always desirous of evading questions which are
susceptible to debate, and which, by mature thought and deliberation,
can be analyzed, as she does not desire to come into contact with the
brains of any nation, but is satisfied to prey upon the ignorant and
superstitiously inclined, as those are her dupes and the ones from
whom she derives her revenue, and "revenue" is one of the main
perquisites of the Catholic Church, as this Romish institution is run
for the sole purpose of making serfs of men and controlling the
destiny of nations, so that the inhabitants may be forced to disgorge
their sustenance in her lap of greed, and it matters not how low she
brings her followers, nor what may be the hardships they have to
endure, just so she accomplishes her diabolical end.

The reader may think it strange that a man who was born and raised a
Catholic, and who for thirty years officiated in the capacity of a
Catholic priest, could turn his back upon the creed of his
forefathers and so vehemently endeavor to destroy every vestige of
his childhood's doctrines, but this is no more unreasonable than it
was for Paul, in the twinkle of an eye, to turn from his wickedness
and become one of the chosen Apostles of Christ.

Many years before I cut loose entirely from the Catholic Church my
faith in her abominations was at times almost threadbare, and I have
declared time and time again that never would I enter another
Catholic Church in the capacity of a priest, but as often as I
declared and made these resolves, just so often I broke them, as my
early training and my superstitious fears would get the better of my
convictions, and I would be whipped back into the trenches of
superstition.

I have often tried within the past ten years to "nag" those officials
who were above me into a paroxysm of fury and have them excommunicate
me, as I tried to make myself believe that it would be better to have
them throw me out of the church than to leave it on my own free will,
but it appeared as though they discerned by intentions and they would
not do as I desired, and at last I made up my mind that I would swing
out upon my own account from the dark shadows of this superstitious
belief, and every word of this book has been written without a single
charge preferred against me by the Catholic Church, therefore the
Catholic Church cannot declare that I was not in good standing as a
priest at the time this book was compiled.

What I mean by "good standing" is that the robed monarchs who boldly
claim the power to damn the soul by excommunication, have not as yet
seen fit to eternally obliterate my prospects of ever entering the "New
Jerusalem," but as soon as this book is given to the reading public,
then those who wield the axe will let it fall with all the diabolical
vengeance of Roman hatred upon my head and declare the "pearly gates"
have been forever closed upon my depraved soul; but what I most desire
is to have the public understand that NOW, while I am writing this book,
I am considered AND AM BY ALL THE RIGHTS OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH A PRIEST
AND ENJOY ALL THE PRIVILEGES OF CATHOLICITY AS SUCH.

Why I so earnestly desire to impress this upon the minds of the
reader is that I know so well the trickery of those whom I write
about and I know full well that the Catholic officials will at once
endeavor to make the world believe that I am an outcast and in bad
standing with the Catholic Church.

This book is being written in the year 1903, and I will make oath
before any court of record on earth to the truthfulness of the
statements herein set forth, and I will give ten thousand dollars to
any charitable institution in America if any priest, bishop or
archbishop on the face of the whole earth will make oath and prove
before any lawful tribunal of America if one word of the foregoing is
not true.

Furthermore, I will give up all of my earthly possessions, which
amounts to several thousand dollars, if any priest, bishop or
archbishop living upon the face of the earth can prove before any
court of justice in America that I have not always endeavored to live
an exemplary life and rigidly taught the doctrines of the Catholic
faith, although at times my whole life rebelled at being compelled to
do so, but my whole training and long association would invariably
get the master of my reason and better judgment, and I would be
forced by my superstitious training back into the mystified
labyrinths of my childhood's education.

I stood it until I became tortured day and night by the prod of
reason, then I quietly left the church and bade farewell to the
heathen Scapular and the ten thousand other trinkets of blind
paganism, and resolved to break the chain of this "_slave of the
soul_" and "_tyrant of reason_."

In this chapter we want to give the reader some idea of the
nonsensical and unreasonableness of the claims of Catholicism, so
that you may more fully understand how disgusting it is for a man who
endeavors to use his God-given abilities to submit to such
abominations.

The Catholic Church depends more upon the saving power of the
Scapular than it does upon the saving power of Jesus Christ. Now,
this is a broad expression, but I know whereof I speak and I am
prepared to back up the assertion with facts.

The Scapular is a veil or cape, which covers the shoulders. It was
worn as such by Monks and Nuns, over their dress, but which is best
known among Catholics as two little pieces of cloth worn out of
devotion, under ordinary garments, and connected by a string which
goes around the neck and hangs down, allowing this "trinket" to rest
upon the breast.

Catholic children, from their infancy, are taught that this trinket
is a preventative against accident and disease, and they actually
believe it, and should they lose this "nothing" they at once become
miserable and will undergo any hardship to possess another.

It was through the Carmelites (Monks) that this devotion began and I
believe that the history that I will relate in regard to it is the
first history ever repeated in this or any other country by an
ex-priest that ever lived or died.

A man by the name of Simon Stock was elected to the generalship of
the Carmelite Order, and this same Simon Stock was considered a
Saint, and it is taught by Catholicism that the Virgin Mary appeared
to Simon Stock in a vision and exhibited this Scapular and gave Stock
to understand that it was to be worn by the Catholic world in the
future as a preventative against accident, disease and sudden death.

There is another story which is told in regard to this Scapular, as
follows: It is said that the Virgin Mary appeared to Simon Stock in a
vision in behalf of the Carmelite Order, which at that time was in
great trouble, and gave to Stock a Scapular, which she bore in her
hand, in order that it could be worn, and which she guaranteed was
an order direct from God Almighty that the Carmelite Order should
wear this "trinket," which would be a preventative from any evil
overtaking any of those who did wear it, and further stating that all
of those who wore this Scapular "_shall never suffer eternal
burning_."

It is further stated that Pope John XXII, in his famous Sabbatine
Bull, declared that the Virgin Mary had appeared to him and informed
him that all the members of the Carmelite Order who wore this
Scapular should be gotten out of purgatory by her on the Saturday
after their death, and this Pope winds up his declaration with the
following sentence: "I accept, corroborate and confirm, in the name
of Jesus Christ, for our Glorious Virgin Mary, who has granted this
great privilege to those who wear the Scapular."

This abomination is nothing more nor less than a "tale of fiction,"
and promulgated by men who know that it is a positive lie, but they
do it in order to mystify the ignorant and to compel them to remain
in darkest ignorance.

Now, to convince the reader that Catholicism is as densely ignorant
to-day as it ever was, we will bring her history up to date.

Pope Leo, in the good year of 1903, on his death bed, ordered this
Carmelite veil brought from Mount Carmel, that he might have
assistance from it in his dying hour, and declared that by the
assistance of this mythical Scapular that when he died he would go
straight to Heaven.

You can take the history of the Roman Catholic Church from the
earliest days of its cussedness up to the present time, and you will
find that the same heathenish superstition that surrounded it
centuries ago still follows it to-day.

Is there any proof that the Virgin Mary appeared to Simon Stock and
made to him the promise above related? No proof whatever, only the
cungered up proof of the officials of Catholicism, and the Sabbatine
Bull of Pope John has no more sense nor righteous meaning in it than
the ghost dance of the American Indian.

The Scapular that we above refer to is not the only emblem of
heathendom that Catholicism resorts to, but we have a number of
others which the Protestant world knows but little about, and
especially the Protestants in America, as the Catholic officials do
not want "this Scapular business" talked about too much in this
country, for fear that the Protestant world will give it the
deserving ridicule that it should have. However, we have started out
to show up the teachings of Catholicism as they actually exist, and
the more light we turn upon this subject the more prominent her
abominations will become, consequently we want to mention these other
Scapulars.

The first that we will mention is, "The Trinity of White Linen with
Red Cross;" the second is, "The Survite Scapular of Seven Dolors,"
which is of black woolen stuff; the third is, "The Immaculate
Conception," which is of blue woolen cloth, and the fourth and last
Scapular is one that was originated in 1846 by a Sister of Charity in
Paris, France, who is said to have received a revelation from God
Almighty, and this one is called "The Red Scapular of the Passion."

While American Catholics are a class far superior in intellect to the
Catholics of other nations, they still tenaciously cling to the
inert Scapular and believe in its efficacy and power; however, the
Catholic Church is getting to have quite a number of these Scapulars,
which is causing the intelligent Catholics to become a little
doubtful as to which has the greatest "pulling power," and many of
them, in order to make no mistake, wear all five of them in a bunch;
thus they are assured that if one fails to get in its work another
will come to the rescue, and should they fall off of a train moving
60 miles an hour, this little bunch of woolen goods will save them
from a bruise, or should they drink a quart of the essence of
strychnine they would be saved from instant death by one of these
five Scapulars.

You ask a Catholic to explain the merits of the Scapular and all they
can tell you is that if they die during the week that the Virgin Mary
will then take them to heaven on the Saturday following, but if they
happen to die on a Saturday, bear in mind that the Virgin Mary gives
them a cold shoulder until the next Saturday. Now, this is the only
explanation that you can get a Catholic to give you in regard to a
Scapular.

Is it any wonder that the power to reason is shattered by these
cungering devices of Catholicism, and do you wonder that the dense
ignorance of Catholic nations are completely under the power of this
angel of darkness?

Let us repeat, in conclusion of this chapter, that Romanism is the
everlasting enemy of science and individual intellect, as she knows
full well that when the broad, effulgent light of Protestantism dawns
on the benighted minds of her followers that she at once loses her
grasp upon her "hood-winked" dupes, as it is impossible for the
teachings of Catholicism to exist side by side with the teachings of
Protestantism, provided that those who believe in these Romish
abominations care to look above the horizon of Romanism.

[Illustration: IMMORALITY OF THE PRIESTHOOD--
With Romish lust, the blossom of virtue is destroyed.]




Chapter V.

Innocent Girlhood at the Confessional Box.


Blight girlhood and you destroy the usefulness of womankind. Tarnish
the sacredness of girlhood and you scar the purity of womanhood.
Deface the beautiful countenance of chastity, which is found in the
bosom of girlhood, and you not only mar the happiness of girlhood,
but you deface and obliterate the families of the future, for without
that priceless treasure, virtue, the eternal principles of conjugal
love becomes a barren waste without a single oasis.

Oh, if I could but call about me in one vast throng the girls of this
land, and all other lands, who have had the first thought of
carnality planted in their bosom by the scheming Priestcraft, I would
have a throng of tear-faced mortals that would rend the heart of
stone and stigmatize the cunning of Catholicism with a stigma blacker
than the lowering clouds of despair.

When you force childhood to believe in the infallibility of the
priestcraft you educate the mind of that child to implicitly believe
in the officials of the Catholic Church, and when you gain the
implicit confidence you have established a belief that cannot be
easily eradicated, as this belief has become a part of that child,
and as it grows older, this erroneous belief grows in proportion to
the body, and by the time this child has arrived at the age of
maturity, she is as densely ignorant of the cunning of this doctrine
as she was when she first learned to repeat the Catechism with a
childish lisp.

We desire to preface this chapter with common-sense arguments, so
that the reader may thoroughly understand how completely the female
element of the Catholic Church is under the control of the priesthood
of this institution.

Priests are, as a rule, men of more than average intellect, and, as
they have no other calling nor no other avocation in life than to
make good impressions upon their members, they of course become
cunning in their art, especially with the female members of their
congregations, and more especially with their young and handsome
members.

Imagine the power that a Catholic priest has over a young girl in her
teens--yea, over any female member of their congregation, when you
take into consideration the fact that from infancy these girls and
women have been taught that it is almost an absolute impossibility
for a priest to commit a sin.

When you dwell upon the doctrines taught these girls and women it
will not be a matter of surprise that the priestcraft wields such a
powerful influence over them, as any one with this doctrine funneled
into them from childhood is open and ready to believe what the
priestcraft may tell them, and the individual is not to blame for
believing this, as they have been taught it by their parents from
infancy, and the officials of the Catholic Church have taught it;
then why should we be surprised at the dense ignorance upon the part
of these girls and women?

Priests always try to impress their members with the idea that they
are infallible and that it is impossible for them to sin. They do
this for many reasons. First, in order that they may have their
congregations in humble submission to any of the demands of the
church, and, secondly, it enables them to accomplish any devilish
deed they may wish to accomplish under the guise of priestly
sanctity.

It is no pleasant task to dwell upon this most distasteful and most
repulsive of all of the fallacies of Rome and the abominable
rottenness of the priesthood, but without giving a vivid description
of the cunning of the priestcraft in regard to the "Confessional"
would be treating the subject in a manner that would not do justice
to the abominations of her hideous doctrines; and to fail to touch
upon this subject would leave the greatest and most deadly weapon in
the hands of this band of devils.

The Confessional Box is an emblem of paganism, as innumerable
trustworthy authorities prove that Roman Catholicism has pre-empted
this custom as well as many other of her practices from the dark ages
of paganism.

Oricular confession was practiced centuries ago by the ancient
Babylonians, Egyptians, Mexicans, Peruvians and the Japanese--in
fact, it is not only an ancient custom, but one which belongs to the
darkest of the ancient ages, which should have been relegated to the
haunts of hell centuries ago.

A priest once said: "Nobody should be surprised when we priests,
bishops and popes sink into the bottomless abyss of immorality, for
the celibacy of the priestcraft is only a cudgel in the hands of
Catholic officials to drive us to the haunts of immorality."

A priest once said "that the Confessional is one of the most damnable
institutions that was ever permitted to exist, as these Confessionals
are only traps to lead the piously and morally-inclined priest to the
plains of immorality, for a priest is naught but man, and when he is
forced to compel women penitents to pour into his ears their every
thought, feeling, desire, emotion and act, it kindles the fires of
unholy thought upon the altars of his better ambitions and before he
knows it he has committed adultery and not only ruined his own soul,
but has been the implement in the hands of the devil to destroy the
virtue of innocent womanhood."

He further states "that not only do the thoughts, feelings, emotions,
etc., have to be related, in all of their details, to the priest, and
perhaps a bad priest, but all circumstances leading to and the
results growing out of these thoughts, must be given in detail."

The immorally inclined and licentious priest is not satisfied with
the female penitent enumerating only her mortal sins, but he insists
and forces the penitent to give circumstances, minutely describing
her thoughts and feelings of every-day life, which leads both the
penitent and the confessor to the lowlands of immorality.

The priestcraft is instructed by the Romish Church not to allow the
penitent to conceal anything from them, and the priestcraft is given
instructions to probe the penitent to the heart's core.

In this chapter we propose to give you a little insight to the
character of one or two priests that I have personally known, and if
I dared and if it was possible to print the nasty history of a number
of priests that I have been acquainted with, I could fill this volume
with their depravity; but should I do so this book would not be
permitted to circulate through the mails of the United States. But I
will endeavor to clothe my recital of a few instances of priestly
immorality in language of chastity, but will make my recital plain
enough that any one who can read may understand.

Rev. Chas. Kuhlman, who was pastor of a Catholic Church in
Edwardsville, Ill., was suspicioned of having become too intimate
with a sister of his own school, and this sister soon left the
sisterhood, and it was rumored that she went to St. Louis to evade
the birth of a child.

This very same priest was caught in the act of adultery with a
married woman in his office in East St. Louis. He was at that time,
besides being pastor, the editor and publisher of a very important
Catholic paper called "_The Catholic Progress_." This immorality of
Priest Kuhlman became public property and formed such a nasty mess
that the Catholic bishop had to take some notice of it and the case
was tried before the Bishop of Alton, Ill., and Kuhlman was
excommunicated for life.

This married woman gave testimony that was very damaging to the Rev.
Kuhlman and gave her evidence before a notary public, which cannot be
disputed, and it matters not how hard the Catholic Church may try to
villify these statements, they cannot overcome the truthfulness of
the same, as there are too many living witnesses at this time who
know that what I am relating is absolutely true.

Rev. Kuhlman was not satisfied with the verdict of the bishop of
Alton, Ill., and appealed his case to Rome, and the bishop was indeed
glad to get rid of this dirty case and did not appear in Rome to
prosecute the case, and the Rev. Kuhlman won the case in Rome by
default, and this same Rev. Kuhlman became a Catholic priest in good
standing again and was permitted to officiate as a minister of the
gospel, with all of this abominable slime of immorality clinging to
his priestly garments.

Now, bear in mind that Rev. Kuhlman, after having all of this
immorality laid at his door, was permitted by the Pope of Rome to go
right ahead with his priestly duties, but a short time after he won
his case at Rome there was an affidavit sworn out against Kuhlman by
a man in East St. Louis, averring that he had been again caught in
the act of adultery with another woman. This time the case was
reported to Bishop Janssen, of Belleville, Ill., and also to Cardinal
Martinelli, of Washington, D.C., but there was no attention paid to
it, and this Rev. Kuhlman was permitted to go right ahead in his
pastoral duties and is at the present time the pastor of a church in
East St. Louis and is also the spiritual director of a convent, which
contains many sisters and many pupils.

Now, if what I have related is false, Rev. Chas. Kuhlman has redress
at law; and if I have libeled him he can make me suffer for the
crime, and he will not have to spend any money to locate my
whereabouts, as he is aware of my location at the present time and
can find me at any time that he desires to bring suit against me for
blackmail or any other crime that he sees fit to instigate against
me.

It is no pleasant task to relate these very nauseating things, but it
is my aim and intention to so plainly and powerfully set forth the
deceit, cunning and dastardly deeds of Catholicism that I may be able
to open the eyes of not only the Protestant world but of Catholicism
at large, for there are thousands of the followers of the Pope who
are very weak in their faith, and if I can by the righteousness of my
cause, convince them that they are following the blind leaders of
paganism, I am absolutely certain that the Protestant ranks will have
an in-gathering of the hosts of Catholicism that will cause the
angels in heaven to shout hallelujahs of thanksgiving.

Do not understand me to say, or to intimate, that there are no
sincere priests, as there are; but their sincerity is founded upon
superstitious beliefs and erroneous doctrines, consequently their
sincerity and devoutness only helps to fasten the abominations of
Catholicism more completely upon humanity, as those who are candidly
sincere are held up to the Protestant world as models of Catholicism,
when, in fact, they are but exceptions to the general herd of
Catholic officials.

To more plainly illustrate to the reader how fascinating and powerful
the teachings of Catholicism is upon the minds of man, I would
illustrate this by the power that parents have over a child. You
teach a child some doctrine, it matters not whether it is right or
wrong, and you will impress it with the truthfulness of this doctrine
in its childhood, and let it understand as it grows into manhood and
womanhood that this doctrine is absolutely true, and hedge it about
with superstitions confirming this doctrine, and the hosts of hell
can hardly convince it that its early teachings were wrong; so you
can easily see what a powerful influence Catholicism has over the
minds of its followers, as you must bear in mind that Catholicism
takes up the child when it is only a few days old and continually
hedges it about with emblems of ignorance and superstition and never
allows it to gaze above the horizon of this mass of erroneous
doctrine; therefore the child is not to blame for its implicit
confidence, but the cunning of those who practice this deception upon
this child is to blame, and the doctrine of Catholicism is what I am
assailing in this volume, for if I can be instrumental in opening the
eyes of those who have arrived at the years of accountability, I feel
sure that I can be instrumental in having those so reached declare to
their offspring that their first lessons have been altogether
erroneous, and if the Catholic parents will begin to teach their
children before they leave the parental roof that their first lessons
were erroneous it will not be so hard for the Protestant world to
finish the job and turn these hosts of darkness into the highways of
intellectuality.

The reason that we have so many disgraceful happenings and immoral
incidents in the lives of the priestcraft is because of the absolute
confidence that their followers have in them, as it is a well-known
fact that the female world has a greater confidence in humanity than
the male population, so it is an easy matter for any sane man or
woman to understand why an immoral priest, and one who has no regard
for honor, has such an easy task in accomplishing the ruin of those
whom he seeks to destroy.

The paradise of the priestcraft is inky darkness, as they prefer
darkness to light, and by their actions, their every-day lives take
on the hue of midnight. If we can read God Almighty's hand-writing in
a legible manner, we believe that any intelligent man or woman can
discern in the countenance of a majority of the priestcraft a look
which is almost equal to a condemnation of their actions, as a large
majority are lacking of that manly frankness of countenance which is
found in the countenances of godly men.

In conclusion of this chapter, I beg to state that the Confessional
Box of the Romish Church is one of the darkest pages of the dark
history of Catholicism, and if this hideous chapter was removed from
Romanism, three-fourths of her diabolical deeds would be eradicated;
but when you remove the "Confessional" you remove the charm for that
part of the priestcraft which exists upon the carrion of the human
family, and whenever you remove the "Confessional," the celibacy of
the church will be abandoned and the priestcraft will be allowed to
marry, as Protestant ministers are permitted to do, and when this is
done, instead of having a Roman Catholic Church, we will have a
Protestant denomination in its stead, and my prayer is that a just
God will hasten the day when this "_virtue trap_" will be relegated
to the dark recesses of paganism, from whence it came.

[Illustration: "AMERICA'S RUIN."
UNCLE SAM--"I am afraid these people will be the ruination
of this country unless I stop them from coming over."]




Chapter VI.

The Nations Completely Dominated by
the Power of the Pope Are Nations of Illegitimacy.


In this chapter, we have before us the vision of two countries; one
is Protestant America and the other Catholic Ecuador.

Protestant America stands upon a plane of morality and chastity,
which is pleasing to contemplate, and for which she can thank only
the principles of Protestantism, for Protestantism teaches, by both
precept and example, as she looks to the only true standard of
morality that ever existed, which is the Holy Bible. But Catholicism
looks only to a standard which the Pope of Rome sees fit to
establish, and a standard of morals which is set by mortal man, can
only be, at its best, a very inferior standard, as the licentiousness
and lust of unholy man can never compare with that great and
infinitely good _being_, the Lord of Hosts.

Broad education of the mind means a subduing of the passions, and
_broad_ education is something that the Catholic Church fights
against, as she knows full well that to educate her masses would be
equivalent to losing her grasp upon their actions, for no man or
woman of a broad education and an individual intellectuality will
permit these hosts of darkness to dictate to them.

Ignorance is the greatest breeder of crime known to the intelligence
of man, and it is an established fact that crime breeds immorality,
and immorality of course is the equivalent of illegitimacy, and
historical facts will bear me out in the assertion that the countries
which are absolutely under the power of the Pope are countries which
are densely ignorant, and again, as above stated, ignorance leads to
crime, and crime to immorality, and now we are back to the first
proposition and have proven without going further that "The nations
completely dominated by the power of the Pope are nations of
illegitimacy," but we propose to use historical records to convince
without the shadow of a doubt that our statements are true. However,
I do not need these historical facts, as I have traveled extensively
through Europe and many other countries, and I know whereof I speak,
by personal observation and by coming into personal contact with both
Catholic and Protestant nations. However, we are not going to be
satisfied with this alone, as we do not want the reader to rely
implicitly upon our individual statements, but we propose to bring
facts to bear upon your mind which cannot be over-thrown, as
statistics are stubborn and unyielding facts, which none but fools
dispute.

We propose to take statistics from the _Peabody Reporter_, which you
can corroborate with the official report of the United States
Commissioner of Education. The statistics that we above refer to
follow:

"To every ten thousand inhabitants under the Roman Catholic school
system, there are 1,400 illiterates, 410 paupers and 160 criminals,
while in the public school system we only find to every ten thousand
inhabitants 350 illiterates, making a difference of 1,050 to every
ten thousand." Thus you see that what we have said in previous
chapters of this book in regard to Romanism being founded upon the
mountains of ignorance is true.

Education in its literal meaning, means an infusion of intelligence
that lifts up the minds of man, and it is generally so accepted by
the world at large, but education, as far as Catholicism goes, means
only a rehearsal of abominations, which have been practiced upon the
followers of this creed for centuries in the past, and does not in the
least bear upon the principles of true education.

The public school system is established on the principle that the
intelligence and virtue of the people constitutes the foundation of
free government.

Our public schools therefore form one of the chief cornerstones of
our American republic; they are the sheet anchor of our hopes. The
growth and prosperity which have characterized the first century of
our schools fulfills their mission.

Education is the watchword of the hour among Protestants, but never
among Catholics. We must educate if we would elevate, and unless we
elevate the minds of men we will have humanity running riot with vice
and immorality, and this is why the Catholic nations of the earth are
found with their morals trailing in the slime of degeneracy.

Our public schools are to-day the great assimilating power in this
country. We find in them children of all nationalities, and whether
they be English, Irish, Scotch, Danish, Norwegians, French, Italians,
or some other nationality, when they enter these institutions they
pass out of the school houses, scattered all over this land,
_Americans_, one and all, as it is absolutely impossible to make
anything but a _true American_ out of a pupil who has been turned out
of the public schools of this country, and one who has been permitted
to assimilate the doctrines of broad education taught in these
schools.

The influence of the public schools works rapidly upon childhood and
is felt through all of their after lives. A child who has been
educated in the public schools of this country is always an
unrelenting foe of caste, but the child who is educated in the
parochial schools is taught to look up to innumerable superiors, and
such an education dwarfs the minds of childhood and teaches them to
continually look to others for their individual happiness, but the
teachings of the public schools broaden the individual mind and gives
courage, which enables the child to swing out from the influence of
others and become a mighty power in the mechanism of the universe.

We touch upon the public schools in this chapter, only in connection
with the dominating influence of the Pope over nations which he
completely rules, in order that the reader may thoroughly understand
that ignorance begets crime and crime begets illegitimacy, as we
expect to dwell more fully upon the education of nations in the
future, but we want the reader to begin at the "Alpha" of reason, so
that when he or she is through with this chapter that there will be
no doubt in their minds as to why the power of the Pope breeds
illegitimacy among his followers.

We have contrasted the difference in morals of the inhabitants,
which are completely dominated by Roman Catholicism, to that of the
inhabitants of Protestant America, but we have made this comparison
in a general way; but we now want to select a country which for its
absolutism of Catholic monarchy has no comparison, and that country
is Ecuador.

In Ecuador the Catholic Church has such a complete hold upon the
inhabitants that they will not allow Protestantism taught, and the
consequence of her tyranny is that out of every 100 children born in
that country, seventy-five are bastards or illegitimate and have no
idea of their father, and the immorality of the priestcraft is so
vile that their actions are absolutely passed over without notice, as
there is scarcely a single priest to be found in that country but who
is the father of from ten to twenty-five and thirty children; but
still the Roman Church continues to forbid her priests to wed, when
they know full well that celibacy in the Catholic Church is the cause
of all of this degeneracy.

This state of affairs is not confined to Ecuador alone, but the same
state of affairs exists throughout the length and breadth of all
Catholic nations which are completely under the power of the Pope.

Italy, for instance, which is the home of the Pope and which has been
the home of the Catholic Church since the existence of her
abominations, is one of the most immoral countries that ever
besmirched the face of the earth.

The first lesson that a Catholic child is taught is "_hate_," and
that lesson is directed at Protestantism; therefore, is it any wonder
that the education of Catholicism only reaches out far enough to
hoodwink the student and does not elevate him or her above the
festering mess which surrounds it?

We want, to repeat the statement that the Roman Catholic Church does
not want to educate anybody, nor will it do so, where it is not under
the pressure of Protestant influence. However, the American people
demand figures and facts before they will be convinced; so as further
evidence of the truthfulness of what we are telling you, we propose
to quote from a report of the minister of education in Italy, made
some few years ago. This report is true in every particular, and
bear in mind that this minister of education was a Catholic himself.
The report follows:

"Of every 1,000 males in the province of Lombardy, 539 only were able
to read, and 461 did not even know their letters. Of every 1,000
females, only 426 could read and 574 could not read, neither did they
know their letters.

"In Naples and Sicily, out of every 1,000 males, only 165 were able
to read and 835 could not, and out of every 1,000 females, only 62
could read and 938 could not read and did not know their alphabet.
Taking this report, you will find that out of every 100, only about
10 were able to read.

"In 1864, out of 21,000,000 people, only 3,500,000 could read and
write, and the rest did not know their alphabet, and to-day Spain,
another country which is completely dominated by the power of Rome,
has a population of ignorant dupes, as 80 per cent of the population
of Spain cannot read and write.

"In Ireland, where the Romish Church is dominant, this same record is
repeated, as in other Catholic nations. In European countries where
Protestantism is taught there is but one out of every ten that cannot
read and write, but in the same countries, where Catholicism has
absolute sway, there is but one out of every 125 that can read and
write.

"In six leading Protestant countries of Europe there are 315
inhabitants to every newspaper or magazine, while in six Roman
Catholic countries in Europe there is but one newspaper to every
2,715 people.

"It is estimated that at least seven-eighths of the twenty million
inhabitants in Spanish-America, which consists of the countries of
Mexico, Cuba, Central America and the north and west parts of South
America, are unable to read, and in Mexico alone 90 per cent of the
inhabitants cannot read nor write, neither do they know their
alphabet;" thus you can see what Roman Catholicism does for the
countries which she controls.

We are writing this book, believing that an intelligent class of
people will read it, and if such is true, we believe that it is
useless for us to try to demonstrate further why the countries which
are completely controlled by Catholicism are countries of
illegitimacy, for an intelligent reader knows full well that
ignorance is the greatest brooder of immorality known to man, and, of
course, immorality means illegitimacy, and we believe that we have
thoroughly demonstrated to the mind of the reader that Catholicism
spreads a cloak of ignorance and superstition wherever she is allowed
to rule supreme, and if this is the case, then the natural
consequences of such a state of affairs is illegitimacy.

[Illustration: "FREE IN NAME ONLY."
"Take their chains off, UNCLE SAM, or you will
always have trouble with them."]




Chapter VII.

The Power of the Pope in Cuba, Porto
Rico and the Philippine Islands.


It makes my heart sick when I realize that the Government of the
United States has spent hundreds of millions of dollars upon the
Islands of Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippine Islands, and, after
all, these Islands are still in the grasp and the filthy embrace of
the Vatican at Rome.

Not only fabulous amounts of money have been spent by the United
States upon these Islands, but hundreds of our noble boys in blue
have given up their lives in battle and by the scourge of disease,
and still Catholicism has absolute sway in these far-away countries.

These islands have been under the immediate control of Popery for
hundreds of years, but when the Government of the United States took
charge of them, their inhabitants had advanced no further in
intellectuality and the freedom of free men than they were centuries
ago.

It may sound strange to the average reader when I declare that all of
the lives lost and all of the money expended by the United States
upon Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippine Islands was brought about by
the tyrannical rule of Rome, for it was by her abominations that Cuba
rebelled, which was the prime cause of the interference by the
government of the United States; therefore you can readily see why it
is that I claim that Catholicism is to blame for the part that the
government of the United States took in the affairs of these
countries, and what puzzles me so much is why the government of the
United States still permits Catholicism to control the destinies of
these countries, when the officials of this government know full well
that had it not been for abhorrent Catholicism that Cuba would never
have rebelled and that Porto Rico would have been satisfied, and that
the Philippine Islands would not to-day belong to the United States;
but, instead of this government trying to remedy the great wrong
done to the inhabitants of these countries, it went right ahead and
allowed the bone of contention to remain, and to-day finds this
government not only permitting Catholicism to continue to practice
her abominations in these countries, but this government is
instrumental in sending Catholic teachers over to these countries,
when, if this country would do its whole duty, it would not permit
Catholicism to take any part in the affairs of these countries.

Archbishop Chapelle was shipped to the Philippine Islands with all
the pomp of a ruler, and so was Archbishop J.J. Harty, whom I am
personally acquainted with, and whom I have been on intimate terms
with for a number of years, and this man Harty is to-day in the
Philippine Islands ruling with the same tyrannical hand that has
characterized Romanism for centuries past, and whose rule is only
symbolic to ruin, as the interests of the inhabitants of these
countries are never considered, as it is Rome's ambition and only
desire to keep them under the heel of perpetual tyranny.

We would like to know why Archbishop Chapelle should be given the
best stateroom in a transport ship sailing for Manila, while our
pure-blooded, honest, sincere Protestant boys who wear the blue were
huddled together like so many cattle.

Ah, this is the reason: Archbishop Chapelle is an emissary of the
Pope of Rome and stands ready at all times to serve the wishes and
obey the orders of that Italian pontiff, and our officials were aware
of this fact and they did not want to stir up the Catholic officials
for fear of losing a few votes, as both of our old parties have sunk
so low into the quagmire of filth that they would allow their country
to sink to the level of Romish abominations if they thought by so
doing they could control the Catholic vote for either party.

Was one of your boys on this transport ship? Was your kith and kin
aboard this vessel that showed this ungodly discrimination between
the soldier boy who wrung a poor mother's heart by leaving the
parental fireside? If such was the case, you can vividly see the
injustice done to these brave lads in favor of this Archbishop
Chapelle, as these boys were on their way to this terrible land of
disease and death to help plant the emblem of liberty upon the
ramparts of these far-away Islands, and this same Archbishop Chapelle
was on his way to destroy the influence of these boys' mission.

The time is not far distant until the Protestant world will wake up
to the realization that they have been humbled before this Italian
pontiff for the simple reason that our officials are willing to cater
to Catholicism in Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippine Islands for the
sake of votes.

We do not care whether you are a Republican or a Democrat, this
chapter should fire your blood to the fullest extent, for I am
telling you truths, and if you have got the common decency of the
most ignorant liberty-loving American you will right now make a
resolve that Protestant America must redeem her pledge to Cuba, Porto
Rico and the Philippine Islands to liberate them not only from the
hardships placed upon them by a foreign nation, but liberate them
from the bonds of Catholicism, which not only binds the body, but
chains the soul with the fetters of ignorance and superstition.

When it became known that the government of the United States was to
interfere in the affairs of Cuba, the Catholic Church put all of her
machinery to work immediately in order to fool Uncle Sam and cajole
him into dealing only with the government of Spain, which would
permit Catholicism to exist in these Islands, and the pages of
history only tell us too well how successfully she laid her plans, as
to-day we have the awful spectacle of beholding the government of the
United States playing the part of "protector," while she is quietly
aiding the identical institution which caused the misery in these
far-away countries.

What I tell you in this chapter is true, as I was a Catholic priest
and was on the inside of the workings of Catholicism at that time,
and what I relate is not guess work nor imagination, but it is plain,
unvarnished and unadulterated truths, and the American people will
sooner or later wake up to the realization of these awful truths, for
just so long as the United States permits Catholicism to control the
destinies of Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippine Islands, just that
long turmoil and misery will remain in these tropical regions, for
Catholicism has sworn by all of her imaginary saints that
Protestantism shall never rule these countries, and so far she has
carried out her threat truly and well, as Protestantism to-day has no
more control over the inhabitants of these islands than she did
before the damnable creed of the Pope was molested by the appearance
of Dewey's guns at Manila.

Can you expect these countries to grow in greatness, and can you
expect the inhabitants of these countries to become giants in
intellect when they practice the cungerings of Catholicism?

We want to give the reader an insight in this chapter to what
Catholicism practices in this country and in other countries that are
not near so densely ignorant as Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippine
Islands, and then you can have an idea of what the inhabitants of
these countries may expect in the way of advancement from
Catholicism, and what I will repeat is the abominations that I have
helped to practice myself for thirty years; therefore I know whereof
I speak and no man dare dispute.

We will take a Catholic cemetery, for instance, and in order that the
ground may be sanctified and fit to receive the dead bodies of those
who believe in the Catholic faith a bishop must sanctify this earth
and consecrate it before it is fit to conceal the body of one of the
Pope's followers.

Our Savior has declared that "From earth we came, and to earth we
shall return," and there was no proviso made that before we should
return to earth that it would have to be consecrated by a human
being, as any man or woman of intelligence knows full well that what
the Lord our God has made cannot be improved upon by the idiotic
chant and superstitious rant of a Catholic bishop.

It matters not how godly nor how piously a Protestant may have lived,
Catholicism teaches that it is an abomination to bury a Protestant in
a Catholic cemetery, and one of her laws is that to bury a heretic
(which means Protestant) in a Catholic cemetery is unlawful, and the
Catholic Popes instruct that the remains of any Protestant buried in
a Catholic cemetery shall, if they can be distinguished, be removed,
and if they can not be distinguished, that the cemetery shall be
cleansed by sprinkling holy water over the ground, and bear in mind
that this holy water is to receive its cleansing power from some
priest or bishop, who perhaps is as immoral as hell.

In Canada, some time since, the laws of that country forcibly
effected the burial of a Protestant in a Catholic cemetery, and the
bishop of that diocese, by the name of Bourget, declared that portion
of the cemetery as "_desecrated and filthy_" and forbade any priest
to step his foot upon the ground.

Now, do you expect an institution which teaches such doctrines to
elevate a nation above their own doctrine? If you do, you are
expecting something unreasonable, and if the inhabitants of Cuba,
Porto Rico and the Philippine Islands are not to be elevated above
such abominations can the future hold anything for them but misery?

There is but one thing that beats a bishop's consecration of a
graveyard, and that is money, and money only; but a few dollars will
turn the trick and will open up the ground in a Catholic cemetery for
a heretic, and enough money will turn the entire cemetery into a
Protestant graveyard.

In the City of St. Louis there is a Catholic cemetery called
"Calvary," and lots twelve feet square are sold at from $50 to $1,000
each. A lot was bought by a Protestant whose son died and who was
baptized in his last hour by a Catholic nurse. While his people were
Protestants, they consented, since he had been baptized into the
Catholic Church, that they would give him a Catholic burial, and a
priest by the name of Ward performed the ceremony. Now, bear in mind
that the father of this young man had bought a lot large enough for
his whole family to be buried there, when they should die, as he, of
course, wanted his entire family to be buried together, but the
Catholic Church would not consent to consecrate any part of that lot
but the grave in which the young man was buried that was baptized on
his death bed, simply because the remainder of the family were
Protestants; but for money they consecrated a portion of this lot,
four feet wide and six and one-half feet long, but the remainder of
this lot was not consecrated, therefore you will see that money in
the Catholic Church has as much power to consecrate the earth as doth
the bishopric and priestcraft.

Ah, what abominations! but still this Government expects Cuba, Porto
Rico and the Philippine Islands to be elevated to the standard of
manhood and womanhood by this class of ghouls.

Now, if we could halt with the recital of only a few abominations, my
task, perhaps, would not be so disgusting, but had I the endurance to
live on, until I were a thousand years old, and could write what I
know and have experienced in the ranks of Catholicism, I would be
unable to portray to the reader all of her abominations.

The Catholic Church is a church of show and glamor, and of
nonsensical doctrines, and not a church of God and of holy worship.

Many believe that Catholicism has taught all of her cungerings for
centuries past, and this is the case, but bear in mind, that
Catholicism often has to have new "fakes," in order to make the money
slide out of the pockets of their "dupes" more easily, so they get up
new intrigues and modern shows for this purpose, and the fake that
works the best is the one that they work the hardest, as I solemnly
declare that the Catholic Church as a whole is a money proposition
upon the part of those who teach her abominations, and I further
declare that it is a "graft" conceived by minds that are more cunning
and deceptive than any class of men upon the face of the whole earth.

The Catholic Church changes its form of worship like cheap chop
houses change their bills of fare, as they are after "suckers," and
if one bait will not get them, they throw out another, and the pomp
and show of the church is to catch the eye and not to save the soul.

Not long since, the Catholic Church, with singular devotion, turned
its attention to the five wounds of Christ, and immediately after
giving these five wounds their solicitous attention, they bade their
followers to have recourse to the sacred heart of Jesus, and in
hundreds of Catholic Churches you will find to-day a statue made in
the likeness of Christ, with a heart attached over the breast, and
this heart is illuminated by electricity or candle, and the followers
of Catholicism absolutely worship this mechanism of man, and it has
proven a great drawing card, and you can rest assured that
Catholicism is pushing the scheme along good and hard, and "The St.
Anthony Bread Box" hoax is another scheme that is not very old, but
which the Catholic Church has found to be another great paying
investment, and they are working "St. Anthony" for all that he is
worth.

Now, can any man or woman of intelligence believe that the
inhabitants of these islands can ever expect to become men and women
of affairs--men and women of individuality--and men and women of
intellectuality? If you can give a rational reason why these
countries should ever expect to be elevated to the standard of
greatness under such influences and under the tutelage of such an
institution, then the road to greatness must be a very easy one to
travel.

The Catholic Church is conducted on about the same principle as Dun's
and Bradstreet's mercantile agencies, as they go into the minutest
detail to keep record of the affairs of the country, so that they may
know the weakest as well as the strongest points of their creed, so
that they may at all times be prepared to exercise the greatest
influence at the proper time, and what makes this creed so dangerous,
is that they impress upon their dupes that the church is "eternal
law," and they hold out the crown of glory on high as a reward for
following their doctrine, and this is the most dangerous and damnable
scheme ever perpetrated by mortal, for when you force a man or woman
to believe that you hold in your hands their future destiny, you have
them to the point where you can force them to do your bidding, and
this is exactly what Catholicism does to her followers, and this is
the reason why Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippine Islands can never
expect to go higher in the scale of morality and intellectuality
than they are at the present time, if the Government of the United
States permits this troop of ghouls to continue to be their masters.

We believe that we have in this chapter made, it plain to the reader
why the influence of Catholicism should be remotely removed from
these islands, and if I am right, the Government of the United States
is everlastingly wrong in permitting Catholicism to retain her hold
upon the throats of the inhabitants of these islands, and I
undoubtedly am right, as I know whereof I speak, as I have trod the
deceptive road of Catholicism for the past thirty years, and I dare
not tell in this book all that I know of her cunning in regard to
these far-away countries, as I would have to use language so plain
that I could not expect this volume to pass through the mails, as the
priestcraft in Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippine Islands are an
immoral set, as a whole, and treat the female population of these
islands in a manner that breeds immorality from generation to
generation, and the awful part of this immorality is that those who
commit it with the priestcraft do not consider that it is a wrong, as
they have been taught that it is no sin to do as the priestcraft
demands, therefore it is ten thousand times worse than if the sin was
committed with the knowledge of the fact that it was a sin, as the
mother or father who is aware of the fact that they are sinners will
not teach their offspring to commit the sins that they are guilty of,
but when they are not aware of the fact that they are committing a
sin, of course, they allow their children to believe that their
actions are in harmony with the teachings of God, therefore this
damnable practice goes on and on, from generation to generation, and
this is why the morals, intelligence and progress of Cuba, Porto Rico
and the Philippine Islands, are to-day on the same plane of depravity
as they were centuries ago, and no one is to blame for this carnality
and debauchery of the inhabitants of these islands but the Roman
Catholic Church, and until the Government of the United States shall
declare and back up her declaration by Protestant manhood, the
inhabitants of these islands will never know of the beauties of
chastity and morality and the wonderful blessings that are held in
store for them by embracing Protestantism.

May the Lord of Hosts hasten the day when the eyes of those who rule
in Protestant America may be opened to the awful sins they are
committing, by allowing Romanism to hover over these islands with her
vulturous and carnivorous appetite of depravity, and may the time
soon come when the Government of the United States shall proclaim to
the Vatican at Rome that this veil of abomination shall be lifted
from the inhabitants of these islands; and when this is done, the
goddess of liberty that has made Protestant America what she is
to-day, will hover over these far-away islands of the sea, and new
life will pulsate in the veins of these Romish-ridden countries.

[Illustration: "SAVE THE GIRLS"!
"Batter down the Convent doors of Catholicism and
the civilized world will stand amazed."]




Chapter VIII.

Monasteries Are Often the Abode of Criminals, and
Nunneries the Slaughter Pens of Virtue.


When I was living beneath the folds of the black banner of
Catholicism, I sincerely and devoutly believed that to shield a
Catholic criminal was a righteous and Godly calling, as I believed
that to prevent the civil law from taking hold of the criminal career
of a Catholic official, for his short-comings, was but an act of
Godly justice.

I also believed that anything that was done between the walls of a
Nunnery was sanctified by the approval of those who were higher in
authority in the Catholic Church than myself; therefore, the things
which I now realize are both criminal and immoral, as well as utterly
detestable, I at one time considered righteous, simply because my
education had been confined to the narrow channels of bigotry, and
the effulgency of Biblical knowledge had never penetrated my
Romish-inspired perceptibilities.

I believe that I will make many assertions in this chapter that have
never been made before, but there will not be an assertion made but
what is true; however, there will be many that will arise from the
trenches of Catholicism to denounce the truthfulness of them, but I
know whereof I speak, and I defy any mortal man to successfully
dispute what I may state.

This chapter will relate to monasteries and nunneries, which in olden
times were called "asylums."

These asylums are used by Catholicism to scuffle criminals of their
following into, in defiance of law and justice, as these asylums are
notorious among those who are on the inside workings of this creed,
as to places where Catholic criminals can be concealed without fear
of having the civil law bring them to justice, as these places are a
retreat for Catholic criminals who are pursued by the ministers of
justice, and where, so long as they remain, they cannot be arrested;
but in order to elevate these "asylums" to the plane of religion,
they, are called by different names which are _misnomers_, and are
only raised to the level of religious institutions to cover up the
infamy of their actual missions, as Catholicism has learned that as
long as she can throw around and about herself a religious glamor,
that she is permitted to go ahead and violate the laws of man without
molestation.

The "asylums" of olden times were intended as retreats for those who
were persecuted for their religious belief, but the mission of these
institutions became useless, under the splendid and godly progress of
Protestantism, as Protestantism planted her banner of enlightenment
under the glorious leadership of Martin Luther, and such institutions
were done away with, but Catholicism turned these asylums, which were
once a protection to the persecuted followers of Christ, and
converted them into an abode for Catholic criminals.

There is scarcely a man or woman in America but what has heard of
Wm. Morgan, who lived at Batavia, in Western New York, who, it was
claimed, wrote an expose of Freemasonry, and who, the Catholic Church
claims, was killed by the Masonic fraternity for writing this expose.

The fact of the matter is that this book was prepared by the Catholic
Church for electioneering purposes, and it served their scheme well
and truly.

It is history that Morgan disappeared very suddenly, and the Catholic
Church gave it out that he had been killed by the Masonic fraternity,
which is untrue, as Wm. Morgan was spirited away, and the trick was
turned by Catholicism.

"Wm. Morgan" became the issue for the campaign, and it was narrated
around that Morgan was conveyed in a carriage from Batavia to Niagara
by Freemasons, and there drowned in Lake Ontario.

A body was produced near the mouth of the Niagara River, but a friend
of Wm. Morgan, who knew him well, by the name of Mrs. Wm. G. Barr,
denied that the body that was found at the mouth of the Niagara
River, was that of Morgan, and a devout Catholic remarked at the
post-mortem examination that "It was a good enough Morgan until after
the election."

A rigid investigation was made and no one was ever convicted of
murdering Morgan.

The result of the election was that Catholicism carried her point.
The Catholic Church had turned by this excitement the eyes of the
world towards Freemasonry, and claimed that Morgan's fate was caused
by the Masonic fraternity.

When I came to America, I was given instructions in regard to secret
societies, and the Morgan case was gone over with me in detail, and I
was given "The Bulls" of three popes, which excluded all members of
Freemasons from the Catholic Church, and all who belonged to the
Masonic fraternity were denied even a Christian burial by the
Catholic Church.

I was told by a priest, who was in good standing, that the Masons had
in their meetings a literal devil concealed in a box, and that when
they would meet, they would stick pins in a picture of some supposed
"traitor" and shriek out in their madness: "Die like Morgan!"

Mrs. Wm. G. Barr was called to identify the supposed body of Wm.
Morgan, which was found at the mouth of the Niagara River.

Her husband, Wm. G. Barr, was an old dry goods man and once ran for
governor of the State of Kansas, but was defeated because his wife
had declared "that Wm. Morgan's body had never been discovered at the
mouth of the Niagara River, and further declared that it was a
'fake,' pure and simple, and gotten up by Catholicism in order to
villify the Masonic fraternity."

I had always been of an investigating turn of mind, and the stories
that were told to me in regard to Wm. Morgan did not sound right, so
I took the train for Topeka, Kans., where Mrs. Wm. G. Barr lived, and
this is the story that she related to me in great emotion:

Mrs. Barr told me that she was a friend of Wm. Morgan, and that she
was called to identify his body, but instead of finding the corpse of
Wm. Morgan, on the seashore, she found the body of some one else and
not that of Morgan, and she further told me that Wm. Morgan, before
his disappearance, had written her that he was persuaded by a number
of Catholic priests to leave the Masons, and that he, to his sorrow,
had followed their advice, and that these priests had written a book,
and insisted that he should publish it, but he never did give his
consent, and stated that he never would; however, the book appeared,
and the fact of the matter is that it was a clumsy forgery by the
priestcraft of Catholicism.

This book appeared in print, and Wm. Morgan became frightened, as he
realized that should the country at large believe that he was the
author of this book, he would be considered as a traitor, and he
became frightened and did not know what to do, and about this time
two Catholic priests approached him, and persuaded him to leave the
country, and they took him to "a Trappist monastery," near Montreal,
Canada.

He remained there quite a time, and left Canada and went to Asia, and
he was seen and identified in Asia years after Catholicism had
declared that he had been murdered by the Masonic fraternity.

I do not remember of ever reading this history before, and I am under
the impression that I am the first man--in fact, I know that I am the
first man who was for thirty years a Catholic priest that ever gave
this information to the public.

Now, if a monastery in Canada would be turned into a lie and a
deception in order that the Catholic Church might carry out her
diabolical and cunning schemes, what can we expect of other
monasteries?

If this history attaches itself to a monastery like that in Canada,
what must be the condition of the monasteries and nunneries of
nations which have not the enlightenment that Canada has?

I desire to call to the attention of the reader a little history that
is not exceedingly old, and which every boy and girl is acquainted
with, as it has transpired in the past ten years--yea, later.

It was in the afternoon of a December day, in 1900. A boy, Edward
Cudahy, Jr., was walking to his father's mansion and was invited to
step into a buggy and was informed that he was under arrest. This
boy was then and there abducted, and this abduction became known by
the boy remaining away from his home that night.

The police and detectives of Omaha and the detectives from Chicago
and other cities were busy on the case day and night. Days and weeks
passed and nothing came to light except letters from the ones who had
kidnapped this boy, asking for a ransom of $25,000, and stating that
if this sum of money in gold was not forthcoming, that the boy's eyes
would be put out and he would forever lose his sight.

This last threat startled the poor, heart-broken mother, and as the
time approached for these devils to put into execution their threat,
this poor frantic mother insisted that her millionaire husband,
Edward Cudahy, Sr., give up the $25,000 and save her precious boy's
eyesight.

Her husband resisted as long as he could, but at last took the
$25,000 in gold and stepped into his buggy, with the signal lantern,
and drove to a certain spot, designated by Pat Crow, who is the one
who abducted Cudahy, and with this $25,000 bought his boy's liberty,
and this boy was brought from that cottage on Grover street, unhurt,
and Pat Crow made away with his $25,000 in gold.

Cudahy was called up a number of times by telephone and was
threatened that if he did not withdraw the reward that he was
offering for Pat Crow's arrest that there would be something awful
befall him; but he resisted and would not withdraw his offer of
reward, consequently this made it necessary for Pat Crow and Eddy
McGehee, alias Burns, to leave the country.

These men were known in Omaha, St. Joe, Kansas City, St. Louis and
Chicago, not only by a number of their ilk, but also to the police
forces, consequently the nets of the law were stretched all over the
United States for these abductors.

On December 28 it was reported from La Salle, Ills., that Pat Crow
was arrested. Kansas City police promised his arrest before sunset,
but he was not arrested.

There were 80,000,000 people looking for Pat Crow, but he took a
Pullman sleeper and traveled to New York, and from there sailed on a
first-class ticket for Europe and spent a good time in London, from
whence he went to South Africa and played a deceptive role in the
English-African war.

Now, I am going to relate something that will make one's blood boil
with indignation and the cold sweat stand out with the clamminess of
death, but what I tell you is true.

Priest Dempsey, pastor of St. Patrick's Church in St. Louis, was
president of the "Emmet" celebration in the year 1902.

After a speech by Judge Ryan of St. Louis, and a most eloquent
address by a priest, who had been a young Boer officer, he inspired
Irish patriotism by an elegant appeal against "Old England." He was
indeed an orator who, by his recitation, held the audience for an
hour. I was one who was nearest to him on the platform and
congratulated him on his powerful speech.

After the applause from his Irish friends, as he had called them, he
decided to leave with me for his hotel, and I was stopping at St.
Patrick's parsonage, so we both had to go in the same direction.

I had become interested in the fellow while he was delivering his
speech and I became much more interested in him in our car ride,
together, to the Lindell Hotel, and he invited me to stop off with
him awhile at the Lindell Hotel, and we were soon engaged in all
kinds of discussions, both religious and political. He was a
"Dutchman" and had asked his government of Holland for a leave of
absence to fight in the Boer war, which was granted him, and to prove
the truthfulness of this assertion he showed me a wound on his breast
which had not yet healed.

He remarked that he came "nearly" telling in his address at the
"Emmet" meeting about the miraculous escape of Pat Crow to South
Africa, and stated that if it had not been for the bad impression Pat
Crow had made in America, he would have told of the trick that had
been turned to gain him his freedom and rob some one in America of
the reward that had been put on his head by Millionaire Cudahy.

The following is his story he told me as near as I can remember it:

"One night I was in Johannesburg, South Africa, and stayed with Pat
Crow in the same room. I knew that it was Pat Crow and did not intend
to have much to do with him, but he noticed me and I became
interested in him, and he spoke to me about matters, and the
millionaire's boy being abducted, and the ransom that he received,
and his escape to Africa.

"He remarked that I would realize from his name that he was an Irish
Catholic, and stated that he had gone through the Catholic schools
and was a 'brother' in the cloisters, and stated that this was his
strong point in never being caught in his daring undertakings.

"He stated that when they received their $25,000 ransom from Cudahy
that it was divided at the cottage where the crime was committed. He
stated that it cost him quite a sum of money to stay with friends a
few days in Omaha, but that he soon disguised himself as an inmate of
the Jesuit College, a school for Catholic boys.

"He stated that he traveled on a 'permit' as Father O'Connor to
Kansas City, and stated that from there he went to St. Louis,
disguised as a Catholic priest, and that the conductors on the train
spoke to him as 'How do you do, Father?'

"When I arrived in St. Louis I went to St. Anthony's Church, where
you can obtain most anything from that saint. I rang the bell for
confession. I confessed all kinds of things. I confessed to murder,
robbery, kidnapping, and the Father Confessor was impressed with me
because I was a 'big fish' in my line, and because I had done no harm
to the millionaire's boy. I told the inmates of St. Anthony's Church
that I wanted to make confession and do penance the remainder of my
life.

"A brother came with the scissors and I received the 'tonsure' for
the third time, which left only a circle of hair around my head, and
no Pinkerton detective, or even Bertillion himself could have
identified me.

"In a short time I left this St. Anthony Church in a 'Catholic
Habit,' which disguised me as a Catholic official, and I went to
Omaha and passed myself off as 'Brother Clement from St. Louis.'

"When I reached Omaha I had no trouble in passing myself off as
'Brother Clement.'

"After I had remained there awhile I excused myself and in my
priestly robes I walked to the banks of the Missouri River and raised
my buried treasure, as I had left a part of the money that I received
from Cudahy buried near the river, and I took the train to St. Louis,
and from there to New York, and from New York I took a German steamer
to Southampton.

"I stayed in London two weeks and read in the papers all about Pat
Crow. London was not the place for a man like me, as I had been there
before, and they knew me; so I sailed for the diamond fields of South
Africa, where I am now free, by the system of 'asylums' (which are
Catholic monasteries) of the Catholic Church. Pat Crow wound up his
story by telling me that if I ever needed to try this plan that I
could do it, and stated that the Catholic Church was the refuge of
criminals."

Now, bear in mind, the reason that the Catholic Church is such a
refuge for criminals is because no police or detective is ever
allowed to cross over the door-sills into these places of Catholic
refuge, where the worst chapters of crime never will be told, and
where these criminals flee to avoid the punishment of their crimes.

This is the first time in the history of the world that this awful
history in regard to Pat Crow and Catholicism was ever given to the
reading public.

Catholicism teaches, and acts accordingly, that if a confessor
forgives the sins of these criminals that God has taken away all
guilt from their heinous crimes and that the civil laws have no right
to punish these criminals after a Catholic priest has forgiven their
sins, and on this damnable dogma, Catholicism bases her right for the
existence of these "asylums."

I want to give the reader a little history in regard to the
assassination of Abraham Lincoln. Wilkes Booth, a Roman Catholic, was
the assassin of President Lincoln. The Roman Catholic Church, under
the mask of Democracy, was always believed to be responsible for
this diabolical assassination. In fact, it is believed, and the
belief is well founded, that through the "inquisition" in the City of
Rome that a plot was laid to destroy the republican form of
government of the United States, and the assassination of Abraham
Lincoln was the first step, and the plotting on this side of the
water was done in Catholic houses, adorned with crucifixes, religious
saints, religious statues, religious relics, and rosaries, scapulars,
holy water pots, and medals of Catholicism innumerable.

It was in the house of Mrs. Surratt, located in the very heart of
Washington, D.C., that the officers of this government proceeded
after the assassination of President Lincoln, and bear in mind that
Mrs. Surratt was a Roman Catholic, and the occupants of this house
were arrested. The ones who were arrested were; Mrs. Surratt, a Roman
Catholic; her daughter, Anna, a Roman Catholic; Mrs. Fitzpatrick, a
Roman Catholic, and Miss Hollahan, a Roman Catholic. Before the
officers had left this house a light knock was heard at the door and
a young man appeared in disguise, as he was dressed as a common
laborer and carried a pick upon his shoulder; his hands were white
and soft and he was also arrested, and his name was Powell, another
Roman Catholic.

John Wilkes Booth, the assassin, was a Roman Catholic, consequently
the belief is undoubtedly well founded that not only the scheme to
assassinate Abraham Lincoln was laid in the City of Rome by Roman
Catholics, but was carried into execution by the same set in this
country.

Booth, after the assassination, fled to Surrattsville to the hotel of
Mrs. Surratt, and there a Roman Catholic woman had concealed a
carbine. Mr. Surratt, at Washington, had warned the folks at the
hotel that the weapon would be called for the night of Abraham
Lincoln's assassination, which is _prima facie_ evidence of the plot
to assassinate Lincoln. After the assassination Booth fled, but on
the eastern shores of the Potomac he was concealed in a Roman
Catholic Church for nearly a week. As we relate this history, which
is true, the evidence becomes more damaging against Roman
Catholicism.

The finale of this national tragedy was that Herald, Powell and Mrs.
Surratt were hung, and Dr. Mudd and O'Laughlin were committed to
life-long imprisonment, and all of these were Roman Catholics.

The question now arises, How did John H. Surratt escape from the same
fate of Herald, Powell and Mrs. Surratt? _I will tell you!_ John H.
Surratt escaped by the assistance of Catholic officials and went to
Canada, and was concealed in a "Trappist cloister" near Montreal, and
remained there until 1865, when, as a Priest, he went to Liverpool.

In the spring of 1866, Mr. Wm. H. Seward was informed by a Mr. King,
at Rome, Italy, that John H. Surratt had enlisted in the Papal
Guards, under the name of John Watson. He was arrested at Teroli, in
Italy, but escaped by plunging down a ravine twenty-three feet deep.

He was wounded by the fall and crawled off to a monastery and
remained there until he was healed and then resumed his flight.
After his wounds healed, he went to Egypt, as he was not satisfied
with Italy, and was there captured by our minister, Mr. Hale, and
sent to America.

I could go on and on, giving you history of lesser importance that
this, which occurs week in and week out, month in and month out, and
year in and year out, and which is strictly connected with the
Catholic Church, but what I have given you are truths, and
indisputable truths, which should be evidence enough of the awfulness
of monasteries of this and other countries, and a class of men who
will commit such dastardly deeds in the monasteries would not
hesitate to slaughter innocent virtue in the nunneries of this
country.

I could give you history in regard to the nunneries that would make
the cheek of virtue blush with shame, but to give you this history I
would have to use language that I do not desire to use, as I want to
keep the minds and morals of the girls of this country as pure as
possible; but from this chapter, Protestant fathers and mothers must
know what Roman Catholicism consists of, and Catholic fathers and
mothers who are not everlastingly blinded by the false light of this
damnable creed should rally from their lethargetic walks of
debauchery and snatch their children from the Romish mire of
degradation and place them upon the Protestant highways, which lead
to the beauties of individual and collective greatness.

[Illustration:
                 CHRIST            POPE
The Christ of Protestantism compared to the God of Catholicism.
                    TAKE YOUR CHOICE.]




Chapter IX.

Un-Married Cussedness of the Roman Priest-Craft.


In the Book of Books, we find that the Lord of Hosts declares that,
"It is not good for man to dwell alone," and our Heavenly Father also
teaches us that "Every man should have one wife."

Now, the Good Lord was either right or wrong when He made this
declaration, and who is there that would declare that the Lord was
mistaken in His injunction? Not one! Therefore, we must acknowledge
that either the Lord our God made a declaration that was nonsensical
and unreasonable, or else the Roman Priestcraft is living a life
which is diagonally contrary to the commands and demands of God
Almighty, for when the Roman Church declares that her Priests shall
not wed, they at once set up a rule for their teachers which is in
violation, to not only the laws of God, but laws of man, as the
silent whisperings of man's nature demands a helpmate. The heathen
nations of the earth who are not acquainted with the sanctity of the
marriage vow, have a longing for the companionship of the opposite
sex, and this longing cannot be termed anything but "a godly love,"
as this feeling was placed in the bosom of humanity by a divine
being, and whenever this desire is thwarted, you have disturbed the
most blissful inspiration of the human family; but the Roman Catholic
Church would have us believe that a few of the human family have been
ordained by God to live recluses, or, as we may term it, "unmarried
hermits."

Catholicism, with all her damnable dogmas and creeds, cannot change
that God-given impulse that was planted in the bosom of man, when
Adam was created in the Garden of Eden, and the more Roman
Catholicism endeavors to eradicate that feeling, the greater her sins
become, for it is a most damnable sin to try to force man to
eradicate from his bosom this everlasting and godly craving for the
love of the opposite sex, and as long as "man is born of woman," just
so long that inspiration will live in the bosom of mankind, and just
so long as Roman Catholicism endeavors to force humanity to purge
itself of this blessed longing, just so long the mark of deception,
depravity and ungodliness will be left upon the brow of this Romish
demon.

This chapter is one that must be written in a delicate manner, which
prohibits me from becoming emphatic and explicit, for should I allow
myself to write exactly what I have seen, and the truths that exist
in regard to Romish hellishness, and the deeds of the unmarried
cussedness of Catholicism, I would have to resort to language that
would be unchaste, but I have in mind a story that was told some time
ago, by a young lady, who had spent a number of years in a convent,
which I will relate word for word as she gave it, and which will be
only the history over and over again of thousands--yea, tens of
thousands of girls who have had the same experience as this poor
mortal, only perhaps had new agonies added to their lives.

The history of this girl's life in a convent is more than pathetic,
from the fact that her father on his deathbed requested that she be
placed in a convent by her mother, which was done, and her
sufferings, the reader will see, were not a fault of hers, but the
fault of her parents, who had been raised to believe in the
diabolical teachings of Roman Catholicism, but who did not know that
these teachings were only echoes of the dark ages of paganism,
therefore you will see that this poor girl's history is laden with a
sadness for which she is not to blame, and the fault can only be laid
at the fountain head, as her parents were sincere in their belief,
and did not, of course, realize that they were helping to ruin their
darling girl's future.

I will now relate her history, as near as possible, the way she gave
it, which will be symbolic of the history of thousands of other
girls, and which is absolutely true. Her story follows:

"When one becomes an inmate of a convent, they become a prisoner, as
every act is scrutinized by the mother superior, and you have no
privilege any more than if you were a convict and placed behind the
bars for some heinous crime. With this exception, however, you are
allowed to receive letters from a priest without having the letter
opened and read before it reaches you, as there is always some mark
to distinguish a letter received from a priest, but all letters that
you write and all letters that you receive, unless they bear the mark
indicating that they have been sent by a priest, are carefully read,
and if the contents of either the letter you write, or the one that
has been written to you does not meet with the arbitrary opinion of
the "mother superior," they are destroyed, and you never have the
opportunity of sending the one that you have written, or to receive
the one that has been written to you, unless they can pass the
inspection of the "mother superior," who is nothing more nor less
than an agent of the Pope of Rome, as she receives her instructions
from the priestcraft, and they receive their instructions from the
Pope of Rome."

When an inmate of a convent receives a letter from a priest it is
handed her without being opened, as the "mother superior" is
instructed not to open such letters, and is told that all such
letters, of course, relate to the spiritual welfare of the nun.

In these letters the priest will tell the nun what day he will call
to give her a _general confession_. As soon as such a letter is
received the nun informs the "mother superior" that on a certain day
Priest So-and-So will visit her, and, of course, this "mother
superior" gives the permission, and on the day that the priest is to
arrive, this nun is excused from all duties for that day, and when
the priest arrives he is shown into what is called the _Retreat
Parlor_; and no matter how long he remains there, no one will disturb
him. He is supposed to be _talking_ with his penitent on the welfare
of her soul. Ah, could any one look through the door, they would find
this priest with his arms about the form of this fair penitent, or
perhaps in a far more compromising position!

Right here the reader may ask if these nuns are willing to submit to
the embraces of these priests?

I will allow this girl to answer this question in her own language,
and her answer is this:

"I answer that in fifteen out of twenty cases--No! But she is there
helpless; the priest has seen her somewhere in the garb of a nun and
has taken a fancy to her, and whether she be willing or not, he
compels her to allow him to satisfy his hellish passion!"

This girl continues by exclaiming: "Oh God! Great God! When I think
of this system--this system born of the devil and nurtured by
hell--and realize that under the cloak of religion it is stealing
away our liberty, entering into our homes, ruining our womanhood and
girlhood, and painting childish purity with the brush of immorality,
and defiling everything with which it comes in contact, I then become
a mad woman, and I become as a venomous serpent, wanting revenge for
what has been done to me, and it seems as if I cannot remain quiet,
but, closing my eyes and ears to everything, as I have no redress, I
am compelled to warn thousands who may come after me, of their fate,
should they take up convent life, which is a hell upon earth and a
blotch as black as the shadows of hell to any land."

The same lady who related the above, and a great deal more which I
cannot tell in this chapter, gave an account of the sufferings of
another nun, who was in the same convent with her, and I now learn
that the same story that I will now relate has been told to others.

Reader, you must bear in mind that convents have many tortures
outside of the torturing conscience on account of having the virtue
of their inmates destroyed. The teachings of Catholicism lead people
to practice self-infliction upon their person in order to appease a
living God, as they seem to worship a living God the same as the
pagans would worship a God of stone, or a ferocious God in the form
of some carnivorous beast, and in order to atone for their sins,
these inmates of the nunneries are taught that they must bear
self-infliction; in fact, Catholicism teaches her followers that in
order that any of them shall receive absolute pardon, that they must
resort to heathenish practices.

As stated above, the same lady whom we speak of in the first part of
this chapter, relates her experience with a sister nun, who endured
self-torture, believing that it was an outward demonstration of
godliness. Her story follows:

"I call to mind a case of cruelty under the guise of devotion that
happened in our convent. A consecrated penitent, Sister Madeline, had
been for some time a victim of consumption. She was a beautiful girl,
and her exquisitely sweet voice could be heard in church every
Sunday, taking part in the high mass. Poor Sister Madeline! How many
humiliations she received! How often she was censured for leaving her
work unfinished when she was not able to do it, and how I have pitied
her as she tried to eat the bread and dripping we had for supper.
Failing in the attempt, I would notice the tears gather in her eyes.
Oh, how often I longed to be able to obtain some little delicacy for
her! but dared not ask for it. Her gentle, patient, suffering face
will never fade from my memory.

"One Sunday evening she and I were walking in the garden after
benediction. She felt more than usually weak, and, therefore, I could
offer her my arm to lean upon.

"'Dear Sister Magdalene Adelaide,' she said, 'I think our blessed
Lord is soon going to come for me.'

"I tried to cheer her by telling her that it might be His will to
restore her again to health and strength.

"'No, dear Sister,' she replied; 'and oh, I do not want to stay. I
long to see my Master's face. At night, when I lay awake in pain, I
long, oh, so much, that I might go!'

"'Sister Madeline,' I said, 'you have been happy here, have you not?
You love your present life?'

"We had seated ourselves by this time in a little grotto made up in
honor of 'Our Lady of Lourdes.' She buried her face in her hands, and
I saw the tears trickling between her fingers.

"My own eyes filled with tears; I know not why.

"At last, raising up her head, she said: 'I have tried my best to be
contented; but oh! Sister Adelaide, it has been a bitter struggle. It
is wrong in me to give way thus; but I cannot help it. May Our Lady
pity me! I want you to promise, dear Sister, that you will say a
rosary for me every day for a year after I am dead, and one communion
every month.'

"'I will gladly do this for you, Sister Madeline,' I answered. 'Tell
me,' I continued, 'is there any particular day you prefer?'

"'Yes,' she replied, 'I would like your Friday communion. Promise me
that on the anniversary of the feast of St. Mary Magdalene, my patron
saint, you will offer your communion for me.'

"I promised her this and she seemed more satisfied.

"'I know,' she said, 'that I shall have a long purgatory.' She
shuddered as she spoke. 'And oh! I do hope the dear sisters will
remember me in their prayers and communions.'

"'Dear Sister Madeline,' I said at last, 'purgatory is better than
hell and our Blessed Lady will intercede for you.'

"'Yes, dear Sister Magdalene Adelaide,' she said, 'you are right; but
oh!' she continued, 'I cannot help the shudder that passes through me
as I think of the suffering I shall be in for years, especially after
the mortifications I have practiced here, the discipline I have
applied to myself, the days I have abstained from food, the prayers I
have offered, the tears I have shed; and now, as death approaches,
there is no other prospect before me than a long term of purgatorial
punishment. Besides, the punishment will be all the greater since I
have given away to an unnatural thought.'

"'And what, may I ask, do you call an unnatural thought?'

"'Sister Magdalene Adelaide, come close to me.'

"I rose from my chair and knelt down beside her.

"'Dear sister, I have endeavored to bear my cross,' she commenced,
speaking with difficulty; 'But oh! sister, I dread the end; I have so
much to expiate; and oh!' she continued, her voice now choked with
sobs, 'if only I could have my mother near me; if only I could hear
her voice once more; it is so long since I have seen her. I have
asked for any letter that may have come, but they tell me none has
arrived, and oh! I don't think mother has quite forgotten me.'

"I durst not trust myself to speak; my heart was too full. At last I
said, 'Dear sister, do not grieve thus; our Blessed Lady will
intercede for you. Remember, in coming here your purpose, even as
mine, was to make reparation for sin. You and I have both suffered.
Be brave now, dear, and now that the end is near do not take away
from God's glory by fearing for the future.'

"'I know it is wrong to grieve so much, Sister Magdalene Adelaide,
but oh, I am so weak! Will you read a meditation for me?'

"I took up the book and did as she requested. Soon she fell into a
sleep which lasted about one hour, and again I commenced saying my
rosary beads. Presently I heard her murmur, and, listening, I heard
her whisper, 'My feet! oh, my feet!' I arose from my chair and
removed the sheet with the intention of rubbing her limbs; as I did
so her feet were disclosed. A thrill of horror passed through my
being as I looked at them, for they were all cut, festered and
bruised; a fearful suspicion took possession of me, and, stooping
down, I picked up her infirmary shoes. On examination I discovered in
them pieces of broken glass; a thrill akin to horror ran through my
whole frame. I held the shoes in my hands and looked at the pale,
suffering face of Adeline as she lay there on her bed, and this
evening the whole scene rises before me--the little infirmary with
its clean, white floor, a few cheap prints of the stations of the
cross hanging on the otherwise bare walls, the two or three small
iron bedsteads, then the white wooden altar upon which was spread a
white linen cloth embroidered with red; the two statues, one of 'Our
Lady of Dolours' and the second of St. Joseph, the patron of happy
deaths. In the center of the altar was a vase with a few cheap paper
flowers.

"Yes, it comes to me most vividly. There she lay, the sin of her
past life being that she, too, had been deceived at the altars of
Rome--a victim of priestly solicitation in the confessional. Even as
she lay there in the last stages of consumption, traces of what had
at one time been a beautiful face were clearly discernible. What had
she not suffered for years! Who could tell the many weary hours of
heart anguish she had passed through? And yet she was young--hardly
twenty-five years old. She had given up all that was near and dear,
and, for the years she had lived in the convent, she had tried to
appease God's justice for her early sin by mortifying and chastising
herself in a way that can only find a parallel in the doctrines of
Buddha. Oh, Madeline! poor, wounded, betrayed one! Who can wonder, as
you lay there with the fever of consumption running and coursing
through your veins, that, in spite of all the teachings and practices
of self-denial in the convent life in which you had lived so many
years, yet, when the hour of death drew nigh and your soul was
hovering on the borders of the unknown eternity, your thoughts once
more went back to the old home-scenes, and you longed, as only a
child can, for the sight of a mother's face, the sound of a mother's
voice, the cool, soothing touch of a mother's hand passing over your
brow? They tried to crush down the natural love that God placed in
your heart for your mother, but they could not. The use of the
discipline caused the blood to flow and gave you physical suffering;
fasting and long prayers made you weak, and thus incapable of
exercising will-power; and, when no other eye but God's was upon you,
when struggling with the desire to leave forever the hateful prison
walls of the convent, the bitter tears forced their way. Then,
kneeling before the statue of the 'Mother of Sorrows,' you pleaded
with her to help and intercede for you. What comfort did you get?
What hope? What consolation? _None!_ You might make good confessions
and communions, practice all the self-denials required of one in your
vocation, and the only thing that the church could give you, the only
gleam of _hope_ she could offer, was that, through your works of
supererogation, your purgatory would be lessened; and now, wasted
through suffering and consumption, dreading the punishment of
purgatory, endeavoring in your dying state to do something to lessen
its pangs, you have walked with glass in your shoes and your poor
feet give evidence of the agony you endured. And this is
Christianity!

"I applied cold cloths to her feet; I sat down in the dimly-lighted
infirmary by the side of her bed, and, holding the fevered and
trembling hand, I, in my ignorance, tried to give her some comfort. I
promised to remember her in my intentions, my communions, and at the
sacrifice of the Mass. I spoke to her of the mercy and compassion of
Mary, the 'Mother of Sorrows,' and tried to give her hope by pointing
to her as mediator between her soul and Christ, but I could see that
she received no satisfaction, no assurance. Then her eyes closed and
she dozed for a few minutes, only to wake with a moan of pain--'Oh,
my feet! oh, my feet!' And then again, 'If only I could see my
mother!' would issue from her parched and cracked lips.

"And so I sat through the night, soothing her as well as I knew how,
and repeating aspirations for her, until the dawn crept in and the
nuns' bell rang out at 4:30 o'clock, arousing the inmates. The
quietness and deep stillness still remained throughout the
institution, the sisters and penitents walking in the dimly-lighted
cloisters with soft tread and down-cast eyes, as if in the land of
the silent dead and not the living."

As I write I wonder how it was possible for me to endure the paganism
of Catholicism for thirty years, and the only rational reason I can
give for this endurance is that I, like thousands of these poor nuns
whom I have just written about, was raised to believe that the
teachings of Catholicism were right and the only road that lead to
eternal glory; therefore I look with pity and compassion upon those
black-garbed nuns when I behold them tramping the streets of our
large cities, as I realize that they actually believe they are
performing God's work, when the truth of the matter is that they are
only following the practices of heathen nations.

I could go on and write a thousand pages upon "The Unmarried
Cussedness of the Roman Priestcraft," and each page would be as black
as the shadows of hell, but I deem it unnecessary, as I have
confidence in those who may read this book that they will believe
every word of what I have written, therefore it is unnecessary for me
to dwell longer upon the hideousness of celibacy.

In conclusion, I desire to say that so long as Roman Catholicism
demands that her priestcraft shall not wed, just so long the
priestcraft will remain vultures of virtue and just so long convents
will be turned into carnivals of vice.

It is only natural that such should be the case, as both the
priestcraft and the inhabitants of our convents are brought up from
childhood to believe in the absurdities of Roman Catholicism, and to
believe that all of their many sins can be pardoned by the cungerings
of this Romish doctrine.

My prayer is that the government of the United States may learn in
the near future that the broad light of Protestant inspection must
penetrate these recesses of darkness before we can ever have them
cleansed of their immorality, and this inspection must be made
often, and I sincerely believe that the time is not far distant when
Protestant America will demand that Catholicism shall do away with
her monasteries and nunneries, unless she submits to a rigid
examination of her actions, and whenever she submits it will be
because she is forced to submit, and whenever she is forced to do so,
these monasteries and convents will be closed up, as Protestant
America will not allow nor permit these plague spots to exist to
pollute the fair name of America when she learns of their actual
mission.

[Illustration: "BEING EXCOMMUNICATED FOR READING THE BIBLE."
"May she be damned in her mouth, in her breast, in
her heart and down to her very stomach. Etc. Etc."]




Chapter X.

A Brazen Insult to God.


Catholicism teaches that the Pope of Rome is infallible and cannot
sin, neither can he make a mistake. This claim, if true, would place
the Pope of Rome, who is nothing more nor less than a human being,
upon the same footing as Jesus Christ.

The Bible says, "There are none pure; no, not one." Now, if the claim
of Catholicism that the Pope of Rome is infallible, is true, then the
Bible is a myth and a mockery.

If Catholicism's claim that the Pope of Rome is infallible, is true,
then God is not an impartial God, for if He is an impartial God He
would not bestow upon any of His mortals the gift of purity, without
being ready to bestow the same gift upon all of those who are
deserving, and who by their righteousness deserve this grand and
princely distinction.

We want to use a little common sense and a philosophy that can be
assimilated by any man or woman of ordinary intelligence.

The Bible does not relate in any verse or chapter that any one can
reach the point of infallibility during life. Now, is not this true?
And if it is, then the claim of Catholicism that the Pope of Rome is
infallible is a lie, woven in the devil's loom.

We want to prove to our readers that this claim is one founded upon
fallacious grounds, as the Pope of Rome is elected by the cardinals
of the Catholic Church, who are human and who are often as immoral as
the devil; therefore the infallibility of the Pope rests in human
hands, for it is by these cardinals that the Pope is created,
therefore you will see that by the ballot of these cardinals the Pope
derives his infallibility, and not from any power of God Almighty,
consequently this proclaimed infallibility of the Pope rests in the
hands of these cardinals.

Now, to illustrate this damnable doctrine and show it up in its rabid
ignorance, we will suppose that when Pope Pius X was elected Pope of
Rome that if some other priest had received a majority of one of the
votes of the cardinals, Pope Pius X would never have had this
blessing from God, but he would only have missed it one vote,
therefore you will see that this infallibility which was about to
rest on Pope Pius X, but did not, would have been snatched from him
by the failure of one cardinal to vote for him.

Now, any man or woman of ordinary "horse sense" can see that God
Almighty has nothing whatever to do with filling the office of the
Pope, and this infallibility rests altogether with the pulling power
that the candidate for Pope exercises over the cardinals, as it is an
indisputable fact that there is as much political chicanery in the
election of a Pope as there is in the election of a justice of the
peace at a township election.

We want to learn just how far this infallibility of the Pope goes.
If a man is infallible he can not make a mistake, and I can prove by
every man of broadmindedness and intelligence that the Popes of Rome,
for centuries past, have made nothing but mistakes, and their
mistakes have been not only ruinous to those whom they profess to
teach, but their mistakes have had a tendency to paralyze the
righteous ambitions of every nation to which their influence has
extended. If the claim of Catholicism is true that her Popes are
infallible, then we must acknowledge that this great gift was
received from God Almighty, and we cannot believe such nonsense when
we are aware of the fact that these Popes are elected by the
cardinals, and the election of a Pope depends upon the tactics and
schemes of these cardinals; then, pray, tell us how any man who has
been raised up under the arch-light of Protestantism, or who has had
the searchlight of Protestant intelligence penetrate his soul, can
for a moment believe in the infallibility of the Pope?

I sincerely believe, in fact, I know that there are millions who
believe this damnable doctrine, as I can honestly say that I at one
time believed it myself. But those who do believe it are those who
have been raised beneath the dark shadows of superstition, and my
mission in writing this book is to brush the cobwebs of ignorance
from these dwarfed minds and help to point them to "_the Lamb of God
who taketh away the sins of the world_," and if I can be instrumental
in this mission I will not only open the eyes of the followers of
Catholicism, but I will put stiffening into the backbone of
Protestantism and help them to brand this idolatrous doctrine of
Catholicism wherever she may dare to rear her abominable head.

The great danger in teaching that the Pope is infallible is in making
thieves and murderers of our citizens, for if Catholicism is right in
teaching her followers that the Pope of Rome is infallible, this
doctrine is bound to have an influence that is awful in its effect,
for whenever a man or woman believes in the infallibility of the Pope
they are bound to believe in the infallibility of all things that he
creates; therefore you will see that this doctrine is far-reaching in
its effects, for if a Pope is infallible the bishops which he
creates are infallible, and if the bishops which he creates are
infallible, the priests which they create are infallible, and
whenever we teach a nation this abomination we have a nation of
people which believes that there is no sin so heinous which they may
commit but which may be forgiven by the priesthood, as they have
learned to believe that all things created by the Pope are
infallible, simply because they have been created by the Pope, and
whenever you preach a doctrine that has such effect upon the
inhabitants of any country you will have a set of inhabitants who
will commit crime without hesitation, as they are assured that by
paying a few dollars into the coffers of the priest they can have
their sins pardoned, and whenever you cause a nation to believe this,
you at once have a nation of criminals.

It is, in my estimation, absolutely impossible for an individual who
believes in such a damnable doctrine to become a pure, patriotic
American citizen. Now, this may seem to the reader a very broad
assertion and one that may appear too broad to be substantiated, but
I propose to demonstrate to you that it is only a natural
consequence, and if we fail to make this point clear to the reader's
mind we will not ask them to believe it.

In the first place, we desire to say that the Catholic religion--if
religion it can be termed--is founded upon the rock of superstition.
Every code of their church doctrine teaches that the Pope is
infallible and cannot err, which is absurd, and not only absurd, but
a festering lie, for no man or woman who believes in the teachings of
the Holy Bible can believe in such a doctrine, and whenever a man or
woman does believe in the infallibility of the Pope and believes that
the Pope cannot err, he or she believes that the Pope is superhuman,
and such we know cannot be the case as long as there is life in the
body, as we are all liable to the Adamic sin, as the world at large
was cursed with the Adamic sin in the Garden of Eden.

Now, we want to deal in simple facts and truths that are so simple
that the commonest man of ordinary intelligence can understand.

Now, if the Pope of Rome is infallible, he is immortal, and if every
action of this Pope is pure, then everything that is created by him
must be pure; and if such is the case, I was at one time as pure as
Jesus Christ Himself, as I for thirty years was a Roman Catholic
priest and a creature created by a Roman Catholic Pope. Every man and
woman of very ordinary intelligence knows that neither I nor any
other priest ever was pure; in fact, that man has never lived or died
who could claim infallibility and purity so long as life was left in
his body.

If the doctrines of Catholicism are correct then we have no use for a
God any longer, as we already have a Pope; and should Pope Pius X die
to-day the cardinals to-morrow, or some day in the near future, would
elect another Pope, who would take the place of Jesus Christ Himself,
according to their doctrine; and if such doctrines are true, then the
human family in the future and the unborn millions could be saved as
easily without God as they could with Him, as the Pope would perform
that mission himself.

There are thousands--yea, tens of thousands, who send handkerchiefs
and trinkets each year to Rome to be blessed (?) by the Pope, and
who believe that by having some article which has been blessed (?) by
this presumptuous vagabond will prevent them from being overtaken by
bad luck, ill health or any other misfortune that besets the path of
man.

Now, if the Pope of Rome has the power to bless and sanctify a piece
of cloth, a ring, or any dead and inert object, he undoubtedly is
"_the real thing_," and if such is the case the Bible is a lie, the
gospel a fallacy, and God Almighty becomes a hireling, and we have no
further need of a God.

What can we expect of the followers of Catholicism who believe in
this hellish doctrine, and what can we expect of a nation which is
controlled by those who teach and preach such abominations?

An institution which will teach such damnable ignorance and practice
such superstitious paganism is a plague spot and a curse to any
country, and the man or set of men who claim that the Pope is
infallible offers "_a brazen insult to God_."

[Illustration: "A MODERN JUDAS."
In his wake, misery always follows.]




Chapter XI.

The Characters of the Followers of Catholicism Compared
to the Followers of Protestantism.


I believe that I am not presuming too much when I consider myself
authority on the subject of "Character," as I have had the privilege
of studying the characters of the followers of both Catholic and
Protestant countries, as I have traveled extensively over both Europe
and America and have had occasion to compare the characters of the
followers of the Pope to the characters of the followers of Jesus
Christ, and the comparison is one that will lead any sane man, or
woman, and one who desires to reach a true verdict, to arrive at the
conclusion that it is a physical impossibility for any man or woman
who depends upon mortal wisdom for their inspiration to ever attain
the broadness and purity of character that the man or woman who
lives beneath the shadow of the Cross, and who looks to a living God
for their wisdom.

Character is not a spontaneous fungus which grows without proper
care, as character is an essential that must be cultivated in the
fertile soil of morality, as there is no code of morals which will
stand the crucial test of godliness unless it springs from the
eternal injunctions laid down in the Holy Bible, and without morals
an individual as well as a nation loses its identity among the good
of the land, and when this happens, society in general is the loser,
for whenever we degrade society we degrade ourselves, for there is no
man or woman so strong and powerful in their individuality but what
they can become besmirched and contaminated, to a degree at least, by
the association of those who have been lowered in the scale of
morality by the lack of this most precious jewel of the human family.

We are aware of the fact that Protestantism is not exempt from sin,
as we are well aware that we will find sinners of all degrees in the
Protestant ranks, but we make the assertion, without fear of
contradiction, that the characters in general of the followers of
Protestantism are many times superior to the characters in general of
the followers of Romanism.

We will take the large cities in the United States as an
illustration, and we will find that the saloon-keepers, comparatively
speaking, are from the ranks of Catholicism, and to engage in the
saloon business is no bar to a member of the Catholic Church, for if
this saloon-keeper, no matter if he runs a wine-room in connection
with his saloon and is responsible for the downfall of an army of
precious girls, he is considered a fit subject for heaven by the
Catholic Church provided he liberally donates to the support of this
damnable institution.

Statistics show that ninety-four bar-rooms out of every one hundred
in America are owned and controlled by the followers of Romanism. As
Catholicism establishes and builds character out of money, she makes
money her god, and as long as her followers liberally support the
great army of Catholic dignitaries they are taught that they have
performed the essential part in the establishment of character; thus
you can see what the result of this doctrine would lead to, and you
have demonstrations of this doctrine in this country, and more
especially in other countries where Catholicism is solely responsible
for the condition of the inhabitants.

Everything that is not in the Bible is taken by the Catholic Church
from the heathens and the Jews, and you will find the doctrines and
the practices of Catholicism founded upon heathenish practices and
not upon the broad plane of morals taught by Jesus Christ.

Those who may read this book, and who are not acquainted with the
characters of the rabble of Catholicism, we would be glad to have
them go to any of our large cities and visit some of the districts of
these cities which are inhabited by the followers of Romanism, and
there you will find a class whose countenances alone would condemn
them in any criminal court of the land, as they are men and women who
are made up of a foreign element and from the criminal districts of
European countries, and who are as ignorant as rams and glory in
their ignorance, and who have no idea of patriotism and of loyalty to
country, and only have an idea and desire to worship the images and
symbols of Catholicism, and any man or body of men, or any nation,
who will practice this heathenish worship cannot possess character.

I have traveled extensively over the United States and over European
countries which are controlled by the Pope, and if I could vividly
portray the characters of Catholicism and Protestantism the
comparison would resemble the countenance of the criminal compared to
the innocent and loveable features of a girl baby.

Catholicism poisons the very atmosphere that surrounds her followers,
and she is not satisfied by confining her contaminating influences to
her own followers, but she is everlastingly stretching her filthy
grasp to pull Protestantism down to her degraded level. Catholicism
lowers the standard of public opinion. She makes war on morality and
virtue, which destroys character. Catholicism countenances
wrong-doings. Catholicism tolerates evil and rewards vice, and it is
a well-known fact that "evil communications corrupt good manners,"
and if this is the case, then is it any wonder that the characters of
the followers of Catholicism cannot, nor never will, favorably
compare to the followers of Protestantism?

I am about to make an assertion that will perhaps shock those who are
not familiar with the teachings of Catholicism, but I make it without
fear of contradiction, as I know whereof I speak, as I have traveled
the Papist road for thirty years, and I declare to you with all
sincerity and honesty that Rome would not go far wrong if she counted
in her membership 95 per cent of the men and women who are on their
road to hell, and if this assertion is true, and if I have not
overdrawn my estimation, then, pray, tell me what we can expect in
the future in this country should such characters as I have just
portrayed be permitted to dominate this government.

Every Roman Catholic that is born in the world comes into the world
alienated from God and God's teachings, and is taught from infancy
not to depend upon God Almighty for guidance, but to depend upon
Romanism for their everlasting future, and with such doctrines
everlastingly funnelled into childhood, what can we expect of the
child when it has grown to maturity?

Protestant children are born into the world of parents who look above
the horizon of earthly things for their inspirations, and these
children are taught from infancy that they must look to an all-wise
God for succor and support; but Popery ignores all of this and
teaches by heathenish symbols and by paganic practices. Thus it is an
easy matter for any sane man or woman to understand why character
cannot be found in such a class.

The followers of Catholicism are taught that by the payment of a few
dimes they can have their sins remitted and pardoned; thus you will
see that crime has no terrors for such a class, as they believe that
when they have committed a crime all they have to do is to go to the
priestcraft and have their sins pardoned, in exchange for perhaps a
part of the money which they gained in their criminal transaction.

To rule such men, no religion is required. A Romanist does not look
to God Almighty for his salvation, but to the church, and the church
gives him her unbounded sanction to commit sin, provided that he
returns after he commits the crime and pays a few dollars to have his
sins pardoned.

A Roman Catholic can swear, break the Sabbath, dishonor his parents,
lie, steal, commit adultery, get drunk and commit any other crime
that he chooses, provided that he returns to the confessional box and
pays for having his sins pardoned.

Now, what can you expect of a class of men and women who believe in
this doctrine, and can you expect to find anything but the character
of a criminal or a degenerate? If you do, you are undoubtedly as
ignorant as the followers of Romanism, as it is a physical
impossibility to reasonably expect a man or woman who has been taught
these abominations to ever make men and women of character who will
adorn this or any other nation.

One of the rulers of England, Charles II, died with prostitutes about
him and died a disgrace to England and to himself, but Rome glorified
in him as one of her converts. The more of Rome a man or woman
possesses, and the less of God, the more the Roman Catholic Church
glorifies in him.

Catholicism is a coward--yea, a cringing coward--when not surrounded
by large numbers of her followers, as she has no excuse for her
existence and cannot defend herself by intelligent and godly
arguments, and the only way she can defend herself is by numbers; but
whenever she can resort to physical and brutal strength, she then
makes a fight which crimsons the earth with blood, and Protestantism
pays the penalty, and the reason why those in the country and in
sparsely settled districts do not know more of the hellishness of
Catholicism is because this creed cannot intelligently defend itself
and will not take issue with Protestantism unless she can take issue
by brutal power, but in our cities we have an exhibition of the
diabolical deeds of Catholicism, as the majority of our municipal
elections are controlled by the followers of Catholicism, as Rome's
followers congregate in our large cities, because they love darkness
better than light, and they infest the "tough" sections of our cities
and control our municipal elections by brute force, which is
sanctioned by the priestcraft.

We will take it for granted that the inhabitants of the United States
know more of Mexico than any other nation which is priest-ridden, so
we desire to dwell for a short time upon the characters of the
Mexican peon. You will find Mexico, which lays right across from
Texas on the Rio Grande River, a dividing line between ignorance and
intelligence, crime and godliness, and morality and immorality;
however, that part of Texas which lays near the Mexican border has
become contaminated to a great degree by these Mexican "dupes" who
follow the black flag of Romanism; but the difference in character,
in manhood, in womanhood, in intelligence and everything which
distinguishes right from wrong is so marked and so plain that one
does not have to look twice to see the difference, and there is no
cause nor no reason for this great difference in character, in
manhood and womanhood but the teachings of Rome.

If we expect America to retain her place among the nations of
intelligence and nations of greatness, and nations of goodness and
godliness, we must be character-builders, for without character we
can never expect to reach the zenith of godliness, and without
godliness individual greatness is an impossibility.

Catholicism paints the countenances of her followers with the brush
of ignorance and criminality.

[Illustration: "FOES TO KNOWLEDGE."
"Like a poisonous serpent Catholicism is endeavoring
to inoculate our public schools, with the virus of ignorance."]




Chapter XII.

Why Teachers in Our Public Schools Should Not Be
Selected from the Ranks of Catholicism.


The Catholic world does not hesitate in declaring that our public
schools in this country are "Sinks of Iniquity," "Schools of Vice,"
and "Nurseries of Hell;" then why should the followers of Catholicism
be permitted to teach in our public schools?

This is a question that ought to vitally interest every Protestant
father and mother in this land, and the time is not far distant until
they will become interested, for just as sure as God reigns, the time
is not far in the future when Catholicism will endeavor to close up
the public schools of this land and establish her nurseries of
darkness and superstition in their stead.

If the public schools of this country are not good enough for the
children of Catholic parents, it seems to me that the Protestant
parents of this country should see to it that their children are _too
good_ to be taught by Catholic teachers.

Why is it that the Pope does not promulgate one of his "holy bulls"
and excommunicate those of his believers who take the money so freely
for their services from the public schools of this country?

Oh, no; the Pope and the priestcraft are perfectly willing, so long
as Protestants have the power to maintain those schools, that their
"jesuitical dupes" shall receive the money that is set aside for
these schools. My blood fairly boils with unbounded indignation when
I think of the hard, harsh, and ungodly slurs that Catholicism is
ever ready to throw at our public school system, and then see blind
Protestants help to place a Catholic teacher in one of our schools.

We propose to give facts and figures in this chapter that we hope
will open the eyes of drowsy, unconcerned Protestants, and help them
and their children to apply the brakes to their downward course, and
spike the guns of the Vatican with American manhood.

We hope by the time you are through with this chapter you will be
ready to make inquiries as to who is to teach your children in the
public schools. Let me ask you, Mr. Protestant, if you ever heard of
a Protestant teaching in a Catholic school? Oh, no! But then you will
fold your hands and be content to allow your children to be taught by
a man or woman who secretly despises the public school system. Shame!
Ten thousand times we exclaim you should be ashamed for not asserting
your American and God-given privileges of Protestantism gained for
you through the blood of your forefathers!

A general system of education, such as affords all alike an
opportunity to cultivate and expand the intellect, the poor as well
as the rich, is, beyond all question, one of the greatest blessings
that any nation can enjoy. Such a system had its birth in America
while it was yet comparatively free from the blighting influence of a
religio-political corporation whose whole history is one
uninterrupted and relentless war upon every system of education
which broadens the intellect and causes people to think. In America
was born the public free school system, and from the date of its
birth, in 1695, to the present, it has been the means of giving to
this nation its most renowned statesmen, jurists, patriots,
agriculturists, teachers and divines. It is one of the principal
agents by which the United States of America has been enabled to
advance to the first rank in all things that make a nation great.

But against this most sacred product of American liberty Rome lifts
her unholy hands. Against our schools she hurls her worst anathemas.
But it is our purpose in this chapter to let the Roman Catholic
Church speak for itself. Its language is plain and needs no
interpretation. Listen to Rome's damnable utterances:

    "These public schools are devouring fires and pits of
    destruction. They ought to go back to the devil, from whence
    they came."--_The Freeman's Journal._

    "If your son or daughter is attending a state school you may
    be sure that you are violating your duty as Catholic parents
    and conducting to the everlasting anguish and despair of your
    child. Take it away. Let it rather never know how to write
    its name than to become the bound and chained slave of
    satan."--_The Shepherd of the Valley._

    "The common schools of this country are sinks of moral
    pollution and nurseries of hell."--_Chicago Tablet._

    "The public or common school system is a swindle on the
    people, an outrage on justice, a foul disgrace in matters of
    morals, and should be abolished forthwith."--_New York
    Tablet._

    "The hideous fetish, called the public school, is only an
    ugly idol after all."--_Colorado Catholic._

    "It will be a glorious day for Roman Catholics in this
    country when, under the laws of justice and morality, our
    school system shall be shivered to pieces."--_Catholic
    Telegraph._

    "We hold education to be a function of the church and not of
    the state, and in our case we do not and will not accept the
    state as an educator."--_New York Tablet._

    They love darkness rather than light because their deeds are
    evil. Listen to the snarls of Rome's "dupes:"

    "Unless you suppress the public school system as at present
    conducted, it will prove the damnation of this
    country."--_Father Walker._

    "I frankly confess that the Catholics stand before the
    country as the enemies of the public schools."--_Father
    Phelan._

    "The duty of all loyal, God-fearing Christian men (Roman
    Catholics) then, I repeat it, is to make common cause against
    this common foe."--_Father Gleason._

    "The public schools have produced nothing but a godless
    generation of thieves and blackguards."--_Priest Schauer._

    "I would as soon administer the sacrament to a dog as to
    Catholics who send their children to public
    schools."--_Priest Walker._

    "The public school system must be destroyed. It must be done
    by stopping Bible reading, Psalm singing and eliminating
    objectionable books."--_Priest Phelan._

    "To rescue these little ones out of the grasp of that monster
    (the public school), of that popular idol, is our
    work."--_Bishop John Hennessy._

    "We can have the United States in ten years. And I want to
    give you three points for your consideration: The Negroes,
    the Indians and the public schools."--_Bishop Ireland._

    "Emphatically a social plague."--_Archbishop Perche._

    "A ripe knowledge of the cathechism, minus Massachusetts
    education, is preferable to her education, minus the
    catechism."--_Cardinal Antonelli._

    "The common school system of the United States is the worst
    in the world."--_Cardinal Manning._

    "The catechism alone is essential for the education of the
    people."--_Cardinal Antonelli._

    "We must take part in the elections. Move in solid mass in
    every state pledged to sustain the integrity of the public
    schools."--_Cardinal McCloskey._

    "The Roman Church alone is endowed with power to educate the
    young."--_Cardinal McCloskey._

    "Education outside of the control of the Roman Catholic
    Church is a damnable heresy."--_Pius IX._

    "Public schools open to all children for the education of the
    young should be under the control of the Romish Church, and
    should not be subject to civil power, nor made to conform to
    the opinions of the ages."--_Pope Pius IX._

    "When I see them drag from me the children, the poor little
    children, and give them an infidel education, it breaks my
    heart."--_Pope Pius IX._

    "It is desirable, therefore, venerable brethren, that in
    concert with your colleagues in the Episcopate, your efforts
    and your zeal guard Catholic children from frequenting
    schools in which their religious instruction is neglected and
    open danger incurred of spiritual loss. Therefore we
    vehemently desire, as has already been intimated to you by
    the propaganda, that in approaching Episcopal meetings you
    carefully discuss the measure that may best help to attain
    this end. We wish you also to use earnest efforts that the
    civil magistrates, who know full well that nothing is more
    advantageous to the commonwealth than religion should
    provide, by the enactment of wise laws, that the office of
    teachings, which is carried on at the expense of the public,
    including consequently the contributions of Catholics, should
    contain nothing that stands in the way of their conscience or
    runs foul of their religion."--_Pope Leo XIII._

We could go on and quote diabolical denunciations of our public
schools from hundreds and thousands of Catholic officials, as the
followers of Rome make no "bones" of declaring their animosity
towards the public schools of this country, and they are only waiting
for the time to arrive when they will be able to wipe from the face
of the earth every vestige of our public schools, and place in their
stead their parochial schools, which are nothing more nor less than
"mills of ignorance" and "institutions of superstition."

An institution of learning is something that is not desired by
Catholicism, for whenever you educate you destroy the doctrines of
Romanism, as the hosts of Catholicism cannot stand the searchlight of
wisdom, for whenever you educate the followers of Catholicism they
become disgusted with their dogmas of damnation.

Our public schools are the bulwarks of this government, and all that
we are to-day, and all that we may expect to be in the future, has
come and must come by and through the public schools, which are the
dearest institutions that adorn this country.

There must be no sectarianism, whether political or religious, in our
public schools, but there must be truth and duty there. The
unchanging and undying maxim of moral rectitude should be taught to
every child. It is not enough that a boy or girl should be educated
mentally. The safety of our nation, as well as his own usefulness and
happiness, demand that they should be trained to habits of
truthfulness and develop a fine standard of honor. They should be
inspired to form exalted ideals of manhood and womanhood, charity,
rectitude and godliness, and made strong in the resolution to defend
the truth, which is never found in parochial schools, as the Catholic
doctrine always tends to humiliate her followers.

The time has come when the pupils of our public schools must be
taught the love of country, and Catholicism does not teach this, but
the reverse. The children of this nation must learn to love their
native land. To whom shall we look for the inculcation of those
patriotic sentiments which should inspire the heart of every American
citizen? Not to Catholicism, by any means, but to the three hundred
thousand teachers of our public schools.

Over every school house in hamlet and city, in country and town, in
the North and in the South, in the East and in the West, the American
flag should kiss the morning breeze. Place it where twenty millions
of children will see it every day, and learn to love it as the emblem
of all that is great and good. It will represent to us and to all the
world, in a new and peculiar manner, the great fundamental truth that
the bulwark of our liberties is in the education of our people.

The war of the revolution was fought to establish our nationality.
Incalculable blood and treasure have been spent to establish and keep
our national life intact, and the national policy with relation to
our public schools is part and parcel of that all-absorbing
determination to secure the perpetuity of the state. Men make better
citizens for being educated. The higher the popular intellect is
raised the more intelligent and independent will be its vote. The
stronger the source of government, the stronger the government. If
the "bayonets that think" are the most potent, the "ballots that
think" are the most beneficent.

Every victory which our nation has won has been a victory of the
public schools and a death knock to Catholicism. They have been the
nursery not only of our statesmen, but of our patriots and soldiers.
They are an American institution and are destined to live as long as
the republic survives. There is no other American institution that
American people would sooner fight for and die for than that which
secures an educated and intelligent nationality. Let us maintain
inviolate our public schools to the end that our nation may ever be
the home of liberty, "the land of benedictions."

In the unbounded universe of God's domain there are manifold
diversities, and yet there is an essential unity that binds the world
together; there is a common point where all matter unites.

As there is great freedom and diversity permitted in the unity of
nature, so, in our country of religious and political freedom, we
must grant the greatest latitude possible to the individual
conscience in personal, religious and civil rights consistent with
good government. But that there must be a code of morality common to
all as the basis of our civilized jurisprudence, in which the rights
of all center or unite and are equally protected, every reasonable
mind must admit. But where do we get our ideas of what is morally
right, and what is morally wrong, as the basis of our common law and
jurisprudence? What book or books contain the best code of morals? We
answer, the Bible. For the excellency of the morality of the Bible
has been admitted by the most distinguished men who have opposed its
supernatural revelation, among whom are Gibbon, Byron, Carlyle, Lord
Bollingbroke, Napoleon Bonaparte, Goethe and Renan. Thomas Jefferson,
speaking of Christ as a teacher, said: "He set forth the sublime
ideas of the Supreme Being, aphorisms and precepts of the purest
morality."

Catholicism says: "No Bible shall be taught in the public schools,"
but demands that she be allowed to proclaim her dogmas.

Benjamin Franklin, five weeks before his death, said of Christ: "I
think His system of morals, and His religion, as He left them, are
the best the world ever saw or is likely to see." The services of the
Bible in behalf of human rights and freedom, and in reforming and
purifying jurisprudence and politics, have been recognized by many of
the most distinguished historians, jurists and statesmen.

As the makers of our laws and the founders of our government have
accepted the moral code of the Bible as the basis of our
jurisprudence, and have forbidden the union of church and state, and
have left every citizen free to "worship God according to the
dictates of his own conscience," so long as he does not interfere
with the rights of others or violate the moral code common to all
citizens, for the law cannot allow a person to murder or steal, or
burn human sacrifices, or be a polygamist, or commit any other public
crime, even if the dictates of his conscience should lead him into
such a form of religion, because the moral code of the Bible is the
basis of our jurisprudence, and it forbids such things.

Therefore, we demand that the "book of books" be kept where the
rising generation shall come under its moral teaching without party
or sectarian comment, so that all may understand the fundamental
principles upon which the science of our common law rests, and thus
one of the objects of the order is "to maintain the public school
system of the United States and to prevent sectarian interference
therewith, and upholding the reading of the Holy Bible therein."

The argument that the reading of the Bible in the public school
should be abolished because it is objectionable to the conscience of
some comes only from the Church of Rome, and applies with equal force
against the moral code of jurisprudence, because it is objectionable
to the conscience of the anarchist, and the conscience of the
anarchist is just as sacred and entitled to as much respect, under
the law, in this free country of ours as the conscience of any one
else.

We have just as much right to take the moral code out of our common
jurisprudence as to take the Bible out of our public schools, because
the moral code of the Bible is the moral code of our common law.

We desire the Bible to be kept in the school as the standard of moral
truth, as the dictionary is kept there as the standard of words and
their definitions. As the unabridged dictionary contains all the
words of the English language, so the Bible contains all the truths
of Christianity. Every book has a part of the words of the
dictionary, so every Christian creed has a part of the truths of the
Bible. As there never was a book written that contained all of the
words of the dictionary, so there never was a creed written that
contained all the truths of the Bible. Therefore, as the dictionary
and not the books is the standard for words and their meaning, so the
Bible, and not the creeds, is the standard of moral truth. A man can
take the words in the dictionary and write a bad book, but that is
not the fault of the dictionary, but of the man. A person may take
passages of Scripture and misapplied truths and write a bad creed,
but that is not the fault of the Bible, but of the creed-maker. But
every man who takes the Bible as a whole has a complete standard of
moral truths.

It is claimed that the Bible should not be read in the school because
there are passages that are not proper to be read before children, or
a promiscuous audience, but this is only claimed by Catholicism. Yes,
and there are words in the dictionary that it would be just as
improper to use and define before children or a promiscuous audience
as any passage in the Bible. Therefore, it would be just as
reasonable to exclude the dictionary as the Bible from the school
room on this hypocritical argument in favor of false modesty.

The man's conscience that will object to the reading of the Bible in
the public school will ultimately object to the moral code of our
jurisprudence, and such a conscience is dangerous to our form of
government, inimical to the best interests of society and good
government, as has been clearly demonstrated in the past. The Mormons
claimed the right under our constitution to live in polygamy, as that
was their religion and the way they served God according to the
"dictates of their own conscience." But the supreme court decided
they could not worship God according to the dictates of their
conscience if their worship was a violation of the moral code common
to all. Thus all must submit to the moral code irrespective of their
individual conscience. So the Bible should be read in the public
schools, irrespective of the conscience of any, until the majority of
the government of the people, for the people and by the people shall
say: "Away with your Bible, away with your Sabbath, away with your
Christian jurisprudence, and give us infidel, revolutionary France,
or lawless anarchy, or the inquisition of the dark ages!"

Our public school is the mill that is to grind out this standard of
morality, knowledge and patriotism common to all. Hence we must have
the Bible in it as the standard of morality, and primary principles
of literature, science and art, the standard of knowledge, and the
American flag and its essential principles as the standard of
patriotism. Our American school system is like a great paper mill,
into which are cast rags of all kinds and colors, but which lose
their special identity and come out white paper, having a common
identity. So we want the children of the state, of whatever
nationality, color or religion, to pass through this great moral,
intellectual and patriotic mill, or transforming process, and thus
lose their foreign peculiarities and come out not as Germans, Irish,
English, Huns or Poles, but as Americans, having the common identity
of morality, knowledge and patriotism that is essential to true
American citizenship and good government stamped upon their minds,
and when they pass through this mill of purification they then begin
to lose confidence in the heathenish doctrines of Catholicism.

In a government where the people are the rulers, intelligence and
education are necessary to maintain the nation's stability. Under
this belief, the public school system of the United States was
founded.

Following are expressions of prominent Americans on the general
subject of popular education:

President Hays: "I am firmly convinced that the subject of popular
education deserves the earnest attention of the people of the whole
country, with a view to wise and comprehensive action by the
government of the United States. The means at the command of the
local and state authorities are in many cases wholly inadequate to
deal with the question. The magnitude of the evil to be eradicated is
not, I apprehend, generally and fully understood."

President Garfield: "Next in importance to freedom and justice is
popular education, without which neither freedom nor justice can be
permanently maintained. Its interests are intrusted to the state and
to the voluntary action of the people. Whatever help the nation can
justly afford should be generously given to aid the states in
supporting common schools, but it would be unjust to our people and
dangerous to our institutions to apply any portion of the revenue of
the nation of the states to the support of sectarian schools. The
separation of the church and the state in everything relating to
taxation should be absolute."

Dr. Strong: "Free schools are one of the cornerstones of our
government."

Washington's Farewell Address: "Promote them as an object of primary
importance, institutions for the general diffusion of knowledge. In
proportion as the structure of a government gives force to public
opinion, it is essential that public opinions should be enlightened."

Calhoun: "In proportion as a people are ignorant, stupid, debased,
corrupt, exposed to violence within and danger without, the power
necessary for a government to possess in order to preserve society
against anarchy and destruction becomes greater and greater, and
individual liberty, less and less, until the lowest condition is
reached, when absolute and despotic power becomes necessary on the
part of the government and individual liberty extinct."

The church of Rome wants to rule by tyranny so that she can force her
"dupes" to do her bidding.

No subject could be of more interest to American citizens to-day than
that of foreign immigration to America. Every section of the country
has felt, to some degree, the demoralizing effect of the free
admission of aliens, unsuited morally and mentally for participating
in a government of the people.

The consensus of opinion among all classes of good citizens is that
some restrictive measures should be adopted, and this can be effected
only by popular agitation and demand.

Read what some prominent men of the country have said on the subject:

Hon. Wm. E. Chandler: "We should prepare ourselves with wisdom and
vigor to enforce completely such laws of exclusion as we have
adopted. We should throw our strongest force into a stricter
administration of those laws so that no man and no family shall pass
through the Ellis Island doors, or into any seaport, or across the
Canadian or Mexican borders, who is a pauper or likely to become
such. One method of stricter administration should be the requirement
that all immigrants before leaving their own countries shall obtain
consular certificates abroad, showing their right to enter the United
States."

Hon. Henry Cabot Lodge: "You ask me for a few words on the subject of
immigration. My opinion has been stated at length, both in speeches
in Congress and in review articles, but I am very glad to restate it
in the briefest possible form. I think that immigration to this
country is increasing too fast on one hand and deteriorating on the
other. We are ready to welcome every honest immigrant who comes to
make a home and become an American citizen, but I believe that the
present immigration ought to be sifted and restricted much more than
it is, both as a protection to the quality of our citizenship and to
the rates of wages to our workingmen."

Hon. Robert P. Porter, Superintendent of Census: "The unrestricted
admission of the diseased, half-fed swarms of helpless humanity from
the purlieus of Southern European cities is the dangerous phase of
immigration. If continued, it will prove a curse and blight to
American citizenship and American institutions. There was a time in
our history when the better class of foreign immigrants and our own
population was able to swallow up the less desirable class, but it
takes no great discernment now to see the congested spots here and
there on our body politic. In this lies the danger. Such a change in
the character of immigration as herein shown cannot have taken place
without materially affecting the entire immigration problem, and the
sooner our statesmen get to the bottom of the present condition of
affairs, the better for the republic."

Rev. Josiah Strong, D.D.: "It is immigration which has fed fat the
liquor power, and there is a liquor vote. Immigration furnishes most
of the victims of Mormonism, and there is a Mormon vote. Immigration
is the strength of the Catholic Church, and there is a Catholic vote.
Immigration is the mother and nurse of American anarchy, and there is
to be an anarchist vote. Immigration tends strongly to the cities and
gives to them their political complexion, and there is no more
serious menace to our civilization than our rabble-ruled cities."

Samuel Gompers, President American Federation of Labor: "It almost
grieves me even to recommend the slightest restriction to the full
and free immigration of anyone who desires to escape from the
iniquitous conditions from which he may suffer, but the progress of
our civilization is hanging in the balance, and intelligent and brave
men should not be afraid to express themselves to secure us against
results which may be appalling. Unrestricted immigration injures the
people of our country and does no good to the people of other
countries. It injures all."

A.S. Draper: "I would hang the flag in every school room, and I would
spend an occasional hour in singing our best patriotic songs, in
declaiming the masterpieces of our national oratory, and rehearsing
the proud story of our national life."

Francis Marion: "Men will always fight for their government according
to their sense of its value. To value it right, they must understand
it. This they cannot do without education."

Winship: "The public school is the one force, is the only force, that
can unify all classes and conditions of society. Here we have the
children of the nation in their entirety, and we can, if we will,
teach them in the schools so much of the grandeur of our possession,
of the heroic in our history, of the brilliant in our prosperity, of
the fascinating in our traditions, that the fathers of the future
will be willing to vote for and die, if necessary, for the American
idea; that the mothers of the future will teach their sons to develop
our resources by industry, to honor the active duties of private and
public system, because it lies at the foundation of our national
existence."

Where does the vicious element which is found in this country come
from, and to what church does it belong? Ah, 98 per cent of those
whom we call anarchists can trace their origin from foreign
countries, and they are always identified with the Roman Catholic
Church.

Wherever you find a national disturbance, and wherever you find the
spirit of anarchy in this country, you will find a spot where Roman
Catholicism exists, as her teachings are anarchistic, as she teaches
her followers a doctrine that is as sure to lead to anarchy as water
is to flow down hill.

Catholicism teaches her children that our public schools are "plague
spots" and "nurseries of hell," and impresses upon their minds that
education, in a broad sense, is not essential, and also teaches them
that they must look to the priestcraft for their education, and at
the same time the priestcraft is instructed by the Pope of Rome that
a broad-gauge education is not permissible to be given to the
followers of Catholicism, and the Pope of Rome teaches her bishopric
and her priestcraft that they must fight the public school system,
and in its stead erect the parochial schools of Rome, which are
nothing more nor less than schools of dogmas, and these dogmas are
incubators of anarchy, for without education and without love of
country, anarchy is as certain to follow as the day is certain to
follow night, but still Protestantism stands idly by and allows
Catholicism to villify her institutions, and at the same time permits
Catholicism to place her followers in a position to draw salaries
from the institutions which they despise and hate with the venom of
hell.

It is my object and my aim to arouse Protestantism to a sense of
their duty, and if I can do this I will feel that I have accomplished
a task that will eventually call forth the plaudits of the American
people, for as sure as God reigns, just that sure our public schools
will be crushed out of existence by Catholicism unless Protestant
America raises her voice and her strong arm in defense of our public
school system, and against the encroachment of the damnable and
diabolical doctrines of Catholicism.

Our greatest American statesmen, our greatest American patriots, our
greatest American thinkers, our wisest and most loyal citizens, and
our grandest old mothers are Protestants, and born of Protestant
stock; then why should we hesitate to denounce this anarchistic demon
of Rome, when we know what she thinks of our American institutions,
and when we are absolutely certain that if it was within her power
she would crash into dust everything that is near and dear to
Protestantism?

Arouse, ye Protestant hosts, and buckle on the armor of your
forefathers and march out in a solid body of Protestant warriors and
fight to the death the encroachment of Romish rule and force her back
into the trenches of her degradation, and compel her to remain within
the border of the countries which she has desolated by her hellish
dogmas, and purge the shores of the "home of the brave and the land
of the free" of this scarlet-robed hag, who would paralyze our
American institutions which are near and dear to every pure American,
both man and woman, who dwells beneath the folds of the American
flag.

[Illustration: "HEATHENISH PRACTICES."
"A dupe kissing the supposed bone of "Saint Ann"
to cure Rheumatism."]




Chapter XIII.

The Influence of the Priesthood of
America Upon the Morals of This Country.


An institution which is allowed to flourish in this country, should
be an institution whose teachers are in harmony with the fundamental
principles of godliness, morality and liberty, and unless they are,
the teachers at once become traitors.

Now, is not this common sense logic and every-day philosophy?

We want to investigate and see if this logic and philosophy is not
reasonable and founded upon common sense, and if we find that it is,
then any man or woman of intelligence must acknowledge that if the
teachings and the fundamental principles of a free country are
correct, then the doctrines of Catholicism are altogether wrong, and
the sooner the American people can arrive at this conclusion, the
better it will be for us, for if the teachings of our Protestant
forefathers are right, and the teachings of Rome are wrong, the
quicker we can eradicate and stamp out these popish doctrines, the
better it will be for our posterity.

If this country is a home for those who love liberty, then the
influence of the priesthood of America is detrimental to the
fundamental principles of America, as Catholicism does not teach
patriotism and loyalty of country, as the burden of her teachings is,
"Loyalty to the Pope," and the Pope of Rome, who is at the head of
the Catholic Church; is a despot pure and simple--yea, he is worse
than a despot, as he rules his followers by a superstitious belief,
which teaches that not only the body of Rome's followers is subject
to the Pope's every whim, but the soul as well is directly under the
control of this despotic sovereign.

A Roman Catholic form of government is more despotic than a monarchy
which is ruled by an absolute despot, as these monarchs who have
absolute sway in the affairs of the state only are satisfied with
this absolutism, but not so with Catholicism, as she haunts her
followers to the grave and then demands of their surviving relatives
that homage be paid her in order to keep their dead out of the
regions of despair.

It matters not how strong we are in our endeavors to do right, the
commission of wrong under our nose will corrupt to a certain extent
the morals of the young, and I say without fear of contradiction that
the priestcraft of this and every other country are, as a whole, a
set of men whose morality is below par; however, I sincerely believe
that there are some few who are chaste, but I am sorry to say that
this class is greatly in the minority; and why should it be
otherwise, as the priesthood is composed of men who are mortal, and
the vow of celibacy which they must take before they enter the
priesthood is an unnatural and an unreasonable vow, and one which is
not kept sacred by one out of every fifty; thus you will see at once
that the priestcraft is a cancer upon the body of morality, for
whenever the young and rising generation learns that those who are
supposed to teach them in chastity and morality, are men who will
commit the very sins which they have been taught are heinous. Then,
what can you expect of future generations, and what must eventually
be the morals of a country which is controlled by the priestcraft?

We do not have to confine ourselves to the recital of the immorality
of the priestcraft of foreign countries, but we could mention scores
of cases that have happened in this country and which will continue
to happen as long as the Romish Church demands the vows of celibacy
by the priestcraft.

We will give you an instance of the practices of Romanism in this
country which happened no later than November of this year (1903),
and if I had the space, I could fill this volume full of such actions
by the priestcraft.

Priest Geo. D. Sander, of St. Leonard's Catholic Church, Hamburg
avenue and Jefferson street, Brooklyn, New York, was known in that
city as a devout Catholic priest, and he was also known in Far Hills,
New Jersey, as a race horse man, by the name of "Geo. West," who was
interested in a stock farm, on which lived a woman known as "Mrs.
Geo. West," but her right name is Mrs. Mamie Kipp, who formerly
belonged to Priest Sander's church, but disappeared from Brooklyn
very mysteriously, and whose whereabouts had been unknown to her
family and her friends, until it was learned that she was living on
this stock farm at Far Hills, N.J., and bore the fictitious name by
which this priest was known.

The double life of Priest Sander began in 1901. Then Jos. C. Peck,
racer and raiser of trotting horses, met this priest in Albany, who
wore the ordinary garb of a citizen. They met at the race track,
which was not a very good recommendation to say the least of it, for
the Rev. Father Sander. Peck found that this priest was a keen judge
of horses and their love for horses established a bond of friendship
between them.

In Baltimore, a short time afterwards, these two men again met at the
race track. Peck told Priest Sander that he had just sold a stock
farm at Millington, N.J., and contemplated buying another. Sander
told Peck that he was the owner of a fine mare named "Ethel Burns,"
and that he would place her on Peck's farm if he purchased it. He
told Peck that his mare had a track record of 2:20-1/4 and a trial
record of 2:16.

Peck informed this priest that he was a bachelor. Priest Sander
proposed that they should keep house jointly and said that he would
provide a housekeeper and share the expense of the establishment. He
was the guardian, he said, of a Mrs. Mamie Kipp, who had had some
trouble with her husband and who wanted to get away from Brooklyn. He
informed Peck that this lady had a young son, and that he would bring
both the mother and son to the farm at Far Hills, N.J.

It was obvious that the priest could not indulge in his love for fast
horses, and make regular visits to the stock farm in his priestly
robes, as he knew it would cause considerable comment; so this priest
suggested to Peck that Mrs. Kipp be called "Mrs. Geo. West," and that
it be given out to the neighbors that she was the wife of a drummer
for a large mercantile house in New York, and further stated that he
could visit this woman as "George West," and not create any comment.

The trainmen became acquainted with this priest and considered him a
"good fellow," as he was always smoking and played the part of a
"drummer" in an elegant manner, and these trainmen came to know "Geo.
West" as Peck's partner in the race horse business.

The merchants about Far Hills knew this priest as the husband of
"Mrs. West," and when this priest would put in his appearance at Far
Hills, the neighbors, of course, thought it was nothing more than
natural that "Mrs. West's" husband should come to see her whenever he
could get an opportunity to get off of the road.

The accounts for the supplies of the household were billed sometimes
to "Geo. West" and sometimes to Jos. C. Peck, thus you will see that
Priest Sander acknowledged by these bills that he was "Geo. West."

This story got to be noised about, and the Protestant element of
Brooklyn as well as Priest Sander's flock became very much interested
in the tale, and sent a reporter out to interview Jos. C. Peck, and
the first question this reporter asked him was, "Is that the picture
of your sister?" pointing to a portrait of the woman hanging on the
wall. "No," he replied. "That is Mrs. West." The reporter asked if it
was not the picture of Mrs. Mamie Kipp. Peck hesitated, his lips
trembling, and he began to look very nervous, then he gave way
completely and said: "Yes, it is Mrs. Mamie Kipp." "How does she come
here under the name of 'Mrs. West,' and who is 'Mr. West?'" was then
asked, which Peck refused to answer.

With these facts in hand, the reporter returned to Brooklyn and
sought Priest Sander in his parlor, in his parish residence, and the
first question he asked him was this: "You own a trotting horse out
at Far Hills, N.J., don't you?" The answer was, "Yes." "Don't you own
a string of trotting horses?" The answer was, "Certainly not! Who
told you that?" The reporter replied, "Oh, no; you don't own a string
of horses as Priest Sander, but as 'Geo. West,' don't you?" Priest
Sander tried to look surprised, and he folded a slip of paper he
held in his hand and got very nervous and replied, "Now, that is a
pretty story, isn't it; who told you all this?"

The reporter laid before him all the facts he had gathered at Far
Hills, and demanded that he affirm or deny the story. Then this
priest said, "I may as well confess; it will be the ruin of me; it
will take the bread out of my mouth, but you have got it absolutely
straight." The reporter asked Priest Sander if he positively didn't
know that this woman who sailed under the name of "Mrs. Geo. West"
wasn't Mrs. Mamie Kipp.

This priest, not being content with the dastardly part that he had
played in his immoral conduct with Mrs. Kipp, absolutely denied that
it was Mrs. Mamie Kipp, and further declared that he knew nothing
about her, except that she was the "housekeeper" at Peck's farm, and
why she was called "Mrs. West" he did not know; thus you will see
that while he was guilty of immorality with Mrs. Mamie Kipp, he also
was a notorious liar; but bear in mind that this same Priest Sander
was still at this time presiding over a Catholic church in Brooklyn.

The reporter was determined to lead him out as far as possible so he
repeated again, "Are you absolutely positive that 'Mrs. West' at
Peck's farm is not Mrs. Mamie Kipp?"

This priest replied that he was "positive," and stated that this
woman at Peck's farm was Peck's housekeeper, and further stated that
he did not know anything about her at all, when he knew as well as he
knew that he was living that he had been the cause of her forsaking
her husband in Brooklyn, and also had been instrumental in her going
to Far Hills, N.J., where he could live his life of shame without
molestation.

After this vagabond had made this denial, Mr. Peck was again seen at
Far Hills, N.J., and emphatically stated that Priest Sander had told
him that this woman was Mrs. Mamie Kipp, and that he knew that this
priest was living in adultery with her.

What is the consequence? Did the Roman Catholic Church excommunicate
this bundle of perfidy for immorality? Ah, no! As the "moguls" and
"high up" officials of Catholicism are cognizant of the fact that the
priestcraft are, as a whole, the most immoral set of men that ever
infested the face of the earth. Now, what can we expect of the morals
of a country which has for its leaders and teachers men of this
caliber? We might as well expect our daughters to become women of
virtue and godliness, who were raised in houses of ill fame, as to
expect young men and women to become men and women of morality and
chastity, who have for their teachers such men as Priest Sander of
Brooklyn, New York.

There is no denying the fact that Catholicism has already a strong
hold upon the affairs of this country, as we find the hydra-headed
demon in every branch of our government, and since such is the case,
it is folly to deny the fact that if Catholicism is what we have
shown it to be, that her influence is demoralizing, and the influence
of the priesthood of America upon the morals of this country is bound
to be detrimental, and who will deny the truthfulness of my
assertions, as I have not misstated a single paragraph in this book;
and if this is true, what shall we expect of the present generation
and the generations that are yet unborn, if we permit Catholicism to
make as great headway in the future as she has in the past?

We call to mind another case which belongs to the history of to-day,
and in this chapter we desire to refer to the present sins of the
priestcraft, as history teems with the abominations of the
priestcraft immorality, but in this chapter we want to thoroughly
convince the reader that the same immorality that has existed in the
ranks of Catholicism in bygone centuries, is to-day as degrading and
as rampant as it ever was, and if we can do this, we feel satisfied
that we will impress the Protestant world with the importance of
overthrowing the power of the Pope, and erecting in its stead the
true spirit of Protestantism, whose influence will not blight the
characters of our boys and girls, but which will make of them an army
of giants, ever ready to battle for the chastity of our American
homes.

One of the most fashionable Roman Catholic churches in New York City
is "St. Cecilia's," situated on North Henry and Herbert streets.

Only a few years ago the organist of this church went to the room of
the priest in charge, in company with a little boy. The priest
informed this boy to stay down stairs, and invited the organist to
his parlor, near which were his living rooms. This priest locked the
door behind him, and without a moment's warning, leaped upon her like
a beast and attempted to bear her down upon the sofa and commit an
assault, but her cries frightened him away.

With flushed face she rushed from this priest's room and passed the
servant, out into the street, with the priest begging her to say
nothing about what had happened. We want to know if this attempted
crime injured the priest in the estimation of Catholicism? Not by any
means, as he continued to serve the church in the capacity of priest,
after both this girl's father and mother had publicly denounced him
as a seducer of virtue.

The entire congregation learned of this priest's attempted assault
upon virtue, but this degrading notoriety did not injure him in the
least, as his services are just as crowded as they were before. This
outrage was carried before the bishop of the diocese in which this
church was situated, but nothing was done.

The priest which we refer to was a drunkard, and he drank as deeply
after this attempted assault as before, and in a short time he
assaulted a 12-year-old girl, and not long after that he assaulted
his servant, who was a girl 18 years of age, and continued his raid
upon her virtue until one day, while in a drunken spree, he struck
her and injured her, and she made public the actions of this human
viper, who had been parading in the robes of a priest.

Did this exposure disgrace him in the eyes of the Catholic officials
who were above him? Not at all, as he continued to serve this New
York church without molestation, and it was a notorious fact, and
known by the members of his church what he was accused of, but still
hundreds of boys and girls, young men and young women, and old men
and old women, bowed at the feet of this depraved devil and
confessed their sins.

If we cared, we could write from now until our old arm would become
palsied with age, and each chapter would be a new story of the
perfidy and hellishness of the priestcraft, as every age reeks with
the stench of their immorality, and the countries which are
completely under the power of the Pope of Rome are only the shadows
of what this country will become if this demon of darkness is not
halted, for the influence of the priesthood in America upon the
morals of this country will spread its blight over the face of our
fair land until our nation's morals will be a nauseating sight to
behold.

Reader, remember what I tell you to-day: that unless the spirit of
Protestantism takes a firm stand in this land against Catholicism, we
will find our Protestant hopes and ambitions within the near future
paralyzed by the infusion of Rome's immorality.

[Illustration: "A CATHOLIC TOOL."
"Begging in the name of the Lord, but in reality to support the
Priestcraft in their idleness."]




Chapter XIV.

The Chastity of the Home Invaded by the Lustfulness of the
Priest-Craft.


Catholicism begins to teach her children from their infancy that no
act of their officials is impure; thus their followers grow up to
believe that any advancement made by these officials are made in
behalf of the salvation of their souls, consequently it is an easy
matter for the Priestcraft to make the female members of their
congregation believe that whatever they may do or say is done and
said through a righteous motive, and no stigma of disgrace can
possibly attach itself to the act.

With this erroneous doctrine funneled into the minds of the female
members of the Catholic Church, is it any wonder that the Priestcraft
exerts a wonderful power over these members? And is it any wonder
that thousands of trusting and confiding wives and daughters are
forced to the level of immorality by this belief?

As an introduction to this chapter, and in order to make the conduct
of the priestcraft in general thoroughly understood, so that the
reader may know what character of men I refer to, I will give a part
of a story told by a nun who had been in a convent for a number of
years.

I repeat what this nun related in order that the reader may not be
compelled to take my statements alone. Her story follows:

"It was customary with the sisters in our convent to give the bishop
and priests of my diocese a grand dinner once every year. Of course,
this entailed a great deal of extra work upon our part; however, we
were glad to undergo these hardships, as I thought at that time that
it was a part of my religion. The finest delicacies of the season and
the choicest wines graced the table. The dinner was always served in
the dining-room of the priest of the house. The bishop would usually
arrive along in the afternoon about two or three o'clock. We would
spread scarlet felt upon the floor of the cloister in honor of the
occasion, and the drawing room would be banked with the rarest
flowers; the dining table would groan beneath its rich silver and
cut-glass."

Now, bear in mind that what I am going to tell you is what happened
when there were a number of priests together with their bishop in
their midst, and it is a well known fact that "numbers" is often a
check to the actions and ungodly inclinations of many, but if what
this nun related is true, with an assemblage of a score or more of
priests, with their bishop in their midst, then what could be
expected of one of these priests alone in the presence of a female
whom he preferred? I make this statement so that the reader can draw
an intelligent conclusion. I will now proceed with the nun's story:

"This annual dinner would be made an occasion for great rejoicing and
recreation on the part of the holy ecclesiastics. Everything was all
right as long as the meal was in progress, but as soon as the sisters
who had waited on them had withdrawn, after placing an abundance of
wine, whiskey and cigars on the table, then all restraint would be
set aside and these holy fathers (?) would then exchange confidences
as to the latest items of news they had gathered in the confessional
from Catholic servants employed in Protestant families, and, without
mentioning any names, would repeat, amid shouts of drunken laughter,
the sins that some of their female penitents had confessed.

"We nuns would often put our ears to the key-hole and listen to the
stories that were being told by the priests, and upon my word, I
never in all my life heard as many dirty, immoral, filthy stories
told as these vagabond priests would repeat, and it always seemed as
though the bishop heartily enjoyed them.

"These carousals would proceed for hours. The whiskey bowl would be
placed in the center of the table, then these drunken priests would
sing songs which were vileness personified."

I feel that it is not necessary for me to go further to convince any
one of my readers that the lustfulness of the priestcraft is a menace
to the chastity of womankind, for if this nun has told the truth,
and which I know from past experiences is true, and which I also know
is a recital that could be intensified ten thousand times over, if
the whole truth could be told, but which cannot be told in this
volume, as I have too much respect for my readers to recite what I
have seen with my own eyes and what I have had repeated to me by
broken-hearted "sisters" who have come to me with tears in their eyes
and with sighs in their throats to tell me of their miseries.

"I know of a nun who spent many years in a convent, who declared that
on many occasions the priests would come to the convent and demand
that a number of the nuns even do worse than expose their entire
person; however, I cannot conceive of a demand that would be more
degrading than this of forcing those benighted souls to prostitute
their persons for the gratification of those who pretend to be the
followers of a crucified Christ."

In relating her experience, I understand that a nun who had been
confined in a convent for years made the following declaration:
"That the superior of the seminary would often come and inform us
nuns that an order had been received from the Pope to request those
nuns who possessed the greatest devotion and faith to perform some
particular deeds, which he would name in our presence, but which no
moral or decent person could ever endure to speak of, and I cannot
repeat what these demands often were, as I would have to resort to
language so filthy that it would blush the cheek of one who was
hardened in sin."

Now, if those who sail under the garb of righteousness would go so
far that the inmates of the convents, who are there believing they
are doing the work of God, would rebel against the priests'
immorality, then what can we expect of the priestcraft when they are
in the presence of your wife, daughter or sister, whom they may
prefer, and who has been taught to believe that every act of the
priestcraft is sanctified by God Almighty?

We want to bring the history of Catholicism down as near to the
present time as possible, so the reader may understand the
confidence the "dupes" of Catholicism have in the priestcraft, for,
as stated in a previous chapter of this book, it is a well-known fact
that the feminine world in general have more confidence in humanity
than the male population, but to demonstrate to the reader what
implicit confidence the male members of Catholicism have in the
priestcraft, we call attention to Ed Butler, of the State of
Missouri, who resides in St. Louis.

Ed Butler is a full-fledged Catholic and believes in Catholicism
twenty-four hours each day. By the way, it may be necessary for us to
refresh the readers' mind of the fact that Ed Butler of St. Louis,
Mo., is considered one of the most high-handed "boodlers" in America,
and who has had a number of his "dupes" placed in the state
penitentiary and kept himself out of the same institution by a
"technicality." But to go back to the point that we wanted to make,
we will just say that a Catholic priest in the City of St. Louis by
the name of Coffey had a falling out with Butler over some thing or
another, and in order to get even with him he took sides against
Butler and said many harsh but true things about him. One day a
reporter of one of the St. Louis newspapers met Butler and called his
attention to what Priest Coffey had said about him, and the only
answer that Butler gave this reporter was: "Father Coffey is a
Catholic priest and I have nothing to say, and if he should spit in
my face I would not resent the action, as I was born and raised a
Catholic, and do not believe that a Catholic priest can commit a
sin."

Now, if a man of Ed Butler's intellect can be brought up in this land
of intelligence to believe such abominations in regard to a Catholic
priest, is it not reasonable to suppose that the female members of
the Catholic Church would have a severe task in defending their
virtue should a priest desire to destroy it, by telling them "that no
act of his could defile them, as it was impossible for him to sin?"

Now, reader, you may not know just what kind of treatment from the
Catholic Church I will receive for writing this book, but as soon as it
is placed upon the market the Catholic Church will "excommunicate" me;
however, it may be possible that the reader does not understand what a
horrible curse this excommunication is, but in order that you may
thoroughly understand what I mean I will repeat, word for word, what
some Catholic official will declare against me for writing this book,
which will further go to show the reader the vileness of this damnable
creed, and which will also go to convince the reader what fear the
followers of Catholicism have of the priestcraft, which will more fully
convince you that timid, unsuspecting woman, who has been brought up to
believe in the paganism of Catholicism, can be easily led to yield to
the lustful desires of the priestcraft, for fear that by refusing his
request that he would pronounce this terrible curse upon her, which she
has been taught would forever damn her eternal soul.

The curse of excommunication which I am certain to receive at the
hands of Catholicism for writing this book follows:

    "By the authority of God Almighty, the Father, Son and Holy
    Ghost, and the undefiled Virgin Mary, mother and patroness of
    our Savior, and all of the Celestial Virtues, Angels,
    Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers, Cherubim and
    Seraphim, and of all the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and of
    all the Apostles and Evangelists, of the Holy Innocents, who
    in the sight of the Holy Lamb are found worthy to sing the
    new songs of the Holy Martyrs and Holy Confessors, and of all
    the Holy Virgins, and of all the Saints, together with the
    Holy Elect of God, may he, Bernard Fresenborg, be damned!

    "We excommunicate and anathematize him from the threshold of
    the Holy Church of God Almighty. We sequester him, that he
    may be tormented, disposed, and be delivered over with Dathan
    and Abiram, and with those who say unto the Lord, 'Depart
    from us, we desire none of thy ways;' as a fire is quenched
    with water, so let the light of him be put out for ever more,
    unless it shall repent him and make satisfaction!

    "May the Father, who creates man, curse him!

    "May the Son, who suffered for us, curse him!

    "May the Holy Ghost, who is poured out in baptism, curse him!

    "May the Holy Cross, which Christ for our salvation,
    triumphing over his enemies, ascended, curse him!

    "May the Holy Mary, ever Virgin and the Mother of God, curse
    him!

    "May St. Michael, the Advocate of the Holy Souls, curse him!

    "May all the Angels, Principalities and Powers, and all
    Heavenly Armies curse him!

    "May the glorious band of the Patriarchs and Prophets curse
    him!

    "May St. John the Precursor, and St. John the Baptist, and
    St. Peter, and St. Paul, and St. Andrew, and all other of
    Christ's Apostles together, curse him!

    "And may the rest of the Disciples and Evangelists, who by
    their preaching converted the universe, and the holy and
    wonderful company of Martyrs and Confessors, who by their
    works are found pleasing to God Almighty; may the holy choir
    of the Holy Virgins, who, for the honor of Christ, have
    despised the things of the world, damn him!

    "May all the Saints from the beginning of the world to
    everlasting ages who are found to be beloved of God, damn
    him!

    "May he be damned wherever he be, whether in the house or in
    the alley, in the woods or in the water, or in the church!

    "May he be cursed in living and dying!

    "May he be cursed in eating and drinking, in being hungry, in
    being thirsty, in fasting and sleeping, in slumbering, and in
    sitting, in living, in working, in resting, and ... and in
    blood-letting!

    "May he be cursed in all the faculties of his body!

    "May he be cursed inwardly and outwardly!

    "May he be cursed in his hair; cursed be he in his brains and
    his vertex, in his temples, in his eyebrows, in his cheeks,
    in his jaw bones, in his nostrils, in his teeth and grinders,
    in his lips, in his shoulders, in his arms, in his fingers!

    "May he be damned in his mouth, in his breast, in his heart,
    and appurtenances, down to the very stomach!

    "May he be cursed in his ... and his ... in his thighs, in
    his ... and his ... and in his knees, and his legs, and his
    feet, and toe-nails!

    "May he be cursed in all his joints and articulations of the
    members; from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet
    may there be no soundness!

    "May the Son of the living God, with all the glory of His
    majesty, curse him!

    "And may Heaven, with all the powers that move therein, rise
    up against him, and curse and damn him, unless he repent and
    make satisfaction! Amen! So be it! Be it so! Amen! Amen!
    Amen!"

I have given you the diabolical "curse" of excommunication, word for
word; thus you can see how un-Christlike the Catholic Church is.

As I have before said in this chapter, the foregoing is the curse
that will fall to my lot as soon as this book is placed upon the
market, thus the reader can see that my motives for writing this
book must come from a pure incentive, or else I would not willingly
cut myself asunder from all of those whom I have associated with
during my life. This task is not one that I enjoy, as it breaks my
heart to realize that I have all through my life been burdened down
with this load of superstitious filth, but I could not in justice to
myself and in justice to a living God refrain from the task, after I
had had my eyes opened to the beauties of Protestantism.

With tears in my eyes and with a heart full of sadness, I remember
the angelic face of my old mother, as she conscientiously taught me
my first Catechism and directed my feet in the paths of what she
sincerely believed righteousness, and believing in a just God, I knew
that He has taken her to His bosom in His home beyond the skies, for
what she taught me she sincerely believed, as she never had her eyes
opened to the abominations of the creed of which I write, and I do
not believe that a just God would damn the soul of a pure mother who
honestly taught what she conscientiously believed, but the
priestcraft in general are men who are above the average in
intellect, and are men whom I believe have often had had the same
thoughts relative to the doctrines of Catholicism that I had long,
long years before I cut loose from the teachings of Rome; however,
the priestcraft is not to be excused from their raid upon virtue by
ignorance, as they are taught the lessons of chastity in their
childhood, but the bond of celibacy which binds them in an unnatural
way, and the hellish doctrines taught by the Catholic Church that the
priestcraft cannot sin, turns them into pirates upon virtue.

When we take into consideration the fact that all of the teachings of
Catholicism lead to not only implicit confidence in the purity of the
priestcraft, but carry with them the cudgel of destruction of the
soul of her followers, if they do not submit to her teachings and
demands, we can then realize why it is that the chastity of the home
becomes a rendezvous for those of the priestcraft who deliberately
ravish virtue to gratify their inhuman lust.

[Illustration: "SYSTEMATIC ROBBERY."
"The road to Glory along a Catholic highway
is an expensive trip."]




Chapter XV.

Nations Which Have Been Disgraced
by the Toleration of Popish Rule.


There is no nation on the face of God's green earth to-day which has
been enslaved by the power of Popery, and which has been burdened by
an idle and worthless army of Priests, Monks and Nuns, but what would
have become, not only tired, but disgusted with their burden, if they
had ever been permitted to mingle and commingle with Protestant
countries, and learn that Protestantism leads to individual
intellectuality and collective greatness.

It is true, however, that there are many countries in South America
that have been Priest-ridden for centuries, and who are as heavily
burdened to-day with this ancient parasite as ever, who offer not a
single protest, but the only reason for this is that Catholicism has
always forbidden these priest-ridden nations to make any advancement
towards Protestantism, which has been instrumental in keeping these
nations under the complete control of the Vatican; thus you will see
they have never been permitted to taste of the grandeur of
Protestantism.

We will take France for instance, which was at one time one of the
most priest-ridden countries on earth, but which is to-day
endeavoring to extract herself from the meshes of this damnable
creed, as the intelligent statesmen of France have learned that
Catholicism is only another name for ignorance and superstition, and
they have also learned that so long as the affairs of France remain
under the control of papal power, just that long advancement and
greatness stand aloof from the portals of their country, so in the
past two years the government officials have removed tens of
thousands of the Pope's hirelings from authority and have closed up
hundreds of parochial schools.

Now, if Catholicism is such a glorious creed, why is it that France
is so anxious to get rid of her influence? Ah! France has learned by
coming in contact with Protestant countries that she need not expect
to ever become a great nation if she permits popery to control her
affairs.

Italy, the home of the Pope, has begun to wince under the Vatican's
rule, as her national back is getting raw by the saddle of this
diabolical creed. The inhabitants of Italy have been for the past few
years protesting against the high-handedness of Catholicism, and the
officials have begun to take notice of this vulture of humanity, and
my predictions are that within a very short time Italy will do as
France has done and close up the monasteries and convents, for just
as long as these institutions are allowed to keep open house, and
dictate to the inhabitants of Italy, just that long we may expect the
immigrants who come over from Italy to bear the Vatican's mark of
vice, immorality and criminality.

Go to Ellis Island and watch the immigrant ships from Catholic
nations as they vomit forth their load of human carrion upon the fair
shores of this country, and your heart will become sick with fear,
as this class that hails from the nations of popery are a class, as a
whole, that will disgrace and ruin any nation on earth, as these
immigrants are men and women who have no conception of a free
country, as they are men and women who have never been taught to look
above the horizon of Catholicism; therefore they land upon the shores
of America as criminals and not as citizens, and you cannot make pure
American citizens out of them until you boil this hellish creed from
their system by the fire of patriotism, and this cannot be done as
long as this country permits Catholicism to run her mills of
degeneracy unmolested upon our shores.

All of our large cities are infested more or less with this
"scarlet-robed hag of hell," and more especially our eastern cities,
as this foreign herd of the Pope's followers land in eastern ports
and spread themselves out like a blanket, reeking with a moral stench
over the eastern borders of this country, and they make a specialty
of settling in our eastern cities.

We will take Boston, Mass., for instance, as there is but very little
difference in the "rabble" of that city and the immoral degenerate
class that infests the densely populated centers of Catholic
countries.

Several notorious cases of open defiance of civil law and violation
of civil rights by the tools of popery have recently occurred in
Boston. One of these is the escape of two girls from the so-called
"House of the Good Shepherd," in Roxbury, and the re-capture of these
girls by a policeman.

Now, bear in mind that this "House of the Good Shepherd" is a
Catholic institution, pure and simple, but these girls who escaped
from this "plague house," were arrested by the police and returned to
this Catholic dungeon without the semblance of law.

On questioning "The Mother Superior," she said that the girls were
not committed to the institution by the courts, but by "the church."
The question then arose: Has the Roman Catholic Church the right to
give sentence of imprisonment with hard labor as a penalty? For this
is exactly what imprisonment in this "House of the Good Shepherd"
means; therefore, if these girls so sentenced escape, what right has
a _city policeman_ to arrest and carry them back to this Catholic
institution, which exists without the semblance of a State law and
without an iota of moral law? Are the policemen of the cities of
Massachusetts servants of the Roman Catholic Church? Have the courts
the right to sentence prisoners to Catholic prisons, and after
sentence, have the prisoners no right? Many of them are kept for
life, or until too old to work, and then they are set adrift to
become public charges upon a Protestant country, after the Roman
Catholic Church has made hundreds of dollars from the labor of these
unfortunates.

We want to call attention to another flagrant case, which happened in
the north end of Boston not long since.

A few months since, a Protestant Italian family in the north end of
Boston was about to move to New York. There were two children and
the wife soon expected to become mother again. She expressed the
wish that some one would care for one of her children for a few
weeks, until she got well and was settled in her new home. A neighbor
sent a woman to her who offered to care for the children, and when
this little one was turned over to her, she took it straightway to
the home for destitute Catholic children, on Harrison avenue, in
Boston. In a month the mother called for her baby and was told that
it was "up in the country," and was requested to leave it there for a
month, and was told that it would be good for the child. She
consented to this, believing that the fresh air would be good for her
baby, but she was an uneducated woman and was inclined to believe
what others said, as she was an honest lady herself, but she did not
know the trickery of the Catholic Church, so when she was asked to
sign a paper, she readily agreed to it, not thinking that she was
giving her own blood and flesh away.

In a month she came on from New York to get her baby and was told
that she could not have it, and was further told that she had signed
a paper giving it away. Then the husband came on from New York and
demanded the child, but was refused. He then appealed to the pastor
of the Italian Methodist Church, on Hanover street, Boston. The two
went to a very prominent Romanist office-holder, who was chairman of
the trustees of this so-called "Catholic Home." This man draws seven
thousand dollars per year from the city, and is elected largely
through Protestant influence, simply because Protestantism believes
that she can reform Catholicism by being liberal with her; but oh!
Liberty! what crimes are perpetrated in thy name! This Boston
official, after much talk with this Italian father, told him to bring
a letter from a priest, and that he would see what he could do. The
Italian said, "I am a Protestant," at which the official became very
indignant, but after a little more talk said: "Bring a letter of
recommendation from a minister." This Italian father got a good,
strong letter commending his character from a Protestant minister in
New York, and one who already knew him, and went this time alone to
this Boston official.

In about an hour this heart-broken father appeared before a Methodist
minister in tears, saying: "He will not give me my child. He said I
am a bad man for becoming a Protestant, and that by doing so I have
proven that I am unfit to care for my children, and when I gave him
my letter from the Protestant minister, he said: 'I will not take the
word of a Protestant minister!'"

Now, if what we have related is true, which I know to be absolutely
true in every particular, would happen in the United States of
America, "the land of the free and the home of the brave," you might
know what would happen in a Catholic country which is completely
under the tyrannical and damnable rule of the Pope.

A minister informs us that on three occasions lately, children have
come to him and told him that an Irish public school teacher in
Boston had forbidden them to attend Protestant services, as their
parents were at one time Roman Catholics, and that this talk from
this Romish school teacher was had during school hours.

What we need in this country is a "vigilance committee," and we need
it badly, and we need it right away, and this committee should be
instructed to impeach every public official who endeavors to usurp
the law in favor of Roman Catholicism.

The brightest minds of the past, and the brightest minds of the
present have pointed out to Protestant America the dangers of
Romanism, but it seems as though we will not heed their warning, when
we see upon every side evidences of moral decay and national
degeneracy by permitting this "Romish hag" to supervise and
superintend the affairs of this nation.

Protestant European nations have for many years beheld the despotic
march of Catholicism in America, and this country for a number of
years has been the laughing stock of Protestant European countries
for permitting this brazen demon to tread up and down the avenues of
our liberties without molestation.

A few years before Bismarck of Germany died, he, in a public speech
delivered in the German parliament, pointed out that the Roman
Catholic Church was only free in America, and for the benefit of the
reader we will quote a part of this great statesman's speech:

"The Pope being purely a religious chief, there is no occasion to
keep a permanent political representative at his port. Things,
indeed, might have been left _in status quo_ had not the present Pope
thought it fit to revive the ancient struggle of the papacy with the
temporal power, and more especially with the German empire. The
spirit emanating the papacy in this campaign is too well known to
require comment; still we would tell the house a story, which has
long been kept a secret, but which had better be made public. In
1869, when the Wurtemberg government had occasion to complain of the
action of the papacy, the Wurtemberg envoy at Munich was instructed
to make representations, and in a conversation which passed between
the envoy and the nuncio; the latter said, 'The Roman Church is free
only in America.'"

This nuncio further stated that the Roman Catholic Church in all
other countries had to look to revolution as the sole means to retain
her position. This, then, was the view of the priestly diplomatist
stationed at Munich in 1869, and formerly representing the Vatican at
Paris.

Bismarck further stated: "I know from the very best sources that the
Emperor Napoleon was dragged into the war very much against his will
by the influence of Jesuit priests."

Who can deny these statements, as Bismarck was a man who made the
study of Catholicism a part of his life, and he was a man who was of
rugged character and undaunted courage, and a man whom the world at
large believed.

There has not been a war for centuries past but what the cunning hand
of popery has been mixed up with the blood shed in these wars, as
popery never misses an opportunity to take sides with the nation
which represents Catholicism, as this creed of abominations will
resort to bloodshed if by so doing she believes she can carry her
point and establish her rule of despotism.

If America will take a lesson from France she will be taught a lesson
that will save this country from passing through the same ordeal that
France is passing through to-day, and unless the government of the
United States begins in the near future to suppress this giant of
darkness, Roman Catholicism, we will within the next fifty years have
to resort to the same means that Combes of France is resorting to, to
annihilate the serpent of Catholicism from our shores, or else meekly
submit to being dragged down to the level of Roman Catholicism, which
is equivalent to losing our identity as a government, and taking our
places among the nations noted only for either ignorance, vice or
criminality.

Catholicism does not believe in a free country. Catholicism does not
believe in a country of the people, by the people and for the people,
as such a country is not the natural abode for this detestable creed.

Catholicism believes in a country which is ruled by a monarch, as
she then only has to control the monarch himself, and this is why the
Catholic clergy and the Catholic officials, from the smallest to the
greatest, are in sympathy with Russia, as the Russian government is a
most complete monarchy, and the emperor is an absolute monarch, and
this is why Catholicism is always ready to toss up her hat in glee
for the success of the Russian army.

Catholic prelates all along the line, up to the Pope himself, have
been trying to make Americans believe that Russia is deserving of our
sympathy, but her solicitude in behalf of Russia is only a
sympathetic shriek for her own polluted carcass.

Catholicism never sympathizes with any nation nor any individual who
have for their motto "Emancipation," as emancipation means to
Catholicism a vital blow to her teachings, as slavery of both body
and soul is Rome's uppermost desire.

Can we expect Catholicism to change her abominations without force?
Most assuredly not, as her every inspiration comes from a set of men
who know no more about loyalty to country than her dupes know about a
living God, as the Pope is a native born Italian, and her cardinals
are recruited from the ranks of Italy's king-ruled inhabitants,
consequently it is impossible to expect the Pope of Rome or those
cardinals to recommend anything in harmony with the teachings of
Protestant America, as they are strangers to Protestantism and
American manhood; therefore it would be as reasonable to expect
sunlight in the caverns of the earth as to expect Rome to recommend a
doctrine which would be beneficial to humanity.

When I declare to the American people that unless this country in the
near future makes a combined effort to stamp out the political
intrigue of Catholicism, or it will not be long until America will
find her every interest tied tight and fast to the carcass of
Romanism; I do so because I feel that it is my duty to warn this
country of her awful fate, for just as sure as God reigns, just that
sure Catholicism has America "spotted" as her victim, as this spirit
of darkness has for many years in the past made her boast that
"America is Rome's future possession."

There is not a nation on the face of the earth which has permitted
Rome to plant her banner of infamy unmolested but what has been
disgraced by the toleration of her creed, and America cannot expect
to meet with a better fate.

The dangers that beset the path of America's future are in the form
of a political serpent, as Rome has learned to know that by holding
out the "vote bait" to our politicians, that she can retain the
balance of power, as she has long since learned that as long as she
can be instrumental in keeping two political parties, both largely
made up of Protestants, and fighting each other, that she can
associate herself with one or the other by offering this party the
undivided suffrage of Catholicism, and by this act she can gradually
get control of the offices of this land, and this is her main object,
for if she can control the officials, she will see that such laws are
passed as will enable her to coil her slimy self about the vitals of
Protestant America, and just as long as the Protestant denominations
allow themselves to be made Protestant simpletons of, just that long
Catholicism will fool Protestant hosts by offering the "vote bait" to
the politician.

Whenever Protestantism learns that she has a common cause to
champion, and a common enemy to fight, then we will have an "American
party" on one side, and a "Catholic party" on the other, and when
this time comes, Catholicism will be deprived of her cudgel of
deception, and will have to fight her battles without the assistance
of "_Protestant partisan fools_," and will cease to believe that she
belongs to either this or that political party. Protestantism is a
band of American patriots, and should only have the welfare of
Protestantism at heart.

Catholicism, if left alone without the assistance of Protestant
votes, could not turn a wheel in the affairs of this country, but by
permitting Romanism to make Protestantism believe in one of two
political parties thus dividing the Protestant votes, Catholicism is
allowed to hold the balance of power and dictate terms to a
Protestant country.

Shame, eternal shame upon the hosts of Protestantism for permitting
themselves to be made fools of by the Romish Church, as this is
exactly what the hosts of Protestantism are allowing Catholicism to
do with her!

Now, I know whereof I speak, as I have been on the inside of politics
in our large cities, and especially in the City of St. Louis, and
Catholicism's scheme is always to allow the cities to elect a
Protestant mayor, but they always endeavor to elect the other
officials.

Oh, could I but whisper into the ears of every Protestant in America
and make them understand what I know of the cunning and deception of
Catholicism I would march an army of Protestants to the polls at our
elections that would represent a mighty army of patriotism; but just
so long as Protestantism permits Catholicism to make her believe that
it is necessary to have two or more political parties, just that long
we will have partisan block-heads, and as long as this state of
affairs exists, just that long the cunning schemes of Catholicism
will be able to control the balance of power, which will disgrace the
fair name of Protestant America.

I solemnly declare that there never has been a nation completely
under the control of Romanism but what has been disgraced by that
toleration, and America will live to realize the truthfulness of this
assertion unless she becomes "Protestant patriots" instead of
"prattling partisans."

To give the reader a better idea of what happens in countries
absolutely controlled by Catholicism, and to more thoroughly convince
the reader that what I have said is true in regard to nations which
have been disgraced by the toleration of popish rule, I desire to
repeat a little history that is not many months old, which happened
in the United States, where it is supposed that man and woman can
worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience, and if
what we are going to relate happens in this free land, what do you
suppose is the condition in Catholic countries that are completely
under the control of the Pope?

In Worcester, Mass., not long since, a 19-year-old girl by the name
of Maggie Barry received a public whipping from her mother for
attending services of the Salvation Army.

Miss Maggie Barry, who is 19 years of age, had been for some time
occasionally attending the meetings of the Salvation Army, and was
desirous of becoming a member of the corps, having been converted a
short time since.

Her parents were Irish Roman Catholics and insisted that Maggie
should remain a Romanist. They regarded the Salvation Army, which is
purely non-sectarian, as a Protestant organization, and they were
determined that their daughter should have nothing to do with it, and
forbade her attending any of the meetings.

On a Sunday evening not long since she attended the services of the
Salvation Army at No. 5 Commercial street, where there were at least
250 people present. While the commander of the corps was reading from
the Bible, Miss Barry's mother came through the doorway and down to
the front row of seats near the corner of the platform, where Maggie
was sitting, and grabbed her daughter by the arm and began to pound
her over the head, and at once proceeded to pull the girl from the
hall and down the stairs into the street, all the time unmercifully
beating the poor girl over the head and shoulders.

The incident happened so quickly that for a moment the audience could
not realize what was taking place, but as soon as the audience could
gather their wits, there was a rush made for the street.

After the meeting had adjourned many of the attendants found Miss
Barry in the street weeping like her heart would break and afraid to
return to her home.

She told the audience that as soon as she reached the street where a
number of relatives were waiting for her that she broke away from her
mother and fled.

A policeman was called into consultation relative to the case and
stated that as Maggie was under twenty-one years of age, that she
had better be taken to her parents at 125 Salem street, and two
policemen accompanied her to her home.

It is stated that Miss Barry has received many unmerciful beatings
because she attended these religious meetings, and her old Romish
mother, while dragging her down the stairs that Sunday night,
threatened to do her bodily harm if she ever attended these meetings
again.

A few days after this disgraceful and un-American spectacle happened
in the streets of Worcester, a notice in the Central District Court
appeared that "_Miss Margaret Barry was charged with being a stubborn
child and was sentenced to the Woman's Prison at Shearborn. She
appealed and furnished a bail. The girl was arrested on the complaint
of her mother because she would not stay away from the meetings of
the Salvation Army_."

Now, reader, you have a case right in the United States of America
where a poor girl was sentenced to prison for attending a Protestant
meeting. What do you think of a judge of a court who will sentence a
child to a State prison for attending a Protestant meeting?

We know what you think if you are a pure Protestant, and we know that
your blood boils with pure indignation; but you cannot expect any
relief from this state of affairs and you can only expect to see
things grow worse if you continue to be "partisans" instead of
"patriots."

If such things are now happening in the State of Massachusetts, how
long will it be before the Protestant churches in this country will
be closed up by the order of the Pope, and how long will it be before
those who attend Protestant meetings will be liable to arrest and
thrown into prison, as it was during the dark ages when the Roman
Catholic Church had full control?

Authentic history, and history that cannot be denied nor disputed,
nor even questioned, gives the appalling record of 70,500,000
Protestants who were slain by the greatest curse the world has ever
known--Roman Catholicism.

We, in America, cannot expect anything better until we have a set of
Protestant preachers who will practice what they pretend to believe.

Our Protestant ministers of to-day are weak-kneed, weak-spined,
"nothings," who have not enough religion nor backbone to take a firm
stand against Catholicism, and until we have such men we will
continue to see "Maggie Barrys" dragged from Protestant meetings and
publicly whipped by parents, and then sentenced to imprisonment by
judges elected by Roman Catholics.

Again we want to repeat the head lines of this chapter for the
benefit of those who are weak-kneed and who are entirely "spineless:"
"_Nations who have been disgraced by the toleration of popish rule_,"
and we leave it to the reader to decide whether this headline is a
misnomer or not, as we have offered you evidence in this chapter that
should convince any right-thinking man or woman that if the Roman
Catholic Church has grown so bold in America, with the ink upon the
Declaration of Independence scarcely dry, what shall we expect for
our posterity if there is not a stand made by Protestantism to halt
this "emperor of darkness" in his march of devastation?

This black-winged vulture of human rights is growing bolder day by
day by being permitted by Protestantism to separate and divide the
Protestant vote among different parties, and combining the hosts of
Catholicism for an onslaught against everything American in order to
control the affairs of this country. If you will listen you can
almost hear the death rattle of Protestantism as the serpent of Rome
has so gently entwined her slimy self about the throat of our
American goddess of liberty that the death rattle is almost
perceptible.

Strike while you have the power, and do not delay, or else the time
is not far distant when the once powerful arm of Protestantism will
be paralyzed by the infusion of Roman virus.

[Illustration: UNCLE SAM--"Here is your next fight boys."]




Chapter XVI.

Nearing the Trenches of Physical Strength.


We can only judge the future of nations and institutions by the past
and present, and if we are to judge Catholicism by her past, and if
we are honest with ourselves, we cannot paint a future without
producing a panoramic view that is dreadful to behold, as Catholicism
in the past has been an institution which always endeavored to rule
by the tyranny of oppression, and her decisions and mandates to-day
are the same as they were during the inquisitorial days when our
Protestant forefathers were burned at the state for disobeying the
commands of Catholic officials.

Catholicism makes her boast that she never changes; then what are we
to expect the future to bring forth, if her dogmas of damnation are
allowed to fasten her intolerable hold upon this country: for if she
"never changes," and we are compelled to judge her future by her
past, which is the only rational conclusion that can be arrived at,
then we can expect nothing more than to behold her future trail
stained with the blood of Protestants, as such has been her history
of the past.

It is our purpose in this chapter to give the reader an authentic
epitome of a few of the doctrines and facts which we defy Roman
Catholicism to successfully deny, as what we propose to give you is
Roman Catholic law, and if such is Roman Catholic law, then we will
have no trouble in establishing the fact that no loyal Catholics can
possibly be loyal American citizens; therefore should not be placed
in a position where they can carry out the mandates and dictates of
the Church of Rome, for whenever they are placed in power and
thoroughly believe in the laws of Catholicism they can not possibly
be naught but traitors to our American form of government.

We propose to give the reader "Canon Law" to establish our
statements, as we are as well acquainted with the laws that govern
Roman Catholicism--yea, better than we are with the laws that govern
this country, as we for fifty-six years have been directly influenced
by this "Canon Law," and for the past thirty years, or since we
became a Roman Catholic priest, have been a servant and an
executioner of this law; therefore, I know whereof I speak, and no
man dare deny my statements.

The first declaration of this "Canon Law" is: "_All human power is
from evil and must therefore be standing under the Pope_."

You will thus see that the first declaration of the "Canon Law" is to
place the human family as a whole, under the tyrannical control of
Catholicism.

Another declaration of this law is: "_The state has not the right to
leave every man free to profess and embrace whatever religion he
shall deem true_."

In this declaration, you will further see that Roman Catholicism
would, if it was within her power, take from the American citizen
the right to worship a true and living God.

The next law that we will refer to is as follows: "_The state has not
the right to establish a church separate from the Pope_."

Again you will see that Rome's idea is to force all of humanity to
bow at the feet of her creed.

Again she declares in her "Canonistic Laws:" "_That the state has not
the right to assist the inmates of monasteries and convents to
abandon them_."

Again you will see that Catholicism desires to usurp the rights of
the courts and establish prisons of their own without a semblance of
law.

Once more this "Canonistic Law" thunders forth her monarchial law as
follows: "_The Roman Catholic church has the right to require the
state not to leave every man free to profess his own religion_."

Again the reader will see that Roman Catholicism with her iron hand
demands this nation to force and compel every man, woman and child
that lives under that old red, white and blue flag, which was bought
by the blood of our forefathers, to humbly bow to this heathenish
creed.

The next, and one of the most damnable laws found among the
"Canonistic Laws" of Catholicism, is as follows: "_Roman Catholicism
has the right to exercise her power without permission or consent of
the state_."

Within this Romish law any one can easily discern her monarchial
designs, as she boldly and flagrantly declares that she has the right
to do as she sees fit, without even being molested or questioned by
the laws of this country.

Further on in the "Canon Laws" of Catholicism we find the following:
"_Roman Catholicism has the right to prevent the foundation of any
national church not subject to the direct authority of the Roman
pontiff_."

Thus the reader will see that the Protestant churches of America
exist only by and through the numerical power of Protestantism, but
should Romanism ever become powerful enough in this country she
would, within the twinkling of an eye, destroy or confiscate every
Protestant church now in existence.

Further along in this Romish "Canon Law" we find that she strikes at
the dearest institutions of our land, as follows: "_The Roman
Catholic church has the right to deprive the civil authorities of the
entire government of the public schools_."

The reader will see by this declaration that should Catholicism ever
come in control of the affairs of this government that our public
schools, which are the bulwarks of our American government, would
have their very foundations rooted up and scattered to the four winds
of the earth.

The most devilish and damnable law, in my estimation, that is to be
found upon the statute books of Catholicism is the following: "_Roman
Catholicism has the right to require that the Roman Catholic religion
shall be THE ONLY RELIGION of the nation, to the exclusion
of all others_."

We have the entire principles of Catholicism embodied in this last
"Canonistic Law," as Roman Catholicism's aim and intention is to put
this declaration into effect as soon as she can become powerful
enough to execute her plans.

In my estimation, the next "Canon Law" that I will quote, is the one
most detrimental to our American form of government, as it is a law,
when put into execution, that will throttle every ambition and
strangle every hope that now permeates the bosom of Protestantism,
and it is one that should freeze the very flesh and blood of
Protestantism to the bone's marrow. It is as follows: "_Roman
Catholicism has the power to require the nation not to permit free
expression of opinions_."

In this last law, which is found upon the statute books of Roman
Catholicism, we have a declaration from her rulers that would deprive
you and your posterity from expressing an opinion in regard to Roman
Catholicism; that is, if that opinion did not coincide with her
abominations, and an institution which would place such a law upon
her statute books is an institution which would burn and flay alive
those who would disregard this law; thus the reader may have some
idea of what he or she may expect should their posterity ever live
to see America pass into the ungodly clutches of this unholy demon.

The history of Roman Catholicism in the past plainly demonstrates
what she has done and how well and awful she has carried out her laws
herein quoted, and Catholicism makes her brags that she "_never
changes_," consequently the only reason why these laws are not put
into execution in the United States is the lack of physical power,
and whenever Roman Catholicism reaches the point in the history of
this country where she possesses this physical power, Protestantism
will feel her tyrannical heel upon their necks.

That the reader may thoroughly understand and realize that Roman
Catholicism of to-day is the same as Roman Catholicism was hundreds
of years ago, we desire to quote a letter written by Pope Leo XIII
during his reign, which will thoroughly demonstrate to the reader
that Roman Catholicism of the present retains all of her harshness
and cussedness that she possessed when our forefathers were burned at
the stake and our mothers were punished for worshiping a true and
living God, Pope Leo's letter follows:

"_The teachings given by the Apostolic See, whether contained in the
syllabus and other acts of our illustrious predecessors, or in our
encyclical letters, has given clear guidance to the faith as to what
should be their thoughts and their conduct in the midst of the
difficulties of time and events. There they will find a rule for the
direction of their minds and their work._"

The reader will see from this letter from Pope Leo XIII that he
reiterates to his followers the "Canonistic Law" laid down by his
predecessors, making it obligatory upon the followers of Catholicism
to put in practice to-day the hellish doctrines of Roman Catholicism
of the past.

If Catholicism depends upon numbers and physical strength to
accomplish her ends, then what must this country expect when such a
time arrives, as Catholicism can govern by the power of physical
strength?

Will we have any one to blame for what Catholicism does to this
country when such time arrives? Ah, No! No one but Protestantism,
for if America, which is a Protestant country, sits idly by and
permits Romanism to reach a point where she can control the affairs
of this government, it will be on the account of the lethargy and
imbecility of Protestantism, as we have it within our power to-day to
halt this Emperor of Darkness before that time arrives, but the
question is, will we do it?

The history of other nations which have been controlled by
Catholicism should be enough, not only to frighten the Protestant
hosts, but to paralyze them with fear, as the pages of history teem
with the awfulness of Rome's rule, wherever she has been permitted to
become master.

France, which has been priest-ridden for centuries, is now at this
time in the throes of a national convulsion, brought about by the
tyranny of Romanism.

Now, if Rome is such an abominable master and such a tyrant that
France has to deport the priestcraft and close up her institutions,
is it not time that the United States was taking some step to
protect her offspring from this vulture of human rights!

This country is undoubtedly a Protestant country, and if it is a
great country, which no man dares to deny, she surely owes her
greatness to Protestantism.

Our soul is poured into this chapter, as we never were more in
earnest than we are at this time, as we can shade our eyes and look
down the avenues of the past and behold naught but skeletons of
protestant despair on every byway which has been traveled by
Romanism, and when we behold this mighty waste of despair we can not
conceive how the United States of America can expect to fare better
than have the nations of the past, unless she exerts her American and
Protestant manhood and gives Roman Catholicism to understand that it
is time to halt, and, in the name of an intelligent God, forbid her
to transgress further upon the rights of this country.

In this chapter we will endeavor to be explicit and above all
truthful, and we ask God to give us courage to present facts in a way
that will fan to life again the patriotism that has been lulled to
sleep by the bat-like wings of Roman Catholicism.

We hope that this little volume may arouse unconcerned Protestantism
to a realization of the fact that our public officials are year by
year forcing her nearer and nearer the great chasm of Roman despair,
and if we can be instrumental in this great undertaking we will feel
that when our race is done, that we have fought a good fight, and
will be remembered by the Protestant world as a man who taught a
doctrine which was the salvation of Protestant America.

Roman Catholicism has no politics, as she is ever ready and willing
to join hands with any party that will guarantee her more complete
control of national affairs, as she teaches her followers that
whenever they find that the Republican party will grant her requests
that they should be Republicans, and she also teaches them that
whenever the Democratic party or any other party will enter into a
contract with her and grant her the right of way of devastation, that
they should be Democrats, or be adherents to whatever party grants
them the most power.

Roman Catholicism wraps herself about the smaller officials and
wheedles herself into the good graces of the small officials by
promising them the Catholic vote, and by so doing she is able to
control the officials higher up in power, and in this manner she
reaches the highest officials of the land, as we find to-day the
boa-constrictor of Catholicism wrapped about every official at
Washington city, from the President of the United States on down.

Suppose that the Pope and his tribe of liberty-destroyers realized
that the officials of America were Protestants, and implicitly
believed and lived up to the teachings of Protestantism; do you think
that she would presume to approach our Protestant officials and
demand their support in behalf of her damnable creed, or do you
suppose that she would dare to send her emissaries into the halls of
our national congress and brazenly approach those Protestant
officials? Ah, never! as Catholicism is a base coward and never
makes her appearance only where she is assured that her overtures
will be gracefully received.

Protestant America! do you not believe that you have granted Romanism
her requests long enough, and do you not realize that unless you
throttle this carnivorous beast of human rights within the near
future that your protests will only be received with ridicule and
jeers?

Protestantism from this day forward should resolve that her ballot in
the future should be a Protestant ballot, and whenever she has
reasons to believe that there is one place upon their ticket that is
tainted with the abominations of Romanism they should be dropped as
though they were a poisonous reptile.

It matters not what the office may be that is to be filled and what
power it carries with it, Protestantism should find out whether or
not the applicant believes in Protestantism, and learn, if possible,
whether they or their family are tainted with the virus of Roman
Catholicism, and if you should find that the taint extends to any
part of their family then scratch them off your ballot, and by so
doing you will help to woo back the spirit of both Protestantism and
patriotism, as one is symbolic of the other.

It may seem strange and also untrue for me to make the statement that
there are cities in the United States which are as completely under
the control of the Pope of Rome as Rome herself, but such is the
case, and the city of St. Louis, Mo., is one of them, as Romanism
rules the inhabitants of that city with a despotism that is only
equaled in a nation where the pontiff of Rome is an acknowledged
ruler.

During the last election in the city of St. Louis I was a Catholic
priest, and was in the Catholic confidence, and I declare to you as a
man of truth and before a living God that it was understood between
the Catholic church and those who controlled the Democratic party
that the Protestants should elect the present mayor, Rolla Wells, but
that Catholicism was to be permitted to name the other officials, or
at least enough to control the city government.

Now, is there any politics in such an agreement? Ah, no; but the
only object in this secret agreement was a desire upon the part of
Roman Catholicism to control the revenues of the city of St. Louis,
as Catholicism is a money machine and endeavors to keep her exchequer
full by preying upon the ignorance of her followers.

I have mentioned St. Louis only for the simple reason that it is a
recent happening, but there are a score of other cities in the United
States of America which are controlled by Catholicism on the same
principle, as Romanism joins hands with either the Republican or
Democratic party if she sees a chance to put her hellish schemes and
dogmas into practice.

That the reader may know what element controls the municipal
governments of our cities we desire to call attention to the fact
that over one-half of the officials of our large American cities are
direct representatives of Roman Catholicism, and over two-thirds of
all the policemen of these cities are the Pope's followers.

Why does this state of affairs exist? Ah, it is because the
Protestant voter has "politics" instead of "principles"; therefore
you yourself are to blame for this awful state of affairs.

Yes, I say that you are to blame, for you are a voter and you pretend
to represent Protestantism but still will permit yourself to be made
tools of in behalf of Roman Catholicism; then am I not right in
declaring that you are to blame for this state of affairs that exists
in our large cities?

In our municipal elections you will find Roman Catholicism courting
the political power which has the greatest chance of electing their
candidates; it matters not what party it may be, as Roman Catholicism
has no politics, as her only desire is power, and it does not matter
from what source she receives it, so long as it is granted her, as
Romanism is like a chameleon, as she will change her political color
to suit her surroundings if she is assured that she will be permitted
to inject her deadly virus into the veins of Protestantism.

If Roman Catholicism can extract a promise from a Republican
candidate they are Republicans; but, on the other hand, if they can
make a Democrat do their bidding, they are Democrats; and if they
can "wiggle" into the Populists' favor, they are Populists; in fact,
they are any and everything that will serve their purpose and help to
bind and throttle Protestant principles.

The nation of France is making history to-day, and each line and page
of this history is a warning to Protestant America, as every page of
this history is covered with the slime of Roman Catholicism, for had
it not been for her tyrannical despotism, France would not have had
to close up the monasteries and convents of that nation, but on
account of her teachings, and in order to protect the rising
generations from her influence, not only have the convents and
monasteries had to be closed, but the schools which teach her
damnable dogmas have been closed.

We do not have to cross the ocean and visit European countries to
learn of Roman Catholicism's depravity, but we can stand upon the
southern shore of the United States, almost in hailing distance of
Cuba, and there behold the shores of a country which had to rebel
against the hellishness of Roman Catholicism, as Cuba would to-day
belong to Spain had it not been for Roman Catholicism, as it was her
abominations that continually kept Cuba in a feverish ferment.

It was Spain's ungodliness that brought about the Spanish-American
war, and Spain's ungodliness was taught her by Romanism.

The West India islands were the progenies of Spain, and the Spanish
government permitted the Papists to control these islands with her
dogmas of instructions, which were directly instrumental in
continually keeping the spirit of anarchy alive.

The only reason that Roman Catholicism does not control this country
with her tyrannical hand is on account of numerical numbers, for did
Rome believe that she could rule this country to-day, before the sun
would set to-morrow night this would be a nation of serfs instead of
a nation of independent men and women.

I perhaps have made my declarations broader and stronger than any man
of the present day, but I am fresh from the ranks of Catholicism and
I know her cunning, and since I have forsaken her blind leadership
and drank deep from the well of Protestantism, I have resolved that
no stone shall go unturned that will help me to convince America of
her great danger which shadows her future by permitting this Romish
despot to flood this country with not only her blind followers, but
by being permitted to brazenly denounce everything that is near and
dear to this country, as her brazen denunciations of our American
institutions is nothing more nor less than treason, and which should
be treated as such.

To give the reader some idea of what Roman Catholicism will do if she
ever has the power, we quote an article which appeared in a Catholic
journal known as "_The Catholic Citizen_," of Milwaukee, Wis.

Now, if Catholicism has at this time become so brazen that she dares
offer the Protestant world the insults that is contained in this
article, what shall we expect if this damnable creed ever becomes
powerful enough to control by physical strength? The article follows:

    "Protestantism in Cuba? What good will it do there? If only
    the good it has wrought elsewhere, Heaven help the Cubans!
    Protestantism is nothing but a disorganizer and a pathway to
    infidelity and atheism. This is the only reason of its
    existence. As a positive moral force, it is a farce. It has
    never converted a single nation, but it has unconverted
    Protestants themselves with a holy vengeance. Berlin has
    75,000 church goers out of 2,000,000 people; London 400,000
    out of 6,000,000 and so on. 'Without baptism you can not
    enter Heaven,' says the Scripture, and lo! thanks to
    Protestantism, nearly 60,000,000 people in the United States
    are not baptized. A nice system (for the devil), that
    produces such results--results as fatal to the heathen as to
    the Christian. Protestantism found the Sandwich islands with
    400,000 people. Where are they now? Gone. A million Macris in
    New Zealand. Where are they? Gone. Seven million Indians in
    the United States. Where are they? Gone.

    "On the other hand, the friars found 300,000 natives in the
    Philippines 400 years ago, and there are 9,000,000 now;
    12,000,000 Indians south of the Rio Grande, and there are
    50,000,000 now. 'By their fruits you shall know them.' In
    view of such facts, we think Protestants should leave
    'Boonioboola Gha' alone and confine their proselytizing to
    unfortunates nearer home. An American is just as well worth
    saving as a Cuban or a Chinaman any day."

"_The American Citizen_," a journal published in Boston, Mass., made
the following comment on this article, which appeared in this Roman
Catholic journal:

    "The above is as good a specimen of papal logic as we have
    ever seen--and it is the real thing.

    "'It has never converted a single nation!' Christianity is
    not supposed to convert nations--it converts individuals.
    Mohammedanism converted (?) many nations by the sword, and
    popery attempted to do it by the inquisition, but
    failed--except in the case of the Jews and Moors in Spain,
    which it 'converted' into beggars and refugees.

    "Rome 'converted' the Albigenses from being peaceful and
    industrious citizens into the best mountain warriors in
    Europe--and the handful defied and defeated the best papal
    armies of Europe.

    "But how about England, and Scotland, and Scandinavia, and
    the Netherlands, and many other nations--were they not all
    papal at one time, but converted through reformation? How
    about the Huguenots--the very flower of France; the
    Protestant Irish, the very salvation of the Emerald
    Isle--were not these all at one time Romanists--converted to
    Protestantism?

    "Read the record of Rome's 'conversions' in Mexico, in
    Central America, in South America, as told by Prescott and
    other historians--the introduction of slavery by the papal
    church, and the unspeakable cruelties perpetrated upon the
    Indians, or aborigines, of the countries mentioned. Read, in
    United States senate document 190, the record of Rome's
    'conversions' in the Philippines--a work which has made every
    Filipino a bitter hater of the priests.

    "'The Indians of the United States!' Have they ever been
    Protestants? Have not the priests had control of them since
    this land was discovered? Are not the vices which have
    killed them--apart from war--the peculiar vices of popery,
    especially drunkenness? What good have the priests wrought
    among them? Take California as an example, where these
    priests enslaved tens of thousands of the Indians for the
    sole purpose of enriching their church!

    "This is a matter of history--of undeniable history. If the
    American Indians were slain in battle, in nine cases out of
    ten the Jesuits instigated them to the deeds which brought on
    the war. While Prescott's 'Mexico' and 'Peru' are accessible
    in our libraries, popery had better be dumb.

    "That the Filipinos have increased from 300,000 to 9,000,000
    and the South Americans from 12,000,000 to 50,000,000, may be
    true, for all travelers tell us that it is no uncommon thing
    to find a priest with a halfscore of concubines and fifty
    children. Certainly these priests have an advantage over
    Protestant missionaries in this respect. The pagans would
    naturally follow the example of their 'spiritual' advisers.
    Oh, yes, the population certainly increases where the
    priestcraft live."

The Roman Catholic church says that the priests shall not wed, but at
the same time the priestcraft fathers an army of children.

The Philippine islands is a nation of heathens, and Catholicism has
been in charge of these islands for centuries, and to-day they are
worse off than they were before Catholicism planted her black banner
in their midst.

Wherever you find intellectuality, morality and civilization in its
fullest meaning, you will find a country where Protestantism is the
predominating doctrine, as Catholicism can not exist only in the
"underbrush" of ignorance and vice.

The greatest menace this country has to contend with is the influx of
Rome's followers from other nations, and unless our immigration laws
are remedied it will not be long until Rome will be able, by physical
strength, to enumerate the United States as one of her countries, as
each succeeding year tens of thousands of the followers of Rome from
Italy and other priest-ridden countries flock to our shores to
practice in this country the abominations taught them in their
childhood.

France's woes and miseries have been expected for years by men of
intelligence and men who could read the signs of the times, as Rome's
influence was year by year growing more intolerable, and it was only
a matter of time when France would be forced to either permit herself
to be dragged down to the level of the debased teachings of
Catholicism or else by a heroic effort boldly stamp out this Romish
creed of damnation, and the latter course is the one she has chosen
to pursue, and to-day finds the Roman Catholic church despised and
detested by every intelligent and patriotic Frenchman of the land.

In July 1874, Eugene Lawrence, in the columns of "_Harper's Weekly_,"
made a prediction that ought to convince every sane man and woman in
this land that the woes of France are directly traceable to the Roman
Catholic church, as Mr. Lawrence was a historian of national repute,
and a man who was a patriot whom the American eagle was proud of, and
for the benefit of the readers of my little book I desire to quote in
full this prediction made thirty years ago, as to-day finds Mr.
Lawrence's prediction being fulfilled in every particular, and Roman
Catholicism is the incarnate fiend that has forced this prediction to
come true. Mr. Lawrence's article follows:

    "The Papal church is chiefly responsible for the decadence of
    the French mind. The priests have long controlled the
    education of the nation and have striven to shut it out from
    all contact with the culture of America, Germany and England.
    Under the rule of Napoleon III, the Jesuits obtained the
    guidance of nearly all the secondary colleges; Protestant
    schools were sedulously discouraged, and nothing was taught
    that could offend the mediaeval tastes of Rome. When, two
    years ago, the French republicans had resolved to found a
    free and compulsory system of instruction for all France as
    the chief want of the nation, the papal bishops and priests
    suppressed the measure by all their arts. They were resolved
    to have no education which they could not control. The
    republican movement failed; Bishop Dupanloup and his
    associates succeeded once more in shutting out the light of
    knowledge from the people, and have sown the fires of
    warfare in the place of mental progress and moral culture.

    "France, which has often made the most rapid progress toward
    reform, has also been the most successful leader of modern
    reaction. Its revolutions have set in motion all other
    nations, but have failed to purify itself. It is enslaved by
    a single church and ruled by Roman superstition. At the
    recent assembly at Paris, of all the hierarchy of France, of
    Jesuits, Dominicans, Monks and prelates, it was resolved that
    all the strength of the papal party should be given to an
    effort to grasp the control of the higher education of the
    people, and make every college and seminary the teacher of
    the worship of the Sacred Heart; to confine instruction
    within the limits of Roman theology, and shut out more
    strictly than ever before the light of modern progress. At a
    great and powerful meeting of all the Roman Catholic editors
    of France, a similar policy was resolved upon. By a strange
    revulsion of sentiment the press was made to advocate its own
    restriction or repression. The papal editors apparently sigh
    for a return of the mediaeval practices when Francis I.
    burned ardent printers in Paris, and the Sorbonne would have
    banished the printing press from France forever. The Roman
    Catholic papers invoke the restoration of the Bourbons and of
    the temporal power of the Pope, and in the ardor of a new
    spirit of martyrdom offered themselves up to a spiritual
    bondage that must end in their own slow destruction and the
    death of the national intellect They would enforce anew that
    policy if isolation which has filled France with impurity,
    and left it the prey of emperors and marshals, princes and
    priests.

    "France has thus displayed, since its first revolution, a
    most remarkable contest. The spirit of freedom has more than
    once placed its people in front of human progress, and ever
    again the spirit of reaction has dragged them back into the
    abyss of mental and moral decay. Its priests have invariably
    triumphed over its reformers. The Roman church has always
    held a supremacy above the law. Of all the national
    institutions, it has alone preserved its freedom of action
    unimpaired. It receives an enormous subsidy from the state.
    While all other associations are held under a strict
    subjection, while political meetings are scarcely allowed,
    while the press is silenced, while Protestant churches can
    hold no assemblies or synods except by the connivance of the
    government, while Protestant churches are forbidden to have
    either bell or steeple, the Roman priesthood hold their
    councils and assemblies unrestrained, and cover the land with
    their sodalities, their societies, their processions, and
    their pilgrimages. The church is the only well-organized
    political party. Its agents are active in every commune. Its
    severe discipline produces order through all its hosts of
    Jesuits, monks and priests. Its confessors rule in the
    palaces of the wealthy and the hovels of the peasants. It
    forbids education, it stifles thought, it inculcates a
    pitiless severity against Protestants and reformers; and with
    natural indignation the leading Republicans point to the
    dominant church as the chief source of all the woes of
    France, as sacrificing the morals, integrity and mental
    elevation of the nation to the single purpose of maintaining
    the ascendency of a foreign Pope. The French Republicans have
    been forced to see that the Papal church is the necessary foe
    of freedom. It would be well if our own people could learn
    from their experience, and guard with strict vigilance their
    institutions from the secret and open assaults of a foreign
    priesthood.

    "There is no doubt, at least in the minds of the French
    Republicans, that to the intrigues of the Papal faction is
    due the disordered and hopeless condition of the nation.
    Gambetta's paper, _La Republique_, assures its readers that
    the assembly is ruled by a party devoted wholly to the
    ecclesiastical interests; that they labor only to reduce the
    whole country to an abject submission to Rome, and are ready
    to accomplish their aims by measures fatal to the peace of
    France. It asserts that the priesthood forms a league as
    rigorous as that over which the Guises ruled and against
    which the Huguenots struggled; that the church has its
    myriads of societies, committees, agents, an overflowing
    treasury, the favor of the government, a single aim--an
    infallible ruler. It calls upon the people, if they would be
    free, to strike down the hydra that preys upon the state. The
    policy of Bismarck, indeed, finds its best defense in the
    condition of France. If the interference of the papal faction
    proves so disastrous to the welfare of the French people, it
    is plainly the interest of Germany to crush it forever by all
    the resources of statesmanship. If the rule of papal Rome be
    so intolerable to its friends, what might it not accomplish
    in the dominions of its opponents? France may yet learn from
    its neighbors over the Rhine the only path to freedom. What
    it seems most to need is a Bismarck."

If in 1874, Mr. Lawrence, after making a thorough study of the
conditions of France, could so accurately prophecy what would happen
thirty years hence, the conditions at that time must have been indeed
very palpable, but no more so than they are in America to-day, as
Roman Catholicism within the past ten years has made greater strides
in strangling American liberties than she ever has in any twenty-five
years, before, as this creed of abominations has been losing its
hold upon not only the throats of France, but of Italy as well. As
she has made the effort of her life to plant the seeds of anarchy and
revolution in the bosom of her followers in the United States, in
order that she may at the proper time, and as soon as she believes
she is numerically strong enough to overcome by physical force, to
strike a blow that will paralyze every ambition of Protestantism in
this country.

Hundreds of the best and wisest men this country has ever known have
been for years warning the United States of her dangers from
Romanism, but it seems as though we will not heed the warning, but
bear in mind that unless this country does heed this warning and halt
the Czar of Darkness, we will live to see the time when we will have
to resort to arms to protect our Protestant interests.

The nation of France has swung out from the power of the Vatican, and
is to-day defying the Pope of Rome and daring him to do his worst,
and France is a nation that has always been a Catholic nation and
controlled by her abominations, but she has woke up to the fact that
unless this hellish doctrine is stamped out from her shores that she
will become a nation of mental pygmies and nonentities, as she has
long since learned that Catholicism is nothing more nor less than a
poisonous breath that withers intellect and causes nations to decay
and sink to the level of Romish degeneracy.

It seems as though the Vatican will not learn that the world moves,
as the Vatican is determined that Italy shall not appear above the
horizon of papal abhorrence.

It is hard for the Vatican to learn that the world moves and that
Italy moves with it. In its final resolution, the quarrel between the
Pope and the French government is based on the recognition of the
king of Italy as the sole sovereign in Rome, but the Pope is as
determined that him and his reign of darkness shall be the only
acknowledged ruler of Italy.

President Loubet of France, the executive of this Catholic nation,
gave great offense to the Vatican, by visiting the king of Italy,
who is in the eyes of the church a usurper.

According to the Vatican's standards, the kingdom of Italy is not an
accomplished fact, as the Vatican refuses to recognize any government
in Italy save that which he chooses to establish and build up out of
the filth and abominations of Roman Catholicism.

The Pope declares himself to be the only legitimate sovereign in
Rome, but the Italian government has for a number of years been
learning that the power of the Vatican is a power of darkness,
emanating from the putridness of paganism, and which is detrimental
to any nation that aspires to individual intellectuality, morality
and greatness.

The reader must bear in mind that Italy is the home of the Pope, and
the home of Popes, and that Rome is the city of Popes, archbishops
and cardinals.

This statement can not be denied by any living man, and since it is
true, we want to learn something of the inhabitants of Rome, so that
we may be prepared to judge whether Roman Catholicism is beneficial
or detrimental to those whom she rules.

We make the statement without fear of successful denial, that Roman
Catholicism is a power which withers the hopes and ambitions of any
nation, which is so unlucky as to fall under her tyrannical tread, as
Romanism is a power for evil, unequaled by any creed of deviltry and
diabolical cunning ever conceived by mortal man.

We have made the statement that the city of Rome was one of the most
immoral and ungodly cities under the shining canopy of Heaven, and we
have also made the statement that Rome is the home of popes,
archbishops and cardinals, and we propose to prove to the reader
that, while Rome is the home of Roman Catholic officials, that she is
also the home of the libertine and immoral.

We also propose to prove that the immorality of the inhabitants of
Rome is taught them by the Catholic officials of Rome, as we are not
writing of what we have learned from the mouth of others, but we are
writing of what we know by the power of sight, as we have visited
Rome more than once in the official capacity of Roman Catholicism,
and we make this statement with a living God as our witness, that
Roman Catholicism is responsible for the immorality found in the city
of Rome, and this immorality is not confined alone to the city
outside the walls of the Vatican, as this atmosphere of immorality
and degradation permeates the very atmosphere of the Vatican, as
illegitimacy is found within the walls of the Vatican, as well as
without.

Rome is a city of popes, cardinals, archbishops, priests, monks,
friars and ecclesiastical students.

In the city of Rome, which is the home of popes, there are 39
cardinals, 35 archbishops, 1,469 priests, 2,832 monks and friars,
2,000 nuns and 1,000 ecclesiastical students, making in all 7,576
teachers of this abomination; and for every 4,375 children born in
the city of Rome, 3,160 are bastards, and for every 750 people in the
city of Rome, there is a murder committed during the year; thus you
will see that this herd of Catholic teachers are not only teachers of
immorality and degradation, but are also responsible for murder, as
such a pestilence of immorality will lead to murder.

Is it any wonder that France and Italy are to-day struggling with
this polluted beast in order to free themselves from her filthy
grasp? Is it any wonder that France has closed up the monasteries,
convents and schools of this abomination!

With such nations as France and Italy declaring to their inhabitants
that Catholicism is not only a nuisance but a menace to intelligence
and morality, what can this government expect in the future if she
permits Romanism to continue to flourish in the future as she has in
the past?

This book is not written by a man who seeks notoriety, or a man who
is writing from a prejudiced standpoint, but we are writing from what
we know of the awfulness of Catholicism, as fifty-six long years have
rolled into eternity since I began to worship at the feet of this
immoral hag; therefore, the reader must know that it is not a
pleasant task to acknowledge before the world that we have been not
only fifty-six years a follower of this creed of abominations, but
for thirty long years we helped to fasten this creed upon the human
family.

I wish that it was within my power to become a spirit, which would
enable me to navigate the air and whisper my warnings into the ears
of Protestant America, for no nation on the face of the earth needs
the warning as badly as the United States, as day by day, week by
week, month by month and year by year the Vatican's shadow grows
longer and longer upon our shores, and wherever this shadow of
paganish darkness stretches itself you will find the withered hopes
of man, as Roman Catholicism's only ambition is to place humanity at
her feet, which will enable her to bind her followers with the cords
of superstition and ignorance, as she exists upon the blasted hopes
of those whom she rules.

If what I have told you in the pages of this book is true, then is it
not time for Protestant America to arouse herself from her lethargy
and buckle on the armor of righteousness and patriotism and go forth
to battle this "Strumpet of Sin" with the valor of our American
forefathers?

I have prayerfully endeavored to lay bare the sins of Roman
Catholicism, and the only hindrance I have encountered in my efforts
is on the account of not being more familiar with the English
language, as I am a German born, and my power of expressing myself in
the English language is materially hindered by being educated in
Germany, but thank God that education does not stand in the way of a
living God helping the foreign tongue to express itself in a manner
which can be understood.

I have endeavored to inform the reader who I am, what I am, and why I
am what I am, and have taken up the abominations of Catholicism and
treated these abominations in a manner that I hope will carry
conviction to the hearts of the reader, as I am qualified to go
before not only any official who has the power to administer an oath
and to make oath to the truthfulness of every assertion made herein,
but I am willing to meet my God around the great white throne in
Heaven and stand upon the declarations herein contained.

I have endeavored to give the Protestant reader to understand that
his offspring are considered bastards, and their parents persons who
live in immorality, by not belonging to the Roman Catholic Church and
being married by the priestcraft.

I have endeavored to tear the mask of ignorance from the bleared and
polluted features of Romanism and show her up in all of her
detestible ugliness.

I have in my weak manner endeavored to try to warn our American
fathers and mothers of the great danger of the "confession," as the
confessional is the stepping stone that leads to Romish abominations,
as it is there that the seed of immoral thought is planted and it is
there that the purity of girlhood is first tarnished, and if I can
arouse Protestant mothers and fathers of this land to these awful
sinks of iniquity I will consider that I have been instrumental in
helping to obliterate one of the greatest evils known to the human
family.

I have endeavored to point out to Protestant America the awful
mistake made by the United States in permitting Roman Catholicism to
continue her debauchery in Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippine
Islands, as I declare to the reader with eyes wet with grief that not
only the flower of our army is being sacrificed in these far away
islands, but that millions of dollars are being spent upon these
islands and that Roman Catholicism is being benefited by this great
expenditure of Protestant money, as the Pope of Rome is as powerful
in these islands to-day as he ever was, and every intelligent
Protestant in this land who has made this subject a study knows full
well that had it not been for Roman Catholicism and her outrages,
that the Spanish-American war would never have been fought.

I have earnestly tried to make the reader understand that the
monasteries in this country are often the abodes of criminals, and
the nunneries of this land are the slaughter pens of virtue, and I
trust that my readers will read it in the spirit that I have written
it, and if such is the case I know that this little book will be
instrumental in not only opening the eyes of drowsy Protestantism,
but it will be instrumental in turning thousands of Roman Catholics
from the error of their ways and pointing them to "the Lamb of God
that taketh away the sins of the world."

I have endeavored to demonstrate to the reader that celibacy upon the
part of the priestcraft is one of the most damnable crimes known to
civilization, as it is the unmarried cussedness of the Roman Catholic
priests that is instrumental in the slaughter of virtue.

I have endeavored to prove to the reader that the Roman Catholic
Church is a living infamous insult to an all-wise God, by claiming
that the Pope of Rome is an infallible being, and I believe that if
the reader has read my book with a determination of discarding that
which is bad and holding to that which is good, that he or she will
close this book with an enlightened conception of this devilish creed
which would have its followers believe that the Pope of Rome is on an
equality with Jesus Christ.

I have endeavored to lead the reader from clime to clime, so that he
or she might behold the characters of the followers of Rome, and by
comparison I have endeavored to convince the reader that the
characters of the followers of Roman Catholicism are not nor never
can be on a par with the character of Protestantism, as Roman
Catholicism follows the teachings of paganism, born in the kennel of
filthiness and surrounded and led by a class of men who glut their
lust upon the virtue of their "dupes," while Protestantism is led by
the lowly Nazarine, whose teachings have made Protestant America all
that she is to-day or ever will be.

I have endeavored to point out to the readers of this little volume
the sin of Protestantism, permitting Catholicism to control our
public schools and teach our children doctrines that will be
instrumental in strangling their ambitions and paralyzing their
aspirations, which is near and dear to Protestant America.

I have from the bottom of an honest heart endeavored to impress upon
the reader the awful influence that the priestcraft of America has
upon the morals of this country, and I trust that this task has not
been a useless one, for America has no plague that is so deadly to
patriotism as this black-garbed army of priests, who tramp up and
down the length and breadth of this land, seeking whom they may
devour.

With every drop of blood in my old veins electrified with a desire to
serve a living God, I have endeavored to warn Protestant America of
the lustfulness of the priestcraft, who without a blush of shame
invade the chastity of our American homes, and by the hellishness of
this Romish doctrine pollute the wives and daughters of this fair
land.

I have pointed out the dangers which beset this nation by the
toleration of Popish rule, and have compared Protestant nations with
the nations which have been morally damned and disgraced by Romanism,
and I trust that my comparisons will lead an intelligent public to
see the dangers that beset this country unless Romanism is relegated
to the everlasting haunts of oblivion.

In conclusion I desire to say to the reader that he or she will never
know of the diabolical cunning of this Romish doctrine, for it is
impossible for mortal man who has traveled this road of debauchery
to ever portray in print to the public what he has seen along this
journey of ignorance, superstition and immorality, as no man who has
the welfare of the young and rising generation at heart would sink so
low as to write all of the awfulness that I have seen upon my journey
for thirty years upon this Romish highway of carnality, as every turn
in the path that leads through this desert of desolation is strewn
with the bleached bones of ambition.

There is not an oasis in this vast stretch of Romish desolation, as
her every ambition is to rule by superstition, ignorance and tyranny.

Again I would warn Protestant America that we are nearing the
trenches of physical strength, and unless we infuse into our
Protestant manhood the liquid fires of Protestantism, the time is not
far distant when the Bunker Hill that was made famous by the blood of
our forefathers will have her base dripping wet with the blood of
Protestantism, in defense of the principles that have made America
all that she ever has been, all that she is, and all that she may
hope to be.

Can we expect anything else should Roman Catholicism ever become
numerically strong enough to rule by physical strength? The answer to
this question must come from the pages of Romish history, and this
history has every page wet with Protestant blood shed by this Monarch
of Darkness, as 75,000,000 Protestants to-day sleep beneath the sod
of the universe, bearing the scars of Romish torture.

My task is done; my warning has been sounded; my prayers have been
offered, and now in the evening of old age, when life's sun is
slipping down behind the horizon of earthly things, I find myself
surrounded with the faces of new friends, but in the dim far away I
behold the countenance of my Lord beckoning me to that rest beyond
the skies, where I hope to receive a full pardon from a God I so
recently learned to serve.

For the sake of right, I bade farewell to the associations of my
childhood, but in doing so I have been permitted to taste of
realities that were bought for the human race "By the blood of the
Lamb," and I feel assured that when this earthly race is over that I
will be taken home to glory, where I will be permitted to sing the
songs of the new Jerusalem, and my prayer is that this little volume
may march on down the ages after I am gone, to warn the generations
that are yet unborn of the damnable teachings of Romanism, and be
instrumental in wooing away from this human viper those who have been
taught to worship at the feet of this hydra-headed monster, Roman
Catholicism.


THE LIE NAILED.

Catholicism is circulating a lie that BERNARD FRESENBORG
never was a Catholic Priest. Here is a copy of a Check given
Mr. Fresenborg by ARCHBISHOP J.J. HARTY, for saying "Mass" in
1903. J.J. Harty is now an Archbishop in the Philippine Islands
and one of Rome's big guns.

Archbishop Harty at the time this Check was given was Priest in
charge of ST. LEO'S CATHOLIC CHURCH, St. Louis, Mo.

[Illustration: Check]

[I will give $1,000 to any man, woman or child who will prove
that this statement untrue.]




THE END.




       * * * * *

TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS CORRECTED

The following typographical errors in the text were corrected as
detailed here.

On the cover page, "circumfrence" was corrected to "circumference" in
the following text: "This great book has stirred America from center
to circumference."

In the Author's Announcement, "enlightment" was corrected to
"enlightenment" in "A structure of enlightenment ..."

On page 18, "Catholocism" was corrected to "Catholicism" in the
following text: "... that I have shaken off this eternal bondage of
Catholicism ..."

On page 20, "ledgerdemain" was corrected to "legerdemain" in the
following text: "... Catholic legerdemain, and I was taught ..."

On page 22, "Herold" was corrected to "Harold" to be consistent with
other mentions of this name on the same page.

On page 28, "crimnials" was corrected to "criminals'" in the following
text: "... built with the purpose of sheltering her abominable
faithless in case these criminals' desire to hide themselves ..."

On page 34, "hodwink" was corrected to "hoodwink" in the following text:
"... which will enable the officials to "hoodwink" their followers ..."

On page 94, the text "carion" was corrected to "carrion" in the
following text: "... that part of the priestcraft which exists upon the
carrion of the human family ..."

In the first paragraph of chapter VI (on page 97) "Ecquador" was
corrected to "Ecuador" in the following text: "In this chapter, we have
before us the vision of two countries; one is Protestant America and the
other Catholic Ecuador."

On page 128, "asylumns" was corrected to "asylums" in the following
text: "The "asylums" of olden times were intended as retreats ..."

On page 136, "Crowe" was corrected to "Crow" to be consistent with other
mentions of this name.

On page 138, "absense" was corrected to "absence" in the following
text: "... asked his government of Holland for a leave of
absence to fight in the Boer war ..."

On page 141, "sytem" was corrected to "system" in the following text:
"... so I sailed for the diamond fields of South Africa, where I am
now free, by the system ..."

Also on page 141, the word "by" was corrected to "my" in the following
text: "... I walked to the banks of the Missouri River and raised
my buried treasure ..."

On page 147, "degredation" was corrected to "degradation" in the
following text: "... snatch their children from the Romish mire of
degradation ..."

On page 173, Pope "Piux" was corrected Pope "Pius."

On page 214, the word "concensus" was corrected to "consensus" in the
following text: "The consensus of opinion among all classes ..."

On page 219, "broad-guage" was corrected to "broad-gauge."

On page 255, "paracite" was corrected to "parasite" in the following
text: "... who are as heavily burdened to-day with this ancient
parasite ..."

On page 259, two instances of "instiution" were corrected to
"institution."

On page 277, "Massachuetts" was corrected to "Massachusetts" in the
following text: "If such things are now happening in the State
of Massachusetts ..."

On page 297, "Ctholicism" was corrected to "Catholicism" in the
following text: "... permit yourself to be made tools of in behalf
of Roman Catholicism ..."

On page 285, "blod" was corrected to "blood" in the following text:
"... every man, woman and child that lives under that old red, white
and blue flag, which was bought by the blood of our forefathers ..."

Also on page 285, "boldy" was corrected to "boldly" in the following
text: "... as she boldly and flagrantly declares that she ..."

On page 293, "emmissaries" was corrected to "emissaries" in the
following text: "... send her emissaries into the halls ..."

On page 306, "convice" was corrected to "convince" in the
following text: "... made a prediction that ought to convince every
sane man and woman ..."

On page 311, "hopless" was corrected to "hopeless" in the following
text: "... the intrigues of the Papal faction is due the disordered
and hopeless condition ..."

On page 312, "interefrence" was corrected to "interference" in the
following text: "If the interference of the papal faction ..."

On page 320, "expres" was corrected to "express" in the following
text: "... helping the foreign tongue to express itself ..."

On page 321, "detestible" was corrected to "detestable" in the following
text: "... in all of her detestible ugliness."

On page 322, "sacrified" was corrected to "sacrificed" in the following
text: "... the flower of our army is being sacrificed ..."


ERRORS LEFT UNCHANGED IN THE TEXT

"Villify" and "villified" are consistently spelled with two lls and
are used multiple times by the author. They have been left unchanged.

The word "lude" appears twice and is left unchanged.

The word "cungering" is spelled consistently and is used in multiple
places in this book. This word has been left unchanged.

The word "disorganizer" appears in a quoted passage, and is left
unchanged.

The following words each appear once, and are left unchanged:
"cathechism;" "effulgency;" "engraven;" "jesuitical;"
"Macris;" "Oricular;" "perceptibilities."

Both spellings of the word "Savior" and "Saviour" are used in this book.






End of Project Gutenberg's Thirty Years In Hell, by Bernard Fresenborg

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THIRTY YEARS IN HELL ***

***** This file should be named 18040.txt or 18040.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/0/4/18040/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Geetu Melwani and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

