Project Gutenberg's The Log of The "Jolly Polly", by Richard Harding Davis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Log of The "Jolly Polly"

Author: Richard Harding Davis

Posting Date: October 10, 2008 [EBook #1808]
Release Date: May, 1999

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOG OF THE "JOLLY POLLY" ***




Produced by Aaron Cannon





THE LOG OF THE "JOLLY POLLY"

By Richard Harding Davis



Temptation came to me when I was in the worst possible position to
resist it.

It is a way temptation has. Whenever I swear off drinking invariably I
am invited to an ushers' dinner. Whenever I am rich, only the highbrow
publications that pay the least, want my work. But the moment I am
poverty-stricken the MANICURE GIRL'S MAGAZINE and the ROT AND SPOT
WEEKLY spring at me with offers of a dollar a word. Temptation always is
on the job. When I am down and out temptation always is up and at me.

When first the Farrells tempted me my vogue had departed. On my name and
"past performances" I could still dispose of what I wrote, but only to
magazines that were just starting. The others knew I no longer was
a best-seller. All the real editors knew it. So did the theatrical
managers.

My books and plays had flourished in the dark age of the
historical-romantic novel. My heroes wore gauntlets and long swords.
They fought for the Cardinal or the King, and each loved a high-born
demoiselle who was a ward of the King or the Cardinal, and with feminine
perversity, always of whichever one her young man was fighting. With
people who had never read Guizot's "History of France," my books were
popular, and for me made a great deal of money. This was fortunate, for
my parents had left me nothing save expensive tastes. When the tastes
became habits, the public left me. It turned to white-slave and crook
plays, and to novels true to life; so true to life that one felt the
author must at one time have been a masseur in a Turkish bath.

So, my heroines in black velvet, and my heroes with long swords were
"scrapped." As one book reviewer put it, "To expect the public of to-day
to read the novels of Fletcher Farrell is like asking people to give up
the bunny hug and go back to the lancers."

And, to make it harder, I was only thirty years old.

It was at this depressing period in my career that I received a letter
from Fairharbor, Massachusetts, signed Fletcher Farrell. The letter was
written on the business paper of the Farrell Cotton Mills, and asked if
I were related to the Farrells of Duncannon, of the County Wexford,
who emigrated to Massachusetts in 1860. The writer added that he had a
grandfather named Fletcher and suggested we might be related. From the
handwriting of Fletcher Farrell and from the way he ill-treated the
King's English I did not feel the ties of kinship calling me very loud.
I replied briefly that my people originally came from Youghal, in County
Cork, that as early as 1730 they had settled in New York, and that all
my relations on the Farrell side either were still at Youghal, or dead.
Mine was not an encouraging letter; nor did I mean it to be; and I
was greatly surprised two days later to receive a telegram reading,
"Something to your advantage to communicate; wife and self calling
on you Thursday at noon. Fletcher Farrell." I was annoyed, but also
interested. The words "something to your advantage" always possess a
certain charm. So, when the elevator boy telephoned that Mr. and Mrs.
Farrell were calling, I told him to bring them up.

My first glance at the Farrells convinced me the interview was a waste
of time. I was satisfied that from two such persons, nothing to my
advantage could possibly emanate. On the contrary, from their lack of
ease, it looked as though they had come to beg or borrow. They resembled
only a butler and housekeeper applying for a new place under the
disadvantage of knowing they had no reference from the last one. Of the
two, I better liked the man. He was an elderly, pleasant-faced Irishman,
smooth-shaven, red-cheeked, and with white hair. Although it was July,
he wore a frock coat, and carried a new high hat that glistened. As
though he thought at any moment it might explode, he held it from him,
and eyed it fearfully. Mrs. Farrell was of a more sophisticated type.
The lines in her face and hands showed that for years she might have
known hard physical work. But her dress was in the latest fashion, and
her fingers held more diamonds than, out of a showcase, I ever had seen.

With embarrassment old man Farrell began his speech. Evidently it had
been rehearsed and as he recited it, in swift asides, his wife prompted
him; but to note the effect he was making, she kept her eyes upon me.
Having first compared my name, fame, and novels with those of Charles
Dickens, Walter Scott, and Archibald Clavering Gunter, and to the
disadvantage of those gentlemen, Farrell said the similarity of our
names often had been commented upon, and that when from my letter he
had learned our families both were from the South of Ireland, he had
a premonition we might be related. Duncannon, where he was born, he
pointed out, was but forty miles from Youghal, and the fishing boats out
of Waterford Harbor often sought shelter in Blackwater River. Had any of
my forebears, he asked, followed the herring?

Alarmed, lest at this I might take offense, Mrs. Farrell interrupted
him.

"The Fletchers and O'Farrells of Youghal," she exclaimed, "were gentry.
What would they be doing in a trawler?"

I assured her that so far as I knew, 1750 being before my time, they
might have been smugglers and pirates.

"All I ever heard of the Farrells," I told her, "begins after they
settled in New York. And there is no one I can ask concerning them. My
father and mother are dead; all my father's relatives are dead, and
my mother's relatives are as good as dead. I mean," I added, "we don't
speak!"

To my surprise, this information appeared to afford my visitors great
satisfaction. They exchanged hasty glances.

"Then," exclaimed Mr. Farrell, eagerly; "if I understand you, you have
no living relations at all--barring those that are dead!"

"Exactly!" I agreed.

He drew a deep sigh of relief. With apparent irrelevance but with a
carelessness that was obviously assumed, he continued.

"Since I come to America," he announced, "I have made heaps of money."
As though in evidence of his prosperity, he flashed the high hat. In
the sunlight it coruscated like one of his wife's diamonds. "Heaps of
money," he repeated. "The mills are still in my name," he went on, "but
five years since I sold them--We live on the income. We own Harbor
Castle, the finest house on the whole waterfront."

"When all the windows are lit up," interjected Mrs. Farrell, "it's often
took for a Fall River boat!"

"When I was building it," Farrell continued, smoothly, "they called
it Farrell's Folly; but not NOW." In friendly fashion he winked at
me, "Standard Oil," he explained, "offered half a million for it. They
wanted my wharf for their tank steamers. But, I needed it for my yacht!"

I must have sat up rather too suddenly, for, seeing the yacht had
reached home, Mr. Farrell beamed. Complacently his wife smoothed an
imaginary wrinkle in her skirt.

"Eighteen men!" she protested, "with nothing to do but clean brass and
eat three meals a day!"

Farrell released his death grip on the silk hat to make a sweeping
gesture.

"They earn their wages," he said generously.

"Aren't they taking us this week to Cap May?"

"They're taking the yacht to Cape May!" corrected Mrs. Farrell; "not ME!"

"The sea does not agree with her," explained Farrell; "WE'RE going by
automobile." Mrs. Farrell now took up the wondrous tale.

"It's a High Flyer, 1915 model," she explained; "green, with white enamel
leather inside, and red wheels outside. You can see it from the window."

Somewhat dazed, I stepped to the window and found you could see it from
almost anywhere. It was as large as a freight car; and was entirely
surrounded by taxi-starters, bellboys, and nurse-maids. The chauffeur,
and a deputy chauffeur, in a green livery with patent-leather leggings,
were frowning upon the mob. They possessed the hauteur of ambulance
surgeons. I returned to my chair, and then rose hastily to ask if I
could not offer Mr. Farrell some refreshment.

"Mebbe later," he said. Evidently he felt that as yet he had not
sufficiently impressed me.

"Harbor Castle," he recited, "has eighteen bedrooms, billiard-room,
music-room, art gallery and swimming-pool." He shook his head. "And no
one to use 'em but us. We had a boy." He stopped, and for an instant, as
though asking pardon, laid his hand upon the knee of Mrs. Farrell.
"But he was taken when he was four, and none came since. My wife has a
niece," he added, "but----"

"But," interrupted Mrs. Farrell, "she was too high and mighty for
plain folks, and now there is no one. We always took an interest in
you because your name was Farrell. We were always reading of you in
the papers. We have all your books, and a picture of you in the
billiard-room. When folks ask me if we are any relation--sometimes I
tell 'em we ARE."

As though challenging me to object, she paused.

"It's quite possible," I said hastily. And, in order to get rid of them,
I added: "I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll write to Ireland and----"

Farrell shook his head firmly. "You don't need to write to Ireland," he
said, "for what we want."

"What DO you want?" I asked.

"We want a SON," said Farrell; "an adopted son. We want to adopt YOU!"

"You want to WHAT?" I asked.

To learn if Mrs. Farrell also was mad, I glanced toward her, but her
expression was inscrutable. The face of the Irishman had grown purple.

"And why not?" he demanded. "You are a famous young man, all right, and
educated. But there's nothing about me I'm ashamed of! I'm worth five
million dollars and I made every cent Of it myself--and I made it
honest. You ask Dun or Bradstreet, ask----"

I attempted to soothe him.

"THAT'S not it, sir," I explained. "It's a most generous offer, a most
flattering, complimentary offer. But you don't know me. I don t know
you. Choosing a son is a very----"

"I've had you looked up," announced Mrs. Farrell. "The Pinkertons give
you a high rating. I hired 'em to trail you for six months."

I wanted to ask WHICH six months, but decided to let sleeping dogs lie.
I shook my head. Politely but firmly I delivered my ultimatum.

"It is quite impossible!" I said firmly.

Mrs. Farrell continued the debate. She talked in a businesslike manner
and pronounced the arrangement one by which both sides would benefit.
There were thousands of other Farrells, she pointed out, any one of
whom they might have adopted. But they had selected me because in so
choosing, they thought they were taking the least risk. They had decided
she was pleased to say, that I would not disgrace them, and that as a
"literary author" I brought with me a certain social asset.

A clever, young businessman they did not want. Their business affairs
they were quit able to manage themselves. But they would like as an
adopted son one who had already added glory to the name of Farrell,
which glory he was willing to share.

"We wouldn't tie you down," she urged "but we would expect you to live
at Harbor Castle a part of your time, and to call us Ma and Pa.
You would have your own rooms, and your own servant, and there is a
boat-house on the harbor front, where you could write your novels."

At this, knowing none wanted my novels, I may have winced, for,
misreading my discontent, Farrell hastily interrupted.

"You won't have to work at all," he protested heartily. "My son can
afford to live like a lord. You'll get all the spending money you want,
and if you're fond of foreign parts, you can take the yacht wherever you
please!"

"The farther the better," exclaimed Mrs. Farrell with heat. "And when
you get it there, I hope you'll SINK it!"

"Maybe your friends would come and visit You," suggested Farrell,
I thought, a trifle wistfully. "There's bathing, tennis, eight...
bedrooms, billiard-room, art gallery----"

"You told him that!" said Mrs. Farrell.

I was greatly at a loss. Their offer was preposterous, but to them, it
was apparently a perfectly possible arrangement. Nor were they acting
on impulse. Mrs. Farrell had admitted that for six months she had had me
"trailed." How to say "No" and not give offense, I found difficult. They
were deeply in earnest and I could see that Farrell, at least, was by
instinct generous, human, and kind. It was, in fact, a most generous
offer. But how was I to tell them tactfully I was not for sale, that I
was not looking for "ready-to-wear" parents, and that if I were in the
market, they were not the parents I would choose. I had a picture of
life at Harbor Castle, dependent upon the charity of the Farrells. I
imagined what my friends would say to me, and worse, what they would say
behind my back. But I was not forced to a refusal.

Mr. Farrell rose.

"We don't want to hurry you," he said. "We want you to think it over.
Maybe if we get acquainted----"

Mrs. Farrell smiled upon me ingratiatingly.

"Why don't we get acquainted now?" she demanded. "We're motoring down
to Cape May to stay three weeks. Why don't you come along--as our
guest--and see how you like us?"

I assured them, almost too hastily, that already was deeply engaged.

As they departed, Farrell again admonished me to think it over.

"And look me up at Dun's and Bradstreet's," he advised. "Ask 'em about
me at the Waldorf. Ask the head waiters and bellhops if I look twice at
a five spot!"

It seemed an odd way to select a father, but I promised.

I escorted them even to the sidewalk, and not without envy watched them
sweep toward the Waldorf in the High Flyer, 1915 model. I caught myself
deciding, were it mine, I would paint it gray.

I was lunching at the Ritz with Curtis Spencer, and I looked forward to
the delight he would take in my story of the Farrells. He would probably
want to write it. He was my junior, but my great friend; and as a
novelist his popularity was where five years earlier mine had been. But
he belonged to the new school. His novels smelled like a beauty parlor;
and his heroines, while always beautiful, were, on occasions, virtuous,
but only when they thought it would pay.

Spencer himself was as modern as his novels, and I was confident his
view of my adventure would be that of the great world which he described
so accurately.

But to my amazement when I had finished he savagely attacked me.

"You idiot!" he roared. "Are you trying to tell me you refused five
million dollars--just because you didn't like the people who wanted to
force it on you? Where," he demanded, "is Cape May? We'll follow them
now! We'll close this deal before they can change their minds. I'll make
you sign to-night. And, then," he continued eagerly, "we'll take their
yacht and escape to Newport, and you'll lend me five thousand dollars,
and pay my debts, and give me back the ten you borrowed. And you might
buy me a touring-car and some polo ponies and--and--oh, lots of things.
I'll think of them as we go along. Meanwhile, I can't afford to give
luncheons to millionaires, so you sign for this one; and then we'll
start for Cape May."

"Are you mad?" I demanded; "do you think I'd sell my honor!"

"For five million dollars?" cried Spencer. "Don't make me laugh! If they
want a REAL novelist for a son they can adopt me!"

I replied with dignity that I would not disgrace the memory of my
parents.

"You have disgraced them!" retorted Spencer, "with your Musketeer novels
for infants. You need money. To get it you may be tempted to write more
novels. Here's your chance! Stop robbing the public, and lead an honest
life. Think of all the money you could give to the poor, think of all
the money you and I could lose at Monte Carlo!"

When he found I would not charter an auto-mobile and at once pursue the
Farrells he changed his tactics. If I would not go to Cape May, then, he
begged, I would go to Fairharbor. He asked that I would, at least, find
out what I was refusing. Before making their offer, for six months, the
Farrells had had me "looked up," but, without knowing anything of them,
after a talk of ten minutes I had turned them down. "Was that," he
asked, "intelligent? Was it fair to the Farrells?" He continued to tempt
me.

"They told you to think it over," he persisted. "Very well, then, think
it over at Fairharbor! For the next three weeks the Farrells will be at
Cape May. The coast is clear. Go to Fairharbor as somebody else and be
your own detective. Find out if what they tell you is true. Get inside
information. Get inside Harbor Castle. Count the eighteen bedrooms and
try the beds. Never mind the art gallery, but make sure there is a wine
cellar. You can't start too soon, and I WILL GO WITH YOU!"

I told him where he could go.

We then tossed to see who should pay for the lunch and who should tip
the head waiter. I lost and had to tip the head waiter. We separated,
and as I walked down the Avenue, it seemed as though to the proprietor
of every shop I passed I owed money. Owing them the money I did not so
much mind; what most distressed me was that they were so polite about
it. I had always wanted to reward their patience. A favorite dream of
mine was to be able to walk down Fifth Avenue, my pockets stuffed with
yellow bills, paying off my debts. Compared with my steadily decreasing
income, how enormous my debts appeared; but when compared with the
income of a man worth--say-five million dollars, how ridiculous! I had
no more than reached my apartment, than a messenger-boy arrived with an
envelope. It contained a ticket for a round trip on the New Bedford Line
boat leaving that afternoon, a ticket for a stateroom, and a note from
Curtis Spencer. The latter read: "The boat leaves at six to-night.
You arrive at New Bedford seven to-morrow morning. New Bedford and
Fairharbor are connected by a bridge. CROSS IT!"

I tore the note in tiny fragments, and tossed them through the open
window. I was exceedingly angry. As I stood at the window adding to the
name of Curtis Spencer insulting aliases, the street below sent up hot,
stifling odors: the smoke of taxicabs, the gases of an open subway, the
stale reek of thousands of perspiring, unwashed bodies. From that one
side street seemed to rise the heat and smells of all New York. For
relief I turned to my work-table where lay the opening chapters of
my new novel, "The White Plume of Savoy." But now, in the light
of Spencer's open scorn, I saw it was impudently false, childish,
sentimental. My head ached, the humidity sapped my strength, at heart
I felt sick, sore, discouraged. I was down and out. And seeing this,
Temptation, like an obsequious floorwalker, came hurrying forward.

"And what may I show you to-day?" asked Temptation. He showed me the
upper deck of the New Bedford boat feeling her way between the green
banks of the Sound. A cool wind swept past me bearing clean, salty
odors; on the saloon deck a band played, and from the darkness the
lighthouses winked at me, and in friendly greeting the stars smiled.
Temptation won. In five minutes I was feverishly packing, and at
five-thirty I was on board. I assured myself I had not listened to
Temptation, that I had no interest in Fairharbor. I was taking the trip
solely because it would give me a night's sleep on the Sound. I promised
myself that on the morrow I would not even LOOK toward Harbor Castle;
but on the evening following on the same boat, return to New York.
Temptation did not stop to argue, but hastened after another victim.

I turned in at nine o'clock and the coolness, and the salt air, blessed
me with the first sleep I had known in weeks. And when I woke we were
made fast to the company's wharf at New Bedford, and the sun was well
up. I rose refreshed in body and spirit. No longer was I discouraged.
Even "The White Plume of Savoy" seemed a perfectly good tale of
romance and adventure. And the Farrells were a joke. Even if I were at
Fairharbor, I was there only on a lark, and at the expense of Curtis
Spencer, who had paid for the tickets. Distinctly the joke was on Curtis
Spencer. I lowered the window screen, and looked across the harbor. It
was a beautiful harbor. At ancient stone wharfs Jay ancient whalers
with drooping davits and squared yards, at anchor white-breasted yachts
flashed in the sun, a gray man-of-war's man flaunted the week's laundry,
a four-masted schooner dried her canvas, and over the smiling surface of
the harbor innumerable fishing boats darted. With delight I sniffed
the odors of salt water, sun-dried herring, of oakum and tar. The shore
opposite was a graceful promontory crowned with trees and decorous
gray-shingled cottages set in tiny gardens that reached to the very edge
of the harbor. The second officer was passing my window and I asked what
the promontory was called.

"Fairharbor," he said. He answered with such proprietary pride and
smiled upon Fairharbor with such approval that I ventured to guess it
was his home.

"That's right," he said; "I used to live at the New York end of the
run-in a flat. But never again! No place for the boy to play but in the
street. I found I could rent one of those old cottages over there for
the same money I paid for the flat. So I cut out New York. My boy lives
in a bathing suit now, and he can handle a catboat same as me. We have
a kitchen garden, and hens, and the fishermen here will give you all
the fish you can carry away--fish right out of the water. I guess I've
smashed the high cost of living problem all right. I wouldn't go back to
living in New York now--not if they gave me the PILGRIM."

As though trying to prod my memory, I frowned. It was my conception of
the part of a detective. "Hasn't Fletcher Farrell," I asked, "a house in
Fairharbor?"

"Harbor Castle," said the mate promptly. "It's on the other side of the
point I'd as soon live in a jail!"

"Why?" I exclaimed.

But he was no longer listening. He pointed at the shore opposite.

"See that flag running up the staff in that garden?" he cried. "That's
my boy signalling. I got to get to the boat deck and wave back!"

I felt as a detective. I had acquired important information. The mate,
a man of judgment, preferred Fairharbor to New York. Also, to living in
Harbor Castle, he preferred going to jail.

The boat on which I had arrived was listed to start back at six the same
evening on her return trip to New York. So, at the office of the line I
checked my valise, and set forth to explore New Bedford.

The whaling vessels moored to a nearby wharf, I inspected from hatches
to keels, and by those on board was directed to a warehouse where were
stored harpoons, whalebone, and wooden figure-heads. My pleasure in
these led to my being passed on to a row of "antique" shops filled with
relics of the days of whaling and also with genuine pie-crust tables,
genuine flint-lock muskets, genuine Liverpool pitchers. I coveted
especially old-time engravings of the whalers, and was told at
Hatchardson's book-store on the main street others could be found in
profusion.

Hatchardson's proved to be a place of great delight. As you entered
there were counters for magazines and post-cards, popular music, and
best-selling novels, while in the rear of the shop tables and shelves
were stocked with ancient volumes, and on the wall surrounding them hung
engravings, prints and woodcuts of even the eighteenth century. Just as
the drugstore on the corner seemed to be a waiting station for those
of New Bedford who used the trolley-cars, so for those who moved in
automobiles, or still clung to the family carriage, Hatchardson's
appeared to be less a shop than a public meeting-place. I noticed that
the clerks, most of whom were women, were with the customers on a most
friendly footing, addressing them, and by them being addressed by name.
Finding I was free to wander where I pleased, I walked to the rear of
the shop and from one of the tables picked up a much-worn volume. It was
entitled "The Log of the JOLLY POLLY", and was illustrated with wood cuts
showing square-rigged ships and whales Spouting. For five minutes, lost
to my Surroundings, I turned the pages; and then became conscious that
across the table some one was watching me. I raised my eyes and beheld a
face of most surprising charm, intelligence and beauty. It was so lovely
that it made me wince. The face was the fortune, and judging from the
fact that in her hand she held a salesbook, the sole fortune, of a tall
young girl who apparently had approached to wait on me. She was looking
toward the street, so that, with the book-shelves for a back-ground, her
face was in profile, and I determined swiftly that if she were to wait
on me she would be kept waiting as long as my money lasted. I did not
want "The Log of the JOLLY POLLY," but I did want to hear the lovely
lady speak, and especially I desired that the one to whom she spoke
should be myself.

"What is the price of this?" I asked. With magnificent self-control I
kept my eyes on the book, but the lovely lady was so long silent that I
raised them. To my surprise, I found on her face an expression of
alarm and distress. With reluctance, and yet within her voice a certain
hopefulness, she said, "Fifty dollars."

Fifty dollars was a death blow. I had planned to keep the young lady
selling books throughout the entire morning, but at fifty dollars a
book, I would soon be owing her money. I attempted to gain time.

"It must be very rare!" I said. I was afraid to look at her lest my
admiration should give offense, so I pretended to admire the book.

"It is the only one in existence," said the young lady. "At least, it is
the only one for sale!"

We were interrupted by the approach of a tall man who, from his playing
the polite host and from his not wearing a hat, I guessed was Mr.
Hatchardson himself. He looked from the book in my hand to the lovely
lady and said smiling, "Have you lost it?"

The girl did not smile. To her, apparently, it was no laughing matter.
"I don't know--yet," she said. Her voice was charming, and genuinely
troubled.

Mr. Hatchardson, for later I learned it was he, took the book and showed
me the title-page.

"This was privately printed in 1830," he said, "by Captain Noah Briggs.
He distributed a hundred presentation copies among his family and
friends here in New Bedford. It is a most interesting volume."

I did not find it so. For even as he spoke the young girl, still with a
troubled countenance, glided away. Inwardly I cursed Captain Briggs and
associated with him in my curse the polite Mr. Hatchardson. But, at his
next words my interest returned. Still smiling, he lowered his voice.

"Miss Briggs, the young lady who just left us," he said, "is the
granddaughter of Captain Briggs, and she does not want the book to go
out of the family; she wants it for herself." I interrupted eagerly.

"But it is for sale?" Mr. Hatchardson reluctantly assented.

"Then I will take it," I said.

Fifty dollars is a great deal of money, but the face of the young lady
had been very sad. Besides being sad, had it been aged, plain, and
ill-tempered, that I still would have bought the book, is a question I
have never determined.

To Mr. Hatchardson, of my purpose to give the book to Miss Briggs, I
said nothing. Instead I planned to send it to her anonymously by mail.
She would receive it the next morning when I was arriving in New York,
and, as she did not know my name, she could not possibly return it.
At the post-office I addressed the "Log" to "Miss Briggs, care of
Hatchardson's Bookstore," and then I returned to the store. I felt I
had earned that pleasure. This time, Miss Briggs was in charge of the
post-card counter, and as now a post-card was the only thing I could
afford to buy, at seeing her there I was doubly pleased. But she was
not pleased to see me. Evidently Mr. Hatchardson had told her I had
purchased the "Log" and at her loss her very lovely face still showed
disappointment. Toward me her manner was distinctly aggrieved.

But of the "Log" I said nothing, and began recklessly purchasing
post-cards that pictured the show places of New Bedford. Almost the
first one I picked up was labelled "Harbor Castle. Residence of Fletcher
Farrell." I need not say that I studied it intently. According to the
post-card, Harbor Castle stood on a rocky point with water on both
sides. It was an enormous, wide-spreading structure, as large as a
fort. It exuded prosperity, opulence, extravagance, great wealth. I felt
suddenly a filial impulse to visit the home of my would-be forefathers.

"Is this place near here?" I asked.

Miss Briggs told me that in order to reach it I should take the ferry to
Fairharbor, and then cross that town to the Buzzards Bay side.

"You can't miss it," she said. "It's a big stone house, with red and
white awnings. If you see anything like a jail in ruffles, that's it."

It was evident that with the home I had rejected Miss Briggs was
unimpressed; but seeing me add the post-card to my collection, she
offered me another.

"This," she explained, "is Harbor Castle from the bay. That is their
yacht in the foreground."

The post-card showed a very beautiful yacht of not less than two
thousand tons. Beneath it was printed "HARBOR LIGHTS; steam yacht owned
by Fletcher Farrell." I always had dreamed of owning a steam yacht, and
seeing it stated in cold type that one was owned by "Fletcher Farrell,"
even though I was not that Fletcher Farrell, gave me a thrill of guilty
pleasure. I gazed upon the post-card with envy.

"HARBOR LIGHTS is a strange name for a yacht," I ventured. Miss Briggs
smiled.

"Not for that yacht," she said. "She never leaves it."

I wished to learn more of my would-be parents, and I wished to keep
on talking with the lovely Miss Briggs, so, as an excuse for both, I
pretended I was interested in the Farrells because I had something I
wanted to sell them.

"This Fletcher Farrell must be very rich," I said. "I wonder," I asked,
"if I could sell him an automobile?" The moment I spoke I noticed that
the manner of Miss Briggs toward Me perceptibly softened. Perhaps, from
my buying offhand a fifty-dollar book she had thought me one of the
rich, and had begun to suspect I was keeping her waiting on me only
because I found her extremely easy to look at. Many times before, in a
similar manner, other youths must have imposed upon her, and perhaps,
also, in concealing my admiration, I had not entirely succeeded.

But, when she believed that, like herself, I was working for my living,
she became more human.

"What car are you selling?" she asked. "I am TRYING to sell," I
corrected her, "the Blue Bird, six cylinder."

"I never heard of it," said Miss Briggs.

"Nor has any one else," I answered, with truth. "That is one reason why
I can't sell it. I arrived here this morning, and," I added with pathos,
"I haven't sold a car yet!"

Miss Briggs raised her beautiful eyebrows skeptically. "Have you tried?"
she said.

A brilliant idea came to me. In a side street I had passed a garage
where Photaix cars were advertised for hire. I owned a Phoenix, and
I thought I saw a way by which, for a happy hour, I might secure the
society of Miss Briggs.

"I am an agent and demonstrator for the Phoenix also," I said glibly;
"maybe I could show you one?"

"Show me one?" exclaimed Miss Briggs. "One sees them everywhere! They
are always under your feet!"

"I mean," I explained, "might I take you for a drive in one?"

It was as though I had completely vanished. So far as the lovely Miss
Briggs was concerned I had ceased to exist. She turned toward a nice old
lady.

"What can I show you, Mrs. Scudder?" she asked cheerily; "and how is
that wonderful baby?"

I felt as though I had been lifted by the collar, thrown out upon a
hard sidewalk, and my hat tossed after me. Greatly shaken, and mentally
brushing the dust from my hands and knees, I hastened to the ferry and
crossed to Fairharbor. I was extremely angry. By an utter stranger I
had been misjudged, snubbed and cast into outer darkness. For myself I
readily found excuses. If a young woman was so attractive that at the
first sight of her men could not resist buying her fifty-dollar books
and hiring automobiles in which to take her driving, the fault was hers.
I assured myself that girls as lovely as Miss Briggs were a menace to
the public. They should not be at large. An ordinance should require
them to go masked. For Miss Briggs also I was able to make excuses. Why
should she not protect herself from the advances of strange young men?
If a popular novelist, and especially an ex-popular one, chose to go
about disguised as a drummer for the Blue Bird automobile and behaved
as such, and was treated as such, what right had he to complain? So
I persuaded myself I had been punished as I deserved. But to salve my
injured pride I assured myself also that any one who read my novels
ought to know my attitude toward any lovely lady could be only
respectful, protecting, and chivalrous. But with this consoling thought
the trouble was that nobody read my novels.

In finding Harbor Castle I had no difficulty. It stood upon a rocky
point that jutted into Buzzards Bay. Five acres of artificial lawn and
flower-beds of the cemetery and railroad-station school of horticulture
surrounded it, and from the highroad it was protected by a stone wall so
low that to the passerby, of the beauties of Harbor Castle nothing was
left to the imagination. Over this wall roses under conflicting banners
of pink and red fought fiercely. One could almost hear the shrieks
of the wounded. Upon the least thorny of these I seated myself and in
tender melancholy gazed upon the home of my childhood. That is, upon the
home that might-have-been.

When surveying a completed country home, to make the owner thoroughly
incensed the correct thing to say is, "This place has great
possibilities!"

Harbor Castle had more possibilities than any other castle I ever
visited. But in five minutes I had altered it to suit myself. I had
ploughed up the flower-beds, dug a sunken garden, planted a wind screen
of fir, spruce, and Pine, and with a huge brick wall secured warmth and
privacy. So pleased was I with my changes, that when I departed I was
sad and downcast. The boat-house of which Mrs. Farrell had spoken
was certainly an ideal work-shop, the tennis-courts made those at
the Newport Casino look like a ploughed field, and the swimming-pool,
guarded by white pillars and overhung with grape-vines, was a cool
and refreshing picture. As, hot and perspiring, I trudged back through
Fairharbor, the memory of these haunted me. That they also tempted me,
it is impossible to deny. But not for long. For, after passing through
the elm-shaded streets to that side of the village that faced the
harbor, I came upon the cottages I had seen from the New Bedford shore.
At close range they appeared even more attractive than when pointed
out to me by the mate of the steamboat. They were very old, very
weather-stained and covered with honeysuckle. Flat stones in a setting
of grass led from the gates to the arched doorways, hollyhocks rose
above hedges of box, and from the verandas one could look out upon the
busy harbor and the houses of New Bedford rising in steps up the sloping
hills to a sky-line of tree-tops and church spires. The mate had told
me that for what he had rented a flat in New York he had secured one of
these charming old world homes. And as I passed them I began to pick out
the one in which when I retired from the world I would settle down. This
time I made no alterations. How much the near presence of Miss Briggs
had to do with my determination to settle down in Fairharbor, I cannot
now remember. But, certainly as I crossed the bridge toward New Bedford,
thoughts of her entirely filled my mind. I assured my self this was
so only because she was beautiful. I was sure her outward loveliness
advertised a nature equally lovely, but for my sudden and extreme
interest I had other excuses. Her in dependence in earning her living,
her choice in earning it among books and pictures, her pride of family
as shown by her efforts to buy the family heirloom, all these justified
my admiration. And her refusing to go joy-riding with an impertinent
stranger, even though the impertinent stranger was myself, was an act I
applauded. The more I thought of Miss Briggs the more was I disinclined
to go away leaving with her an impression of myself so unpleasant as
the one she then held. I determined to remove it. At least, until I had
redeemed myself, I would remain in New Bedford. The determination gave
me the greatest satisfaction. With a light heart I returned to the
office of the steamboat line and retrieving my suit-case started with it
toward the Parker House. It was now past five o'clock, the stores were
closed, and all the people who had not gone to the baseball game with
Fall River were in the streets. In consequence, as I was passing the
post-office, Miss Briggs came down the steps, and we were face to face.

In her lovely eyes was an expression of mingled doubt and indignation
and in her hand freshly torn from the papers in which I had wrapped it,
was "The Log of the JOLLY POLLY." In action Miss Briggs was as direct
as a submarine. At sight of me she attacked. "Did you send me this?" she
asked.

I lowered my bag to the sidewalk and prepared for battle. "I didn't
think of your going to the post-office," I said. "I planned you'd get
it to-morrow after I'd left. When I sent it, I thought I would never see
you again."

"Then you did send it!" exclaimed Miss Briggs. As though the book were
a hot plate she dropped it into my hand. She looked straight at me, but
her expression suggested she was removing a caterpillar from her pet
rosebush.

"You had no right," she said. "You may not have meant to be impertinent,
but you were!"

Again, as though I had disappeared from the face of the earth, Miss
Briggs gazed coldly about her, and with dignity started to cross the
street. Her dignity was so great that she glanced neither to the left
nor right. In consequence she did not see an automobile that swung
recklessly around a trolley-car and dived at her. But other people saw
it and shrieked. I also shrieked, and dropping the suit-case and the
"Log," jumped into the street, grabbed Miss Briggs by both arms, and
flung her back to the sidewalk. That left me where she had been, and the
car caught me up and slammed me head first against a telegraph pole.
The pole was hard, and if any one counted me out I did not stay awake to
hear him. When I came to I was conscious that I was lying on a sidewalk;
but to open my eyes, I was much too tired. A voice was saying, "Do you
know who he is, Miss?"

The voice that replied was the voice of the lovely Miss Briggs. But now
I hardly recognized it. It was full of distress, of tenderness and pity.

"No, I don't know him," it stammered. "He's a salesman--he was in the
store this morning--he's selling motor-cars." The first voice laughed.

"Motor-cars!" he exclaimed. "That's why he ain't scared of 'em. He
certainly saved you from that one! I seen him, Miss Briggs, and he most
certainly saved your life!"

In response to this astonishing statement I was delighted to hear a
well-trained male chorus exclaim in assent.

The voices differed; some spoke in the accents of Harvard, pure and
undefiled, some in a "down East" dialect, others suggested Italian
peanut venders and Portuguese sailors, but all agreed that the life of
Miss Briggs had been saved by myself. I had intended coming to, but
on hearing the chorus working so harmoniously I decided I had better
continue unconscious.

Then a new voice said importantly: "The marks on his suitcase are 'F.
F., New York."

I appreciated instantly that to be identified as Fletcher Farrell meant
humiliation and disaster. The other Fletcher Farrells would soon return
to New Bedford. They would learn that in their absence I had been spying
upon the home I had haughtily rejected. Besides, one of the chorus
might remember that three years back Fletcher Farrell had been a popular
novelist and might recognize me, and Miss Briggs would discover I was
not an automobile agent and that I had lied to her. I saw that I must
continue to lie to her. I thought of names beginning with "F," and
selected "Frederick Fitzgibbon." To christen yourself while your eyes
are shut and your head rests on a curb-stone is not easy, and later I
was sorry I had not called myself Fairchild as being more aristocratic.
But then it was too late. As Fitzgibbon I had come back to life, and as
Fitzgibbon I must remain.

When I opened my eyes I found the first voice belonged to a policeman
who helped me to my feet and held in check the male chorus. The object
of each was to lead me to a drink. But instead I turned dizzily to Miss
Briggs. She was holding my hat and she handed it to me. Her lovely eyes
were filled with relief and her charming voice with remorse.

"I--I can't possibly thank you," she stammered. "Are you badly hurt?"

I felt I had never listened to words so original and well chosen. In
comparison, the brilliant and graceful speeches I had placed on the lips
of my heroines became flat and unconvincing.

I assured her I was not at all hurt and endeavored, jauntily, to replace
my hat. But where my head had hit the telegraph pole a large bump had
risen which made my hat too small. So I hung it on the bump. It gave me
a rakish air. One of the chorus returned my bag and another the "Log."
Not wishing to remind Miss Briggs of my past impertinences; I guiltily
concealed it.

Then the policeman asked my name and I gave the one I had just invented,
and inquired my way to the Parker House. Half the chorus volunteered to
act as my escort, and as I departed, I stole a last look at Miss Briggs.
She and the policeman were taking down the pedigree of the chauffeur
of the car that had hit me. He was trying to persuade them he was
not intoxicated, and with each speech was furnishing evidence to the
contrary.

After I had given a cold bath to the bump on my head and to the rest of
my body which for the moment seemed the lesser of the two, I got into
dry things and seated myself on the veranda of the hotel. With a cigar
to soothe my jangling nerves, I considered the position of Miss Briggs
and myself. I was happy in believing it had improved. On the morrow
there was no law to prevent me from visiting Hatchardson's Bookstore,
and in view of what had happened since last I left it, I had reason to
hope Miss Briggs would receive me more, kindly. Of the correctness of
this diagnosis I was at once assured. In front of the hotel a district
messenger-boy fell off his bicycle and with unerring instinct picked
me out as Mr. Fitzgibbon of New York. The note he carried was from Miss
Briggs. It stated that in the presence of so many people it had been
impossible for her to thank me as she wished for the service I had
rendered her, and that Mrs. Cutler, with whom she boarded, and herself,
would be glad if after supper I would call upon them. I gave the
messenger-boy enough gold to enable him to buy a new bicycle and in my
room executed a dance symbolizing joy. I then kicked my suit-case under
the bed. I would not soon need it. Now that Miss Briggs had forgiven me,
I was determined to live and die in New Bedford.

The home of Mrs. Cutler, where Miss Briggs lodged and boarded, was in
a side street of respectable and distinguished antiquity. The street
itself was arched with the branches of giant elms, and each house was an
island surrounded by grass, and over the porches climbed roses. It was
too warm to remain indoors, so we sat on the steps of the porch, and
through the leaves of the elms the electric light globe served us as a
moon. For an automobile salesman I was very shy, very humble.

Twice before I had given offense and I was determined if it lay with
me, it would not happen again. I did not hope to interest Miss Briggs
in myself, nor did I let it appear how tremendously I was interested
in her. For the moment I was only a stranger in a strange land making
a social call. I asked Miss Briggs about New Bedford and the whaling,
about the books she sold, and the books she liked. It was she who
talked. When I found we looked at things in the same way and that the
same things gave us pleasure I did not comment on that astonishing fact,
but as an asset more precious than gold, stored it away. When I returned
to the hotel I found that concerning Miss Briggs I had made important
discoveries. I had learned that her name was Polly, that the JOLLY POLLY
had been christened after her grandmother, that she was an orphan, that
there were relatives with whom she did not "hit it off," that she was
very well read, possessed of a most charming sense of humor, and that I
found her the most attractive girl I had ever met.

The next morning I awoke in an exalted frame of mind. I was in love with
life, with New Bedford, and with Polly Briggs. I had been in love before
but never with a young lady who worked in a shop, and I found that
loving a lady so occupied gives one a tremendous advantage. For when you
call she must always be at home, nor can she plead another engagement.
So, before noon, knowing she could not deny herself, I was again at
Hatchardson's, purchasing more postal-cards. But Miss Briggs was not
deceived. Nor apparently was any one else. The BEDFORD MERCURY had told
how, the previous evening, Frederick Fitzgibbon, an automobile salesman
from New York, had been knocked out by an automobile while saving Miss
Polly Briggs from a similar fate; and Mr. Hatchardson and all the old
ladies who were in the bookstore making purchases congratulated me. It
was evident that in Miss Briggs they took much more than a perfunctory
interest. They were very fond of her. She was an institution; and I
could see that as such to visitors she would be pointed out with pride,
as was the new bronze statue of the Whaleman in Court House Square. Nor
did they cease discussing her until they had made it quite clear to me
that in being knocked out in her service I was a very lucky man. I did
not need to be told that, especially as I noted that Miss Briggs was
anxious lest I should not be properly modest. Indeed, her wish that in
the eyes of the old ladies I should appear to advantage was so evident,
and her interest in me so proprietary, that I was far from unhappy.

The afternoon I spent in Fairharbor. From a real estate agent I obtained
keys to those cottages on the water-front that were for rent, and I
busied myself exploring them. The one I most liked I pretended I had
rented, and I imagined myself at work among the flower-beds, or with
my telescope scanning the shipping in the harbor, or at night seated
in front of the open fire watching the green and blue flames of the
driftwood. Later, irresolutely, I wandered across town to Harbor Castle,
this time walking entirely around it and coming upon a sign that read,
"Visitors Welcome. Do not pick the flowers."

Assuring myself that I was moved only by curiosity, I accepted the
invitation, nor, though it would greatly have helped the appearance of
the cemetery-like beds, did I pick the flowers. On a closer view Harbor
Castle certainly possessed features calculated to make an impecunious
author Stop, look, and listen. I pictured it peopled with my friends. I
saw them at the long mahogany table of which through the French window
I got a glimpse, or dancing in the music-room, or lounging on the wicker
chairs on the sweeping verandas. I could see them in flannels at tennis,
in bathing-suits diving from the spring-board of the swimming pool,
departing on excursions in the motor-cars that at the moment in front
of the garage were being sponged and polished, so that they flashed like
mirrors. And I thought also of the two-thousand-ton yacht and to what
far countries, to what wonderful adventures it might carry me.

But all of these pictures lacked one feature. In none of them did
Polly Briggs appear. For, as I very well knew, that was something the
ambitions of Mrs. Farrell would not permit. That lady wanted me as a son
only because she thought I was a social asset. By the same reasoning,
as a daughter-in-law, she would not want a shop-girl, especially not one
who as a shop-girl was known to all New Bedford. My mood as I turned my
back upon the golden glories of Harbor Castle and walked to New Bedford
was thoughtful.

I had telegraphed my servant to bring me more clothes and my Phoenix
car; and as I did not want him inquiring for Fletcher Farrell had
directed him to come by boat to Fall River. Accordingly, the next
morning, I took the trolley to that city, met him at the wharf, and sent
him back to New York. I gave him a check with instructions to have it
cashed in that city and to send the money, and my mail, to Frederick
Fitzgibbon. This ALIAS I explained to him by saying I was gathering
material for an article to prove one could live on fifty cents a day.
He was greatly relieved to learn I did not need a valet to help me prove
it.

I returned driving the Phoenix to New Bedford, and as it was a Saturday,
when the store closed at noon, I had the ineffable delight of taking
Polly Briggs for a drive. As chaperons she invited two young friends of
hers named Lowell. They had been but very lately married, and regarded
me no more than a chauffeur they had hired by the hour. This left Polly
who was beside me on the front seat, and myself, to our own devices.
Our devices were innocent enough. They consisted in conveying the
self-centred Lowells so far from home that they could not get back for
supper and were so forced to dine with me. Polly, for as Polly I now
thought of her, discovered the place. It was an inn, on the edge of a
lake with an Indian name. We did not get home until late, but it had
been such a successful party that before we separated we planned another
journey for the morrow. That one led to the Cape by way of Bourne and
Wood's Hole, and back again to the North Shore to Barnstable, where we
lunched. It was a grand day and the first of others just as happy. After
that every afternoon when the store closed I picked up the Lowells; and
then Polly, and we sought adventures. Sometimes we journeyed no farther
than the baseball park, but as a rule I drove them to some inn for
dinner, where later, if there were music, we danced, if not, we returned
slowly through the pine woods and so home by the longest possible route.
The next Saturday I invited them to Boston. We started early, dined at
the Touraine and went on to a musical comedy, where I had reserved seats
in the front row. This nearly led to my undoing. Late in the first act
a very merry party of young people who had come up from Newport and
Narragansett to the Coates-Islip wedding filled the stage boxes and
at sight of me began to wave and beckon. They were so insistent that
between the acts I thought it safer to visit them. They wanted to know
why I had not appeared at the wedding, and who was the beautiful girl.

The next morning on our return trip to New Bedford Polly said, "I read
in the papers this morning that those girls in that theatre party last
night were the bridesmaids at the Coates-Islip wedding. They seemed to
know you quite well."

I explained that in selling automobiles one became acquainted with many
people.

Polly shook her head and laughed. Then she turned and looked at me.

"You never sold an automobile in your life," she said.

With difficulty I kept my eyes on the road; but I protested vigorously.

"Don't think I have been spying," said Polly; "I found you out quite by
accident. Yesterday a young man I know asked me to persuade you to turn
in your Phoenix and let him sell you one of the new model. I said
you yourself were the agent for the Phoenix, and he said that, on the
contrary, HE was, and that you had no right to sell the car in his
TERRITORY." I grinned guiltily and said:

"Well, I HAVEN'T sold any, have I?"

"That is not the point," protested Polly. "What was your reason for
telling me you were trying to earn a living selling automobiles?"

"So that I could take you driving in one," I answered.

"Oh!" exclaimed Polly.

There was a pause during which in much inward trepidation I avoided
meeting her eyes. Then Polly added thoughtfully, "I think that was a
very good reason."

In our many talks the name of the Fletcher Farrells had never been
mentioned. I had been most careful to avoid it. As each day passed, and
their return imminent, and in consequence my need to fly grew more near,
and the name was still unspoken, I was proportionately grateful. But
when the name did come up I had reason to be pleased, for Polly spoke
it with approval, and it was not of the owner of Harbor Castle she was
speaking, but of myself. It was one evening about two weeks after we
had met, and I had side-stepped the Lowells and was motoring with Polly
alone. We were talking of our favorite authors, dead and alive.

"You may laugh," said Polly, and she said it defiantly, "and I don't
know whether you would call him among the dead or the living, but I am
very fond of Fletcher Farrell!"

My heart leaped. I was so rattled that I nearly ran the car into a stone
wall. I thought I was discovered and that Polly was playing with me. But
her next words showed that she was innocent. She did not know that the
man to whom she was talking and of whom she was talking were the same.
"Of course you will say," she went on, "that he is too romantic, that he
is not true to life. But I never lived in the seventeenth century, so
I don't know whether he is true to life or not. And I like romance. The
life I lead in the store gives me all the reality I want. I like to read
about brave men and great and gracious ladies."

"I never met any girls like those Farrell write about, but it's nice to
think they exist. I wish I were like them. And, his men, too--they make
love better than any other man I ever read about."

"Better than I do?" I asked.

Polly gazed at the sky, frowning severely. After a pause, and as though
she had dropped my remark into the road and the wheels had crushed it,
she said, coldly, "Talking about books----"

"No," I corrected, "we were talking about Fletcher Farrell."

"Then," said Polly with some asperity, "don't change the subject. Do you
know," she went on hurriedly, "that you look like him--like the pictures
of him--as he was."

"Heavens!" I exclaimed, "the man's not dead!"

"You know what I mean," protested Polly. "As he was before he stopped
writing."

"Nor has he stopped writing," I objected; "his books have stopped
selling." Polly turned upon me eagerly.

"Do you know him?" she demanded. I answered with caution that I had met
him.

"Oh!" she exclaimed, "tell me about him!"

I was extremely embarrassed. It was a bad place. About myself I could
not say anything pleasant, and behind my back, as it were, I certainly
was not going to say anything unpleasant. But Polly relieved me of the
necessity of saying anything.

"I don't know any man," she exclaimed fervently, "I would so like to
meet!"

It seemed to me that after that the less I said the better. So I told
her something was wrong with the engine and by the time I had pretended
to fix it, I had led the conversation away from Fletcher Farrell as a
novelist to myself as a chauffeur.

The next morning at the hotel, temptation was again waiting for me. This
time it came in the form of a letter from my prospective father-in-law.
It had been sent from Cape May to my address in New York, and by my
servant forwarded in an envelope addressed to "Frederick Fitzgibbon."

It was what in the world of commerce is called a "follow-up" letter. It
recalled the terms of his offer to me, and improved upon them. It made
it clear that even after meeting me Mr. Farrell and his wife were still
anxious to stand for me as a son. They were good enough to say they had
found me a "perfect gentleman." They hoped that after considering their
proposition I had come to look upon it with favor.

As his son, Mr. Farrell explained, my annual allowance would be the
interest on one million dollars, and upon his death his entire fortune
and property he would bequeath to me. He was willing, even anxious, to
put this in writing. In a week he would return to Fairharbor when he
hoped to receive a favorable answer. In the meantime he enclosed a
letter to his housekeeper.

"Don't take anything for granted," he urged, "but go to Fairharbor and
present this letter. See the place for yourself. Spend the week there
and act like you were the owner. My housekeeper has orders to take her
orders from you. Don't refuse something you have never seen!"

This part of the letter made me feel as mean and uncomfortable as a
wet hen. The open, almost too open, methods of Mr. Farrell made my own
methods appear contemptible. He was urging me to be his guest and I
was playing the spy. But against myself my indignation did not last.
A letter, bearing a special delivery stamp which arrived later in the
afternoon from Mrs. Farrell turned my indignation against her, and with
bitterness. She also had been spying. Her letter read:

The Pinkerton I employed to report on you states that after losing you
for a week he located you at New Bedford, that you are living under
the name of Fitzgibbon, and that you have made yourself conspicuous by
attentions to a young person employed in a shop. This is for me a
great blow and disappointment, and I want you to clearly understand Mr.
Farrell's offer is made to you as an unmarried man. I cannot believe
your attentions are serious, but whether they are serious or not, they
must cease. The detective reports the pair of you are now the talk of
Fairharbor. You are making me ridiculous. I do not want a shop-girl for
a daughter-in-law and you will either give up her acquaintance or give
up Harbor Castle!

I am no believer in ultimatums. In attaining one's end they seldom prove
successful. I tore the note into tiny pieces, and defiantly, with Polly
in the seat beside me, drove into the open country. At first we picked
our way through New Bedford, from the sidewalks her friends waved to
her, and my acquaintances smiled. The detective was right. We had indeed
made ourselves the talk of the town, and I was determined the talk must
cease.

We had reached Ruggles Point when the car developed an illness. I got
out to investigate. On both sides of the road were tall hemlocks and
through them to the west we could see the waters of Sippican Harbor in
the last yellow rays of the sun as it sank behind Rochester. Overhead
was the great harvest moon.

Polly had taken from the pocket of the car some maps and guide-books,
and while I lifted the hood and was deep in the machinery she was
turning them over.

"What," she asked, "is the number of this car? I forget."

As I have said, I was preoccupied and deep in the machinery; that
is, with a pair of pliers I was wrestling with a recalcitrant wire.
Unsuspiciously I answered: "Eight-two-eight."

A moment later I heard a sharp cry, and raised my head. With eyes wide
in terror Polly was staring at an open book. Without appreciating my
danger I recognized it as "Who's Who in Automobiles." The voice of Polly
rose in a cry of disbelief.

"Eight-two-eight," she read, "owned by Fletcher Farrell, Hudson
Apartments, New York City." She raised her eyes to mine.

"Is that true?" she gasped. "Are you Fletcher Farrell?" I leaned into
the car and got hold of her hand.

"That is not important," I stammered. "What is important is this: Will
you be Mrs. Fletcher Farrell?"

What she said may be guessed from the fact that before we returned to
New Bedford we drove to Fairharbor and I showed her the cottage I liked
best. It was the one with the oldest clapboard shingles, the oldest box
hedge, the most fragrant honeysuckles, and a lawn that wet its feet in
the surf. Polly liked it the best, too.

By now the daylight had gone, and on the ships the riding lights were
shining, but shining sulkily, for the harvest moon filled the world with
golden radiance. As we stood on the porch of the empty cottage, in the
shadow of the honeysuckles, Polly asked an impossible question. It was:

"How MUCH do you love me?"

"You will never know," I told her, "but I can tell you this: I love you
more than a two-thousand-ton yacht, the interest on one million dollars,
and Harbor Castle!"

It was a wasteful remark, for Polly instantly drew away.

"What DO you mean?" she laughed.

"Fletcher Farrell of Harbor Castle," I explained, "offered me those
things, minus you. But I wanted you."

"I see," cried Polly, "he wanted to adopt you. He always talks of that.
I am sorry for him. He wants a son so badly." She sighed softly, "Poor
uncle!"

"Poor WHAT!" I yelled.

"Didn't you know," exclaimed Polly, "that Mrs. Farrell was a Briggs! She
was my father's sister."

"Then YOU," I said, "are the relation who was 'too high and mighty'!"
Polly shook her head.

"No," she said, "I didn't want to be dependent."

"And you gave up all that," I exclaimed, "and worked at Hatchardson's,
just because you didn't want to be dependent!"

"I like my uncle-in-law very much," explained Polly, "but not my aunt.
So, it was no temptation. No more," she cried, looking at me as though
she were proud of me, "than it was to you."

In guilty haste I changed the subject. In other words, I kissed her. I
knew some day I would have to confess. But until we were safely married
that could wait. Before confessing I would make sure of her first. The
next day we announced our engagement and Polly consented that it should
be a short one. For, as I pointed out, already she had kept me waiting
thirty years. The newspapers dug up the fact that I had once been a
popular novelist, and the pictures they published of Polly proved her so
beautiful that, in congratulation, I received hundreds of telegrams. The
first one to arrive came from Cape May. It read:

My dear boy, your uncle elect sends his heartiest congratulations to
you and love to Polly. Don't make any plans until you hear from me--am
leaving to-night. FLETCHER FARRELL.

In terror Polly fled into my arms. Even when NOT in terror it was a
practice I strongly encouraged.

"We are lost!" she cried. "They will adopt us in spite of ourselves.
They will lock us up for life in Harbor Castle! I don't WANT to be
adopted. I want YOU! I want my little cottage!"

I assured her she should have her little cottage; I had already bought
it. And during the two weeks before the wedding, when I was not sitting
around Boston while Polly bought clothes, we refurnished it. Polly
furnished the library, chiefly with my own books, and "The Log of
the JOLLY POLLY." I furnished the kitchen. For a man cannot live on
honeysuckles alone. My future uncle-in-law was gentle but firm.

"You can't get away from the fact," he said, "that you will be my nephew,
whether you like it or not. So, be kind to an old man and let him give
the bride away and let her be married from Harbor Castle."

In her white and green High Flier car and all of her diamonds, Mrs.
Farrell called on Polly and begged the same boon. We were too happy to
see any one else dissatisfied; so though we had planned the quietest of
weddings, we gave consent. Somehow we survived it. But now we recall
it only as that terrible time when we were never alone. For once in the
hands of our rich relations the quiet wedding we had arranged became a
royal alliance, a Field of the Cloth of Gold, the chief point of attack
for the moving-picture men.

The youths who came from New York to act as my ushers informed me that
the Ushers' Dinner at Harbor Castle-from which, after the fish course,
I had fled--was considered by them the most successful ushers' dinner in
their career of crime. My uncle-in-Law also testifies to this. He ought
to know. At four in the morning he was assisting the ushers in throwing
the best man and the butler into the swimming-pool.

For our honeymoon he loaned us the yacht. "Take her as far as you like,"
he said. "After this she belongs to you and Polly. And find a better
name for her than Harbor Lights. It sounds too much like a stay-at-home.
And I want you two to see the world." I thanked him, and suggested he
might rechristen her the JOLLY POLLY.

"That was the name," I pointed out, "of the famous whaler owned by
Captain Briggs, your wife's father, and it would be a compliment to
Polly, too."

My uncle-in-law-elect agreed heartily; but made one condition:

"I'll christen her that," he said, "if you will promise to write a new
Log of the JOLLY POLLY." I promised. This is it.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Log of The "Jolly Polly", by 
Richard Harding Davis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOG OF THE "JOLLY POLLY" ***

***** This file should be named 1808.txt or 1808.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/0/1808/

Produced by Aaron Cannon

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
