The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tea-Cup Reading, and the Art of
Fortune-Telling by Tea Leaves, by 'A Highland Seer'

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tea-Cup Reading, and the Art of Fortune-Telling by Tea Leaves

Author: 'A Highland Seer'

Release Date: April 24, 2006 [EBook #18241]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEA-CUP READING ***




Produced by Ruth Hart, ruthhart@twilightoracle.com




 Transcriber's note: In Chapter V, I changed the spelling of
"collecton" to "collection", in the Interpretation of Fig. 6, I changed
"biry" to "bird", and in the Interpretation of Fig. 10, I changed
"letteres" to "letters." All other spelling is unchanged.




-----------------------------------------------








TEA-CUP READING AND FORTUNE-TELLING BY TEA LEAVES


By A Highland Seer

With Ten Illustrations



NEW YORK

GEORGE SULLY AND COMPANY

_PRINTED IN U. S. A._



CONTENTS

     Preface   11
     I.   Introduction to the Art of Divination from
     Tea-Leaves  13
     II.  Ritual and Method of Using the Teacup   25
     III. General Principles To Be Observed in Reading
     the Cup   29
     IV.  An Alphabetical List of Symbols with Their
     Significations   39
     V.   Specimen Cups, with Interpretations   57
     VI.  Omens   66



ILLUSTRATIONS

     Fig. 1   61
     Fig. 2   63
     Fig. 3   65
     Fig. 4   67
     Fig. 5   69
     Fig. 6   71
     Fig. 7   73
     Fig. 8   75
     Fig. 9   77
     Fig. 10   79




PREFACE

It is somewhat curious that among the great number of books on occult
science and all forms of divination which have been published in the
English language there should be none dealing exclusively with the
Tea-cup Reading and the Art of Telling Fortunes by the Tea-leaves:
notwithstanding that it is one of the most common forms of divination
practised by the peasants of Scotland and by village fortune-tellers
in all parts of this country. In many of the cheaper handbooks to
Fortune-telling by Cards or in other ways only brief references to the
Tea-cup method are given; but only too evidently by writers who are
merely acquainted with it by hearsay and have not made a study of it for
themselves.

This is probably because the Reading of the Tea-cups affords but little
opportunity to the Seer of extracting money from credulous folk; a
reason why it was never adopted by the gypsy soothsayers, who preferred
the more obviously lucrative methods of crossing the palm with gold or
silver, or of charging a fee for manipulating a pack of playing-cards.

Reading the Cup is essentially a domestic form of Fortune-telling to be
practised at home, and with success by anyone who will take the trouble
to master the simple rules laid down in these pages: and it is in the
hope that it will provide a basis for much innocent and inexpensive
amusement and recreation round the tea-table at home, as well as for
a more serious study of an interesting subject, that this little
guide-book to the science is confidently offered to the public.




CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION TO THE ART OF DIVINATION FROM TEA-LEAVES

It seems highly probable that at no previous period of the world's
history have there been so many persons as there are at the present
moment anxious to ascertain in advance, if that be humanly possible, a
knowledge of at least 'what a day may bring forth.' The incidence of the
greatest of all wars, which has resulted in sparse news of those from
whom they are separated, and produces a state of uncertainty as to what
the future holds in store for each of the inhabitants of the British
Empire, is, of course, responsible for this increase in a perfectly sane
and natural curiosity; with its inevitable result, a desire to employ
any form of divination in the hope that some light may haply be cast
upon the darkness and obscurity of the future.

It is unfortunately the case, as records of the police-courts have
recently shown, that the creation of this demand for foreknowledge
of coming events or for information as to the well-being of distant
relatives and friends has resulted in the abundant supply of the want by
scores of pretended 'Fortune-tellers' and diviners of the Future;
who, trading upon the credulity and anxieties of their unfortunate
fellow-countrywomen, seek to make a living at their expense.

Now it is an axiom, which centuries of experience have shown to be as
sound as those of Euclid himself, that the moment the taint of money
enters into the business of reading the Future the accuracy and credit
of the Fortune told disappears. The Fortune-teller no longer possesses
the singleness of mind or purpose necessary to a clear reading of
the symbols he or she consults. The amount of the fee is the first
consideration, and this alone is sufficient to obscure the mental vision
and to bias the judgment. This applies to the very highest and most
conscientious of Fortune-tellers--persons really adept at foreseeing the
future when no taint of monetary reward intervenes. The greater number,
however, of so-called Fortune-tellers are but charlatans, with the
merest smattering of partly-assimilated knowledge of some form of
divination or 'character-reading'; whether by the cards, coins, dice,
dominoes, hands, crystal, or in any other pretended way. With these, the
taint of the money they hope to receive clouds such mind or intuition
as they may possess, and it follows that their judgments and
prognostications have precisely the same value as the nostrums of the
quack medicine-vendor. They are very different from the Highlander who,
coming to the door of his cottage or bothie at dawn, regards steadfastly
the signs and omens he notes in the appearance of the sky, the actions
of animals, the flight of birds, and so forth, and derives there from
a foresight into the coming events of the opening day. They differ also
from the 'spae-wife,' who, manipulating the cup from which she has taken
her morning draught of tea, looks at the various forms and shapes the
leaves and dregs have taken, and deduces thence such simple horary
prognostications as the name of the person from whom 'postie' will
presently bring up the glen a letter or a parcel or a remittance of
money; or as to whether she is likely to go a journey, or to hear news
from across the sea, or to obtain a good price for the hose she has
knitted or for the chickens or eggs she is sending to the store-keeper.
Here the taint of a money-payment is altogether absent; and no Highland
'spae-wife' or seer would dream of taking a fee for looking into the
future on behalf of another person.

It follows, therefore, that provided he or she is equipped with the
requisite knowledge and some skill and intuition, the persons most
fitted to tell correctly their own fortune are themselves; because they
cannot pay themselves for their own prognostications, and the absence of
a monetary taint consequently leaves the judgment unbiased. Undoubtedly
one of the simplest, most inexpensive and, as the experience of nearly
three centuries has proved, most reliable forms of divination within its
own proper limits, is that of reading fortunes in tea-cups. Although it
cannot be of the greatest antiquity, seeing that tea was not introduced
into Britain until the middle of the seventeenth century, and for many
years thereafter was too rare and costly to be used by the great bulk
of the population, the practice of reading the tea-leaves doubtless
descends from the somewhat similar form of divination known to the
Greeks as "_{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER
OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK
SMALL LETTER BETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER
FINAL SIGMA~}_" by which fortune in love was discovered by the
particular splash made by wine thrown out of a cup into a metal basin. A
few spae-wives still practise this method by throwing out the tea-leaves
into the saucer, but the reading of the symbols as they are originally
formed in the cup is undoubtedly the better method.

Any person after a study of this book and by carefully following the
principles here laid down may with practice quickly learn to read the
horary fortunes that the tea-leaves foretell. It should be distinctly
understood, however, that tea-cup fortunes are only horary, or dealing
with the events of the hour or the succeeding twenty-four hours at
furthest. The immediately forthcoming events are those which cast their
shadows, so to speak, within the circle of the cup. In this way the
tea-leaves may be consulted once a day, and many of the minor happenings
of life foreseen with considerable accuracy, according to the skill
in discerning the symbols and the intuition required to interpret
them which may be possessed by the seer. Adepts like the Highland
peasant-women can and do foretell events that subsequently occur,
and that with remarkable accuracy. Practice and the acquirement of a
knowledge of the signification of the various symbols is all that is
necessary in order to become proficient and to tell one's fortune and
that of one's friends with skill and judgment.

There is, of course, a scientific reason for all forms of divination
practised without hope or promise of reward. Each person carries in
himself his own Destiny. Events do not happen to people by chance, but
are invariably the result of some past cause. For instance, in the
last years a man becomes a soldier who had never intended to pursue a
military career. This does not happen to him by chance, but because
of the prior occurrence of la European war in which his country was
engaged. The outbreak of war is similarly the result of other causes,
none of which happened by chance, but were founded by still remoter
occurrences. It is the same with the Future. That which a person does
today as a result of something that happened in the past, will in its
turn prove the cause of something that will happen at some future date.
The mere act of doing something today sets in motion forces that in
process of time will inevitably bring about some entirely unforeseen
event.

This event is not decreed by Fate or Providence, but by the person who
by the committal of some act unconsciously compels the occurrence of
some future event which he does not foresee. In other words, a man
decrees his own destiny and shapes his own ends by his actions, whether
Providence rough-hew them or not. Now this being so, it follows that
he carries his destiny with him, and the more powerful his mind and
intellect the more clearly is this seen to be the case. Therefore it is
possible for a person's mind, formed as the result of past events over
which he had no control, to foresee by an effort what will occur in the
future as the result of acts deliberately done. Since it is given to but
few, and that not often of intention, to see actually what is about to
happen in a vision or by means of what is called the 'second sight,'
some machinery must be provided in the form of symbols from which an
interpretation of the future can be made. It matters little what the
method or nature of the symbols chosen is--dice or dominoes, cards or
tea-leaves. What matters is that the person shaking the dice, shuffling
the dominoes, cutting the cards or turning the tea-cup, is by these very
acts transferring from his mind where they lie hidden even from himself
the shadows of coming events which by his own actions in the past he
has already predetermined shall occur in the future. It only remains
for someone to read and interpret these symbols correctly in order to
ascertain something of what is likely to happen; and it is here that
singleness of purpose and freedom from ulterior motives are necessary in
order to avoid error and to form a true and clear judgment.

This is the serious and scientific explanation of the little-understood
and less-comprehended action of various forms of divination having for
their object the throwing of a little light upon the occult. Of all
these forms perhaps divination by tea-leaves is the simplest, truest,
and most easily learned. Even if the student is disinclined to
attach much importance to what he sees in the cup, the reading of the
tea-leaves forms a sufficiently innocent and amusing recreation for the
breakfast- or tea-table; and the man who finds a lucky sign such as
an anchor or a tree in his cup, or the maiden who discovers a pair
of heart-shaped groups of leaves in conjunction with a ring, will be
suffering no harm in thus deriving encouragement for the future, even
should they attach no importance to their occurrence, but merely treat
them as an occasion for harmless mirth and badinage.

Whether, however, the tea-leaves be consulted seriously or in mere sport
and love of amusement, the methods set forth in succeeding chapters
should be carefully followed, and the significations of the pictures and
symbols formed in the cup scrupulously accepted as correct, for reasons
which are explained in a subsequent chapter.




CHAPTER II

RITUAL AND METHOD OF USING THE TEA-CUP

The best kind of tea to use if tea-cup reading is to be followed is
undoubtedly China tea, the original tea imported into this country and
still the best for all purposes. Indian tea and the cheaper mixtures
contain so much dust and so many fragments of twigs and stems as often
to be quite useless for the purposes of divination, as they will not
combine to form pictures, or symbols clearly to be discerned.

The best shape of cup to employ is one with a wide opening at the top
and a bottom not too small. Cups with almost perpendicular sides are
very difficult to read, as the symbols cannot be seen properly, and
the same may be said of small cups. A plain-surfaced breakfast-cup is
perhaps the best to use; and the interior should be white and have no
pattern printed upon it, as this confuses the clearness of the picture
presented by the leaves, as does any fluting or eccentricity of shape.

The ritual to be observed is very simple. The tea-drinker should
drink the contents of his or her cup so as to leave only about half a
teaspoonful of the beverage remaining. He should next take the cup by
the handle in his left hand, rim upwards, and turn it three times from
left to right in one fairly rapid swinging movement. He should then very
slowly and carefully invert it over the saucer and leave it there for a
minute, so as to permit of all moisture draining away.

If he approaches the oracle at all seriously he should during the whole
of these proceedings concentrate his mind upon his future Destiny, and
'will' that the symbols forming under the guidance of his hand and
arm (which in their turn are, of course, directed by his brain) shall
correctly represent what is destined to happen to him in the future.

If, however, he or she is not in such deadly earnest, but merely
indulging in a harmless pastime, such an effort of concentration need
not be made. The 'willing' is, of course, akin to 'wishing' when cutting
the cards in another time-honoured form of fortune-telling.

The cup to be read should be held in the hand and turned about in order
to read the symbols without disturbing them, which will not happen
if the moisture has been properly drained away. The handle of the cup
represents the consultant and is akin to the 'house' in divination by
the cards. By this fixed point judgment is made as to events approaching
the 'house' of the consultant, journeys away from home, messages or
visitors to be expected, relative distance, and so forth. The advantage
of employing a cup instead of a saucer is here apparent.

'The bottom of the cup represents the remoter future foretold; the side
events not so far distant; and matters symbolised near the rim those
that may be expected to occur quickly. The nearer the symbols approach
the handle in all three cases the nearer to fulfilment will be the
events prognosticated.

If this simple ritual has been correctly carried out the tea-leaves,
whether many or few, will be found distributed about the bottom and
sides of the cup. The fortune may be equally well told whether there are
many leaves or few; but of course there must be some, and therefore the
tea should not have been made in a pot provided with one of the patent
arrangements that stop the leaves from issuing from the spout when the
beverage is poured into the cups. There is nothing to beat one of the
plain old-fashioned earthenware teapots, whether for the purpose of
preparing a palatable beverage or for that of providing the means of
telling a fortune.




CHAPTER III

GENERAL PRINCIPLES TO BE OBSERVED IN READING THE CUP

The interior of the tea-cup when it is ready to be consulted will
exhibit the leaves scattered apparently in a fortuitous and accidental
manner, but really in accordance with the muscular action of the left
arm as controlled by the mind at whose bidding it has worked. These
scattered leaves will form lines and circles of dots or small leaves
and dust combined with stems, and groups of leaves in larger or smaller
patches: apparently in meaningless confusion.

Careful notice should now be taken of all the shapes and figures formed
inside the cup. These should be viewed front different positions, so
that their meaning becomes clear. It is not very easy at first to see
what the shapes really are, but after looking at them carefully they
become plainer. The different shapes and figures in the cup must be
taken together in a general reading. Bad indications will be balanced by
good ones; some good ones will be strengthened by others, and so on.

It is now the business of the seer--whether the consultant or some adept
to whom he has handed the cup to be read--to find some fairly close
resemblance between the groups formed by the leaves and various natural
or artificial objects. This part of the performance resembles the
looking for 'pictures in the fire' as practised by children in nurseries
and school-rooms and occasionally by people of a larger growth. Actual
representations of such things as trees, animals, birds, anchors,
crowns, coffins, flowers, and so forth may by the exercise of the
powers of observation and imagination be discerned, as well as squares,
triangles, and crosses. Each of these possesses, as a symbol, some
fortunate or unfortunate signification. Such signs may be either large
or small, and their relative importance must be judged according to
their size. Supposing the symbol observed should be that indicating
the receipt of a legacy, for instance: if small it would mean that
the inheritance would be but trifling, if large that it would be
substantial, while if leaves grouped to form a resemblance to a coronet
accompany the sign for a legacy, a title would probably descend upon
the consultant at the same time. The meaning of all the symbols of this
nature likely to be formed by the fortuitous arrangement of leaves in
a tea-cup is fully set forth in the concluding chapter; and it is
unnecessary therefore to enlarge upon this branch of the subject.

There are, however, several points of a more general character that must
be considered before it is possible to form an accurate judgment of
the fortune displayed. For instance, isolated leaves or groups of a
few leaves or stems frequently form letters of the alphabet or numbers.
These letters and numbers possess meanings which must be sought in
conjunction with other signs. If near a letter L is seen a small square
or oblong leaf, or if a number of very small dots form such a square
or oblong, it indicates that a letter or parcel will be received from
somebody whose surname (not Christian name) begins with an L. If the
combined symbol appears near the handle and near the rim of the cup,
the letter is close at hand; if in the bottom there will be delay in its
receipt. If the sign of a letter is accompanied by the appearance of
a bird flying towards the 'house' it means a telegraphic despatch:
if flying away from the house the consultant will have to send the
telegram. Birds flying always indicate news of some sort.

Again, the dust in the tea and the smaller leaves and stems frequently
form lines of dots. These are significant of a journey, and their extent
and direction shows its length and the point of the compass towards
which it will extend: the handle for this purpose being considered as
due south. If the consultant is at home and lines lead from the handle
right round the cup and back to the handle, it shows that he will
return; if they end before getting back to the handle, and especially
if a resemblance to a house appears where the journey line ends, it
betokens removal to some other place. If the consultant be away from
home, lines leading to the handle show a return home, and if free
from crosses or other symbols of delay that the return will be speedy:
otherwise it will be postponed. The occurrence of a numeral may
indicate the number of days, or if in connection with a number of small
dots grouped around the sign of a letter, a present or a legacy, the
amount of the remittance in the former, the number of presents to be
expected, or the amount of the legacy coming. Dots surrounding a symbol
always indicate money coming in some form or other, according to the
nature of the symbol.

It will be seen that to read a fortune in the tea-cup with any real
approach to accuracy and a serious attempt to derive a genuine forecast
from the cup the seer must not be in a hurry. He or she must not only
study the general appearance of the horoscope displayed before him,
and decide upon the resemblance of the groups of leaves to natural or
artificial objects, each of which possesses a separate significance, but
must also balance the bad and good, the lucky and unlucky symbols, and
strike an average. For instance, a large bouquet of flowers, which is a
fortunate sign, would outweigh in importance one or two minute crosses,
which in this case would merely signify some small delay in the
realisation of success; whereas one large cross in a prominent position
would be a warning of disaster that would be little, if at all,
mitigated by the presence of small isolated flowers, however lucky
individually these may be. This is on the same principle as that by
which astrologers judge a horoscope, when, after computing the aspects
of the planets towards each other, the Sun and Moon, the Ascendant,
Mid-heaven, and the significator of the Native, they balance the good
aspects against the bad, the strong against the weak, the Benefics
against the Malefics, and so strike an average. In a similar way the
lucky and unlucky, signs in a tea-cup must be balanced one against the
other and an average struck: and in this connection it may be pointed
out that symbols which stand out clearly and distinctly by themselves
are of more importance than those with difficulty to be discerned amid
cloudlike masses of shapeless leaves. When these clouds obscure or
surround a lucky sign they weaken its force, and vice versa. In tea-cup
reading, however, the fortune told must be regarded chiefly as of a
horary character, not, as with an astrological horoscope, that of a
whole life; and where it is merely indulged in as a light amusement to
while away a few minutes after a meal such nicety of judgment is not
called for. The seer will just glance at the cup, note the sign for
a letter from someone, or that for a journey to the seaside or the
proximity of a gift, or an offer of marriage, and pass on to another
cup.

It should be observed that some cups when examined will present no
features of interest, or will be so clouded and muddled that no clear
meaning is to be read in them. In such a case the seer should waste no
time over them. Either the consultant has not concentrated his or her
attention upon the business in hand when turning the cup, or his destiny
is so obscured by the indecision of his mind or the vagueness of his
ideas that it is unable to manifest itself by symbols. Persons who
consult the tea-leaves too frequently often find this muddled state of
things to supervene. Probably once a week will be often enough to look
into the future, although there is something to be said for the Highland
custom of examining the leaves of the morning cup of tea in order to
obtain some insight into the events the day may be expected to bring
forth. To 'look in the cup' three or four times a day, as some
silly folk do, is simply to ask for contradictory manifestations and
consequent bewilderment, and is symptomatic of the idle, empty, bemused
minds that prompt to such ill-advised conduct.

Of course the tea-cup may be employed solely for the purpose of asking
what is known to astrologers as 'a horary question', such, for instance,
as 'Shall I hear from my lover in France, and when?' In this case the
attention of the consultant when turning the cup must be concentrated
solely on this single point, and the seer will regard the shapes taken
by the tea-leaves solely in this connection in order to give a definite
and satisfactory answer. An example of this class of horary question is
included among the illustrations (Fig. 10).




CHAPTER IV

AN ALPHABETICAL LIST OF SYMBOLS WITH THEIR SIGNIFICATIONS

A question that will very naturally occur to persons of an enquiring
turn of mind in regard to the figures and symbols seen in the tea-cup
is: Why should one symbol necessarily signify one thing and not
something quite different?

The answer, of course, is that the meanings given to the symbols are
purely arbitrary, and that there is no scientific reason why one should
signify one thing and not another. There is no real reason why the
ace of clubs, for instance, should not be considered the 'House Card'
instead of the nine of hearts, or why the double four in dominoes should
signify an invitation instead of a wedding, like the double three.

It is obviously necessary, however, in attempting to read the future by
means of any kind of symbols, whether pips, dots, numbers or anything
else, to fix beforehand upon some definite meaning to be attributed to
each separate symbol and to hold fast to this meaning in all events.
In the case of tea-leaves, where the symbols are not mere 'conventional
signs' or numbers but actual figures like the pictures seen in the fire
or those envisaged in dreams, there is no doubt that the signification
of most of them is the result of empyrical experience. Generations of
spae-wives have found that the recurrence of a certain figure in the
cup has corresponded with the occurrence of a certain event in the
future lives of the various persons who have consulted them: and this
empyrical knowledge has been handed down from seer to seer until a
sufficient deposit of tradition has been formed from which it has been
found possible to compile a detailed list of the most important symbols
and to attach to each a traditional meaning. These significations have
been collected by the writer--in a desultory manner--over a long period
of years chiefly from spae-wives in both Highland and Lowland Scotland,
but also in Cornwall, on Dartmoor, in Middle England, in Gloucestershire
and Northumberland. Occasionally it has been found that a different
meaning is attributed to a symbol by one seer from that given it by
another. In such cases an alternative signification might, of course,
have been given here, but as the essence of all such significations
is that they shall be stable and unvarying, the writer has fixed upon
whichever meaning has been most widely attributed to the symbol or
appears to have the best authority for its adoption, so that the element
of doubt may be excluded.

Although included in their alphabetical order in the list which follows,
there are certain figures and symbols which are of so common occurrence
and bear such definite interpretation that it is advisable to refer to
them here in detail. Certain symbols are invariably signs of approaching
good-fortune: certain others of threatened ill-luck. Among the former
may be mentioned triangles, stars, trefoil or clover-leaves, anchors,
trees, garlands and flowers, bridges or arches, and crowns. Among the
latter, coffins, clouds, crosses, serpents, rats and mice and some
wild beasts, hour-glasses, umbrellas, church-steeples, swords and guns,
ravens, owls, and monkeys are all ominous symbols.

SYMBOLS AND SIGNIFICATIONS

ABBEY, future ease and freedom from worry.

ACORN, improvement in health, continued health, strength, and good
fortune.

AIRCRAFT, unsuccessful projects.

ANCHOR, a lucky sign; success in business and constancy in love; if
cloudy, the reverse must be read.

ANGEL, good news, especially good fortune in love.

APES, secret enemies.

APPLES, long life; gain by commerce.

APPLE-TREE, change for the better.

ARCH, a journey abroad.

ARROW, a disagreeable letter from the direction in which it comes.

ASS, misfortune overcome by patience; or a legacy.

AXE, difficulties overcome.

BADGER, long life and prosperity as a bachelor.

BASKET, an addition to the family.

BAT, fruitless journeys or tasks.

BEAR, a long period of travel.

BEASTS, other than those mentioned, foretell misfortune.

BIRDS, a lucky sign; good news if flying, if at rest a fortunate
journey.

BOAT, a friend will visit the consultant.

BOUQUET, one of the luckiest of symbols; staunch friends, success, a
happy marriage.

BRIDGE, a favourable journey.

BUILDING, a removal.

BULL, slander by some enemy.

BUSH, an invitation into society.

BUTTERFLY, success and pleasure.

CAMEL, a burden to be patiently borne.

CANNON, good fortune.

CAR (MOTOR), and CARRIAGE, approaching wealth, visits from friends.

CART, fluctuations of fortune.

CASTLE, unexpected fortune or a legacy.

CAT, difficulties caused by treachery.

CATHEDRAL, great prosperity.

CATTLE, prosperity.

CHAIN, an early marriage; if broken, trouble in store.

CHAIR, an addition to the family.

CHURCH, a legacy.

CIRCLES, money or presents. They mean that the person whose fortune is
read may expect money or presents.

CLOUDS, serious trouble; if surrounded by dots, financial success.

CLOVER, a very lucky sign; happiness and prosperity. At the top of the
cup, it will come quickly. As it nears the bottom, it will mean more or
less distant.

COCK, much prosperity.

COFFIN, long sickness or sign of death of a near relation or great
friend.

COMET, misfortune and trouble.

COMPASSES, a sign of travelling as a profession.

COW, a prosperous sign.

CROSS, a sign of trouble and delay or even death.

CROWN, success and honour.

CROWN AND CROSS, signifies good fortune resulting from death.

DAGGER, favours from friends.

DEER, quarrels, disputes; failure in trade.

DOG, a favourable sign; faithful friends, if at top of cup; in middle of
cup, they are untrustworthy; at the bottom means secret enemies.

DONKEY, a legacy long awaited.

DOVE, a lucky symbol; progress in prosperity and affection.

DRAGON, great and sudden changes.

DUCK, increase of wealth by trade.

EAGLE, honour and riches through change of residence.

ELEPHANT, a lucky sign; good health.

FALCON, a persistent enemy.

FERRET, active enemies.

FISH, good news from abroad; if surrounded by dots, emigration.

FLAG, danger from wounds inflicted by an enemy.

FLEUR-DE-LYS, same as LILY (q.v.).

FLOWERS, good fortune, success; a happy marriage.

FOX, treachery by a trusted friend.

FROG, success in love and commerce.

GALLOWS, a sign of good luck.

GOAT, a sign of enemies, and of misfortune to a sailor.

GOOSE, happiness; a successful venture.

GRASSHOPPER, a great friend will become a soldier.

GREYHOUND, a good fortune by strenuous exertion.

GUN, a sign of discord and slander.

HAMMER, triumph over adversity.

HAND, to be read in conjunction with neighbouring symbols and according
to what it points.

HARE, a sign of a long journey, or the return of an absent friend. Also
of a speedy and fortunate marriage to those who are single.

HARP, marriage, success in love.

HAT, success in life.

HAWK, an enemy.

HEART, pleasures to come; if surrounded by dots, through money; if
accompanied by a ring, through marriage.

HEAVENLY BODIES, SUN, MOON AND STARS, signifies happiness and success.

HEN, increase of riches or an addition to the family.

HORSE, desires fulfilled through a prosperous journey.

HORSE-SHOE, a lucky journey or success in marriage and choosing a
partner.

HOUR-GLASS, imminent peril.

HOUSE, success in business.

HUMAN FIGURES must be judged according to what they appear to be doing.
They are generally good and denote love and marriage.

INTERROGATION (mark of), doubt or disappointment.

IVY, honour and happiness through faithful friends.

JACKAL, a sly animal who need not be feared. A mischief maker of no
account.

JOCKEY, successful speculation.

JUG, good health.

KANGAROO, a rival in business or love.

KETTLE, death.

KEY, money, increasing trade, and a good husband or wife.

KITE, a sign of lengthy voyaging and travel leading to honour and
dignity.

KNIFE, a warning of disaster through quarrels and enmity.

LADDER, a sign of travel.

LEOPARD, a sign of emigration with subsequent success.

LETTERS, shown by square or oblong tea-leaves, signifies news. Initials
near will show surnames of writers; if accompanied by dots they will
contain money; if unclouded, good; but if fixed about by clouds, bad
news or loss of money.

LILY, at top of cup, health and happiness; a virtuous wife; at bottom,
anger and strife.

LINES indicate journeys and their direction, read in conjunction with
other signs of travel; wavy lines denote troublesome journeys or losses
therein.

LION, greatness through powerful friends.

LYNX, danger of divorce or break off of an engagement.

MAN, a visitor arriving. If the arm is held out, he brings a present.
If figure is very clear, he is dark; if indistinct, he is of light
complexion.

MERMAID, misfortune, especially to seafaring persons.

MITRE, a sign of honour to a clergyman or through religious agency.

MONKEY, the consultant will be deceived in love.

MOON (as a crescent), prosperity and fortune.

MOUNTAIN, powerful friends; many mountains, equally powerful enemies.

MOUSE, danger of poverty through theft or swindling.

MUSHROOM, sudden separation of lovers after a quarrel.

NOSEGAY, the same as BOUQUET (q.v.).

NUMBERS depends on symbols in conjunction with them.

OAK, very lucky; long life, good health, profitable business, and a
happy marriage.

OBLONG FIGURES, family or business squabbles.

OWL, an evil omen, indicative of sickness, poverty, disgrace, a warning
against commencing any new enterprise. If the consultant be in love he
or she will be deceived.

PALM-TREE, good luck; success in any undertaking. A sign of children to
a wife and of a speedy marriage to a maid.

PARROT, a sign of emigration for a lengthy period.

PEACOCK, denotes success and the acquisition of property; also a happy
marriage.

PEAR, great wealth and improved social position; success in business,
and to a woman a wealthy husband.

PEDESTRIAN, good news; an important appointment.

PHEASANT, a legacy.

PIG, good and bad luck mixed: a faithful lover but envious friends.

PIGEONS, important news if flying; if at rest, domestic bliss and wealth
acquired in trade.

PINE-TREE, continuous happiness.

PISTOL, disaster.

RABBIT, fair success in a city or large town.

RAT, treacherous servants; losses through enemies.

RAVEN, death for the aged; disappointment in love, divorce, failure in
business, and trouble generally.

RAZOR, lovers' quarrels and separation.

REPTILE, quarrels.

RIDER, good news from overseas regarding financial prospects.

RIFLE, a sign of discord and strife.

RING, a ring means marriage; and if a letter can be found near it, this
is the initial of the future spouse. If clouds are near the ring, an
unhappy marriage; if all is clear about it, the contrary. A ring right
at the bottom means the wedding will not take place.

ROSE, a lucky sign betokening good fortune and happiness.

SAW, trouble brought about by strangers.

SCALES, a lawsuit.

SCEPTRE, a sign of honour from royalty.

SCISSORS, quarrels; illness; separation of lovers.

SERPENT, spiteful enemies; bad luck; illness.

SHARK, danger of death.

SHEEP, success, prosperity.

SHIP, a successful journey.

SNAKES are a sign of bad omen. Great caution is needed to ward off
misfortune.

SPIDER, a sign of money coming to the consultant.

SQUARES, comfort and peace.

STAR, a lucky sign; if surrounded by dots foretells great wealth and
honours.

STEEPLE, bad luck.

STRAIGHT LINE, a journey, very pleasant.

STRAIGHT LINES are an indication of peace, happiness, and long life.

SWALLOW, a journey with a pleasant ending.

SWAN, good luck and a happy marriage.

SWORD, dispute, quarrels between lovers; a broken sword, victory of an
enemy.

TIMBER, logs of timber indicate business success.

TOAD, deceit and unexpected enemies.

TREES, a lucky sign; a sure indication of prosperity and happiness;
surrounded by dots, a fortune in the country.

TRIANGLES, always a sign of good luck and unexpected legacies.

TRIDENT, success and honours in the Navy.

TWISTED FIGURES, disturbances and vexation; grievances if there are many
such figures.

UMBRELLA, annoyance and trouble.

UNICORN, scandal.

VULTURE, bitter foes.

WAGON, a sign of approaching poverty.

WAVY LINES, if long and waved, denote losses and vexations. The
importance of the lines depends upon the number of them and if heavy or
light.

WHEEL, an inheritance about to fall in.

WINDMILL, success in a venturous enterprise.

WOLF, beware of jealous intrigues.

WOMAN, pleasure and happiness; if accompanied by dots, wealth or
children. Several women indicate scandal.

WOOD, a speedy marriage.

WORMS indicate secret foes.

YACHT, pleasure and happiness.

YEW-TREE indicates the death of an aged person who will leave his
possessions to the consultant.

ZEBRA, travel and adventure in foreign lands.




CHAPTER V

A COLLECTION OF SPECIMEN CUPS, WITH INTERPRETATIONS

The succeeding ten figures are copied from actual tea-cups that have
been at different times subjected to the proper ritual by various
consultants and duly interpreted by seers. They are selected out of
a larger number as being representative of many different classes of
horoscope, and they should afford students practical instruction in what
symbols to look for, and how to discern them clearly as they turn the
cup about and about in their hands.

By reference to the interpretations provided upon the pages facing the
illustrations he will be able to ascertain the principles upon which to
form a judgment of the cup generally; and this, once he has mastered the
method, he will be able to supplement, by consulting the alphabetical
list of symbols and their significations in the previous chapter, and
in this way will speedily attain proficiency in reading any tea-cup
presented for his consideration.


INTERPRETATIONS AND ILLUSTRATIONS



INTERPRETATION

FIG.1

This is a fortunate horoscope. If cup has been turned by a man it shows
that he will gain success, honour, and wealth in the profession of a
naval officer. If by a woman then her luck is bound up with that of a
sailor or marine.

The pistols on the sides show the profession of arms, and the naval gun
in the bottom of the cup accompanied by a trident the branch to which he
belongs. The on one side and the tree on the other are two of the best
signs of promotion, rewards, and prosperity. The house near the pistol
pointing towards the handle of the cup indicates the acquisition of
property, but as neither tree nor house are surrounded by dots this will
be a town, not a country, residence. The repetition of the initial 'L'
may show the name of the admiral, ship, or battle in which the officer
will win renown. The triangles confirm the other signs of good fortune.

[ILLUSTRATION 1]

FIG.1

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Two pistols on sides.
     A cannon in conjunction with a trident in centre.
     A pear.
     A tree.

     on sides.
     A house.
     A pair of compasses near the rim.
     Several small triangles scattered about. Initial letters 'L'
     (twice), 'N,' and 'V' (twice).



INTERPRETATION

FIG. 2

There is nothing very significant in this tea-cup. The wavy lines denote
a troublesome journey leading to some small amount of luck in connection
with a person or place whose name begins with the initial 'E.' The
hour-glass near the rim and the place from which the journey starts
denotes that it will be undertaken in order to avoid some imminent
peril. The numeral '4' conjoined with the sign of a parcel shows that
one may be expected in that number of days.

[ILLUSTRATION 2]

FIG.2

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Wavy lines.
     Initial 'E' in conjunction with Horse-shoe.
     Hour-glass near rim.
     Parcel in conjunction with numeral '4.'



INTERPRETATION

FIG. 3

This shows, by means of the crescent moon on the side, prosperity and
fortune as the result of a journey denoted by the lines. The number
of triangles in conjunction with the initial 'H' indicates the name
commences with that letter, and, being near the rim, at no great
distance of time. The bird flying towards and near the handle,
accompanied by a triangle and a long envelope, denotes good news from an
official source. The flag gives warning of some danger from an enemy.

[ILLUSTRATION 3]

FIG. 3

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Crescent moon.
     Bird flying.
     Triangles.
     Flag.
     Initial 'A' in conjunction with sign of letter in official
     envelope.
     Other initials, 'H' and two 'L's.'



INTERPRETATION

FIG. 4

The consultant is about to journey eastward to some large building or
institution, shown by the figure at the end of the straight line of
dots. There is some confusion in his or her affairs caused by too much
indulgence in pleasure and gaiety, denoted by the butterfly involved
in obscure groups of tea-leaves near the handle. The tree and the
fleur-de-lys (or lily) in the bottom of the cup are, however, signs of
eventual success, probably through the assistance of some person whose
name begins with an 'N.'

[ILLUSTRATION 4]

FIG. 4

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Large tree in bottom of cup.
     Fleur-de-lys (or lily).
     Butterfly on side approaching handle.
     Line of dots leading east to Building.
     Initials 'N' and 'C.'



INTERPRETATION

FIG.5

A letter is approaching the consultant containing a considerable sum of
money, as it is surrounded by dots. The future, shown by the bottom of
the cup, is not clear, and betokens adversities; but the presence of the
hammer there denotes triumph over these, a sign confirmed by the hat on
the side. The consultant will be annoyed by somebody whose name begins
with 'J,' and assisted by one bearing the initial 'Y.'

[ILLUSTRATION 5]

FIG. 5

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Hammer in centre of bottom.
     A letter approaching the house, accompanied by
     Dots,
     Hat,
     Initials 'Y' and 'J' (accompanied by small cross).



INTERPRETATION

FIG. 6

A letter containing good news, shown by bird flying and the triangle,
may be expected immediately. If from a lover it shows that he is
constant and prosperous, owing to the anchor on the side. The large
tree on the side indicates happiness and prosperity. A letter will be
received from someone whose initial is 'L.' In the bottom of the cup
there are signs of minor vexations or delays in connection with someone
whose name begins with 'C.'

[ILLUSTRATION 6]

FIG. 6

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Large tree on side.
     Anchor on side.
     Bird flying high towards handle.
     Small cross in bottom.
     Letter sign close to handle.
     Triangle.
     Initial 'L' with letter sign.
     Other initials, 'C' and 'H.'



INTERPRETATION

FIG. 7

The two horse-shoes indicate a lucky journey to some large residence
in a north-easterly direction, the tree surmounting which denotes that
happiness and fortune will be found there and that (as it is surrounded
by dots) it is situated in the country. The sitting hen in the bottom
of the cup, surmounted by a triangle (to see which properly the
illustration must be turned round) is indicative of increased wealth by
an unexpected legacy. A letter from someone whose name begins with
'T' will contain a remittance of money, but it may not arrive for some
little time.

[ILLUSTRATION 7]

FIG.7

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Large horse-shoe, edge of bottom, in conjunction with
     smaller horse-shoe.
     Line of dots leading E.N.E. to
     Large building surmounted by
     Tree, overlapping rim.
     Flowers.
     Small triangles.
     Initial 'T' with letter and money signs.



INTERPRETATION

FIG.8

This tea-cup appears to give warning by the flag in conjunction with
a rifle and the letter 'V' that some friend of the consultant will be
wounded in battle, and as there is a coffin in the bottom of the cup
that the wounds will be fatal. On the other side, however, a sceptre,
surrounded by signs of honours, seems to indicate that 'V' will be
recognized by his sovereign and a decoration bestowed upon him
for bravery in battle, shown by the initial 'K' accompanied by a
letter-sign, and by the astrological sign of Mars, intervening between
these and the sceptre.

[ILLUSTRATION 8]

FIG. 8

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Coffin in bottom, in conjunction with 'V.'
     Flag in conjunction with rifle on side.
     Sceptre on side.
     Large initial 'K' with letter sign near sceptre.
     Astrological sign of Mars between them.
     Initial 'V' near flag and rifle.



INTERPRETATION

FIG. 9

If the consultant be single this cup will, by means of the hare on the
side, tell him that he will speedily be married. The figure of a lady
holding out an ivy-leaf is a sign that his sweetheart will prove true
and constant, and the heart in conjunction with a ring and the initial
'A' still further points to marriage with a person whose name begins
with that letter. The flower, triangle, and butterfly are all signs of
prosperity, pleasure and happiness.

[ILLUSTRATION 9]

FIG.9

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Hare sitting on side.
     Butterfly near rim.
     Heart and ring.
     Large flower on edge of bottom.
     Figure of woman holding ivy-leaf in bottom.
     Triangle.
     Initials 'A' and small 'C' with dots.



INTERPRETATION

FIG. 10

This is typical of the cup being too often consulted by some people. It
is almost void of meaning, the only symbols indicating a short journey,
although the flower near the rim denotes good luck, and the fact that
the bottom is clear that nothing very important is about to happen to
the consultant.

[ILLUSTRATION 10]

FIG. 10

_Principal Symbols_:--

     Line of dots leading W.S.W to
     Flower.
     Two letters near rim



CHAPTER VI

OMENS

How have omens been regarded in the past? An appeal to anciency is
usually a safeguard for a basis. It is found that most of the earliest
records are now subsisting. See official guide to the British Museum.
Babylonian and Assyrian antiquities, table case H. Nineveh Gallery, the
following appears:

"By means of omen tablets the Babylonian and Assyrian priests from time
immemorial predicted events which they believed would happen in the near
or in the remote future. They deduced these omens from the appearance
and actions of animals, birds, fish, and reptiles; from the appearance
of the entrails of sacrificial victims; from the appearance and
condition of human and animal offspring at birth; from the state and
condition of various members of the human body."

In India, where the records of the early ages of civilization go back
hundreds of years, omens are considered of great importance.

Later, in Greece, the home of the greatest and highest culture and
civilization, we find, too, omens regarded very seriously, while to-day
there are vast numbers of persons of intellect, the world over, who
place reliance upon omens.

That there is some good ground for belief in some omens seems
indisputable. Whether this has arisen as the result of experience, by
the following of some particular event close upon the heels of signs
observed, or whether it has been an intuitive science, in which
provision has been used to afford an interpretation, is not quite
clear. It seems idle to attempt to dismiss the whole thing as mere
superstition, wild guessing, or abject credulity, as some try to do,
with astrology and alchemy also, and other occult sciences; the fact
remains that omens have, in numberless instances, given good warnings.

To say that these are just coincidences is to beg the question. For
the universe is governed by law. Things happen because they must, not
because they may. There is no such thing as accident or coincidence. We
may not be able to see the steps and the connections. But they are there
all the same.

In years gone by many signs were deduced from the symptoms of sick
men; the events or actions of a man's life; dreams and visions; the
appearance of a man's shadow; from fire, flame, light, or smoke; the
state and condition of cities and their streets, of fields, marshes,
rivers, and lands. From the appearances of the stars and planets, of
eclipses, meteors, shooting stars, the direction of winds, the form of
clouds, thunder and lightning and other weather incidents, they were
able to forecast happenings. A number of tablets are devoted to these
prophecies.

It is conceivable that many of these omens should have found their way
into Greece, and it is not unreasonable to believe that India may have
derived her knowledge of omens from Babylonia; or it may have been the
other way about. The greatest of scholars are divided in their opinions
as to which really is the earlier civilization.

The point to be made here is that in all parts of the world--in
quarters where we may be certain that no trace of Grecian, Indian, or
Babylonian science or civilization has appeared--there are to be found
systems of prophecies by omens.

It may be accounted for in two ways. One that in all races as they grow
up, so to speak, there is the same course of evolution of ideas and
superstition which to many appears childish. The other explanation seems
to be the more reasonable one, if we believe, as we are forced to
do, that omens do foretell--that all peoples, all races, accumulate a
record, oral or otherwise, of things which have happened more or less
connected with things which seemed to indicate them. In course of time
this knowledge appears to consolidate. It gets generally accepted as
true. And then it is handed on from generation to generation. Often with
the passage of years it gets twisted and a new meaning taken out of it
altogether different from the original.

It would be difficult to attempt to classify omens. Many books have been
written on the subject and more yet to be written of the beliefs of the
various races. The best that can be offered here is a selection from one
or other of the varied sources. In Greece sneezing was a good omen and
was considered a proof of the truth of what was said at the moment by
the sneezer.

A tingling in the hand denoted the near handling of money, a ringing
in the ears that news will soon be received. The number of sneezes then
became a sign for more definite results. The hand which tingled, either
right or left, indicated whether it were to be paid or received. The
particular ear affected was held to indicate good or evil news.
Other involuntary movements of the body were also considered of prime
importance.

Many omens are derived from the observation of various substances
dropped into a bowl of water. In Babylon oil was used. To-day in various
countries melted lead, wax, or the white of an egg, is used. From the
shapes which result, the trade or occupation of a future husband, the
luck for the year, and so on, are deduced in the folk practices of
modern Europe. Finns use stearine and melted lead, Magyars lead,
Russians wax, Danes lead and egg, and the northern counties of England
egg, wax and oil.

Bird omens were the subject of very serious study in Greece. It has been
thought that this was because in the early mythology of Greece some
of their gods and goddesses were believed to have been birds. Birds,
therefore, were particularly sacred, and their appearances and movements
were of profound significance. The principal birds for signs were the
raven, the crow, the heron, wren, dove, woodpecker, and kingfisher, and
all the birds of prey, such as the hawk, eagle, or vulture, which the
ancients classed together (W. R. Halliday, "Greek Divination"). Many
curious instances, which were fulfilled, of bird omens are related in
"The Other World," by Rev. F. Lee. A number of families have traditions
about the appearance of a white bird in particular.

"In the ancient family of Ferrers, of Chartley Park, in Staffordshire, a
herd of wild cattle is preserved. A tradition arose in the time of Henry
III. that the birth of a parti-coloured calf is a sure omen of death,
within the same year, to a member of the Lord Ferrers family. By
a noticeable coincidence, a calf of this description has been born
whenever a death has happened of late years in this noble family."
(_Staffordshire Chronicle_, July, 1835). The falling of a picture or a
statue or bust of the individual is usually regarded as an evil omen.
Many cases are cited where this has been soon followed by the death of
the person.

It would be easy to multiply instances of this sort: of personal omen or
warning. The history and traditions of our great families are saturated
with it. The predictions and omens relating to certain well known
families, and others, recur at once; and from these it may be inferred
that beneath the more popular beliefs there is enough fire and truth to
justify the smoke that is produced, and to reward some of the faith
that is placed in the modern dreambooks and the books of fate and the
interpretations of omens.

OMENS

ACORN.--Falling from the oak tree on anyone, is a sign of good fortune
to the person it strikes.

BAT.--To see one in day time means long journey.

BIRTHDAYS.--

     "Monday's child is fair of face,
     Tuesday's child is full of grace,
     Wednesday's child is full of woe,
     Thursday's child has far to go,
     Friday's child is loving and giving,
     Saturday's child works hard for its living;
     But a child that's born on the Sabbath-day
     Is handsome and wise and loving and gay."

BUTTERFLY.--In your room means great pleasure and success, but you must
not catch it, or the luck will change.

CANDLE.--A spark on the wick of a candle means a letter for the one who
first sees it. A big glow like a parcel means money coming to you.

CAT.--Black cat to come to your house means difficulties caused by
treachery. Drive it away and avoid trouble.

CHAIN.--If your chain breaks while on you means disappointments or a
broken engagement of marriage.

CLOTHES.--To put on clothes the wrong way out is a sign of good luck;
but you must not alter them, or the luck will change.

CLOVER.--To find a four-leaf clover means luck to you, happiness and
prosperity.

COW.--Coming in your yard or garden a very prosperous sign.

CRICKETS.--A lucky omen. It foretells money coming to you. They should
not be disturbed.

DOG.--Coming to your house, means faithful friends and a favourable
sign.

DEATH-WATCH.--A clicking in the wall by this little insect is regarded
as evil, but it does not necessarily mean a death; possibly only some
sickness.

EARS.--You are being talked about if your ear tingles. Some say, "right
for spite, left for love." Others reverse this omen. If you think of the
person, friend, or acquaintance who is likely to be talking of you, and
mention the name aloud, the tingling will cease if you say the right
one.

FLAG.--If it falls from the staff, while flying it means danger from
wounds inflicted by an enemy.

FRUIT STONES OR PIPS.--Think of a wish first, and then count your stones
or pips. If the number is even, the omen is good. If odd, the reverse is
the case.

GRASSHOPPER in the house means some great friend or distinguished person
will visit you.

HORSESHOE.--To find one means it will bring you luck.

KNIVES crossed are a bad omen. If a knife or fork or scissors falls to
the ground and sticks in the floor you will have a visitor.

LADYBIRDS betoken visitors.

LOOKING GLASS.--To break means it will bring you ill luck.

MAGPIES.--One, bad luck; two, good luck; three, a wedding; four, a
birth.

MARRIAGE.--A maid should not wear colours; a widow never white. Happy
omens for brides are sunshine and a cat sneezing.

MAY.--"Marry in May, and you'll rue the day."

NEW MOON on a Monday signifies good luck and good weather. The new moon
seen for the first time over the right shoulder offers the chance for a
wish to come true.

NIGHTINGALE.--Lucky for lovers if heard before the cuckoo.

OWLS are evil omens. Continuous hooting of owls in your trees is said to
be one of ill-health.

PIGS.--To meet a sow coming towards you is good; but if she turns away,
the luck flies.

RABBITS.--A rabbit running across your path is said to be unlucky.

RAT.--A rat running in front of you means treacherous servants and
losses through enemies.

RAVEN.--To see one, means death to the aged or trouble generally.

SALT spilled means a quarrel. This may be avoided by throwing a pinch
over the left shoulder.

SCISSORS.--If they fall and stick in the floor it means quarrels,
illness, separation of lovers.

SERPENT OR SNAKE.--If it crosses your path, means spiteful enemies, bad
luck. Kill it and your luck will be reversed.

SHOES.--The right shoe is the best one to put on first.

SHOOTING STARS.--If you wish, while the star is still moving, your wish
will come true.

SINGING before breakfast, you'll cry before night.

SPIDERS.--The little red spider is the money spider, and means good
fortune coming to you. It must not be disturbed. Long-legged spiders are
also forerunners of good fortune.

TOWEL.--To wipe your hands on a towel at the same time with another,
means you are to quarrel with him or her in the near future.

WHEEL.--The wheel coming off any vehicle you are riding in means you are
to inherit some fortune, a good omen.

WASHING HANDS.--If you wash your hands in the water just used by
another, a quarrel may be expected, unless you first make the sign of
the cross over the water.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tea-Cup Reading, and the Art of
Fortune-Telling by Tea Leaves, by 'A Highland Seer'

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEA-CUP READING ***

***** This file should be named 18241.txt or 18241.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/4/18241/

Produced by Ruth Hart, ruthhart@twilightoracle.com

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
