The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ballads of Lost Haven, by Bliss Carman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ballads of Lost Haven
       A Book of the Sea

Author: Bliss Carman

Release Date: April 27, 2006 [EBook #18268]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BALLADS OF LOST HAVEN ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions
(www.canadiana.org))






Ballads of Lost Haven

_A Book of the Sea_


By BLISS CARMAN

_Author of_ Low Tide on Grand Pre, Behind the Arras, Songs from
Vagabondia, &c.

[Illustration: Logo]

Lamson, Wolffe and Company Boston, New York and London

MDCCCXCVII

Copyright, 1897

by Lamson, Wolffe and Company

_All rights reserved_

Norwood Press

J. S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith

Norwood Mass. U.S.A.




Contents

                                             PAGE
     A SON OF THE SEA                           7
     THE GRAVEDIGGER                            8
     THE YULE GUEST                            12
     THE MARRING OF MALYN                      26
     THE NANCY'S PRIDE                         43
     ARNOLD, MASTER OF THE SCUD                48
     THE SHIPS OF ST. JOHN                     55
     THE KING OF YS                            59
     THE KELPIE RIDERS                         68
     NOONS OF POPPY                            93
     LEGENDS OF LOST HAVEN                     95
     THE SHADOW BOATSWAIN                      98
     THE MASTER OF THE ISLES                  104
     THE LAST WATCH                           110
     OUTBOUND                                 116




A SON OF THE SEA

    I was born for deep-sea faring;
    I was bred to put to sea;
    Stories of my father's daring
    Filled me at my mother's knee.

    I was sired among the surges;
    I was cubbed beside the foam;
    All my heart is in its verges,
    And the sea wind is my home.

    All my boyhood, from far vernal
    Bourns of being, came to me
    Dream-like, plangent, and eternal
    Memories of the plunging sea.




THE GRAVEDIGGER

    Oh, the shambling sea is a sexton old,
    And well his work is done.
    With an equal grave for lord and knave,
    He buries them every one.

    Then hoy and rip, with a rolling hip,
    He makes for the nearest shore;
    And God, who sent him a thousand ship,
    Will send him a thousand more;
    But some he'll save for a bleaching grave,
    And shoulder them in to shore,--
    Shoulder them in, shoulder them in,
    Shoulder them in to shore.

    Oh, the ships of Greece and the ships of Tyre
    Went out, and where are they?
    In the port they made, they are delayed
    With the ships of yesterday.

    He followed the ships of England far,
    As the ships of long ago;
    And the ships of France they led him a dance,
    But he laid them all arow.

    Oh, a loafing, idle lubber to him
    Is the sexton of the town;
    For sure and swift, with a guiding lift,
    He shovels the dead men down.

    But though he delves so fierce and grim,
    His honest graves are wide,
    As well they know who sleep below
    The dredge of the deepest tide.

    Oh, he works with a rollicking stave at lip,
    And loud is the chorus skirled;
    With the burly rote of his rumbling throat
    He batters it down the world.

    He learned it once in his father's house,
    Where the ballads of eld were sung;
    And merry enough is the burden rough,
    But no man knows the tongue.

    Oh, fair, they say, was his bride to see,
    And wilful she must have been,
    That she could bide at his gruesome side
    When the first red dawn came in.

    And sweet, they say, is her kiss to those
    She greets to his border home;
    And softer than sleep her hand's first sweep
    That beckons, and they come.

    Oh, crooked is he, but strong enough
    To handle the tallest mast;
    From the royal barque to the slaver dark,
    He buries them all at last.

    Then hoy and rip, with a rolling hip,
    He makes for the nearest shore;
    And God, who sent him a thousand ship,
    Will send him a thousand more;
    But some he'll save for a bleaching grave,
    And shoulder them in to shore,--
    Shoulder them in, shoulder them in,
    Shoulder them in to shore.




THE YULE GUEST

    And Yanna by the yule log
    Sat in the empty hall,
    And watched the goblin firelight
    Caper upon the wall:

    The goblins of the hearthstone,
    Who teach the wind to sing,
    Who dance the frozen yule away
    And usher back the spring;

    The goblins of the Northland,
    Who teach the gulls to scream,
    Who dance the autumn into dust,
    The ages into dream.

    Like the tall corn was Yanna,
    Bending and smooth and fair,--
    His Yanna of the sea-gray eyes
    And harvest-yellow hair.

    Child of the low-voiced people
    Who dwell among the hills,
    She had the lonely calm and poise
    Of life that waits and wills.

    Only to-night a little
    With grave regard she smiled,
    Remembering the morn she woke
    And ceased to be a child.

    Outside, the ghostly rampikes,
    Those armies of the moon,
    Stood while the ranks of stars drew on
    To that more spacious noon,--

    While over them in silence
    Waved on the dusk afar
    The gold flags of the Northern light
    Streaming with ancient war.

    And when below the headland
    The riders of the foam
    Up from the misty border rode
    The wild gray horses home,

    And woke the wintry mountains
    With thunder on the shore,
    Out of the night there came a weird
    And cried at Yanna's door.

    "O Yanna, Adrianna,
    They buried me away
    In the blue fathoms of the deep,
    Beyond the outer bay.

    "But in the yule, O Yanna,
    Up from the round dim sea
    And reeling dungeons of the fog,
    I am come back to thee!"

    The wind slept in the forest,
    The moon was white and high,
    Only the shifting snow awoke
    To hear the yule guest cry.

    "O Yanna, Yanna, Yanna,
    Be quick and let me in!
    For bitter is the trackless way
    And far that I have been!"

    Then Yanna by the yule log
    Starts from her dream to hear
    A voice that bids her brooding heart
    Shudder with joy and fear.

    The wind is up a moment
    And whistles at the eaves,
    And in his troubled iron dream
    The ocean moans and heaves.

    She trembles at the door-lock
    That he is come again,
    And frees the wooden bolt for one
    No barrier could detain.

    "O Garvin, bonny Garvin,
    So late, so late you come!"
    The yule log crumbles down and throws
    Strange figures on the gloom;

    But in the moonlight pouring
    Through the half-open door
    Stands the gray guest of yule and casts
    No shadow on the floor.

    The change that is upon him
    She knows not in her haste;
    About him her strong arms with glad
    Impetuous tears are laced.

    She's led him to the fireside,
    And set the wide oak chair,
    And with her warm hands brushed away
    The sea-rime from his hair.

    "O Garvin, I have waited,--
    Have watched the red sun sink,
    And clouds of sail come flocking in
    Over the world's gray brink,

    "With stories of encounter
    On plank and mast and spar;
    But never the brave barque I launched
    And waved across the bar.

    "How come you so unsignalled,
    When I have watched so well?
    Where rides the Adrianna
    With my name on boat and bell?"

    "O Yanna, golden Yanna,
    The Adrianna lies
    With the sea dredging through her ports,
    The white sand through her eyes.

    "And strange unearthly creatures
    Make marvel of her hull,
    Where far below the gulfs of storm
    There is eternal lull.

    "O Yanna, Adrianna,
    This midnight I am here,
    Because one night of all my life
    At yule tide of the year,

    "With the stars white in heaven,
    And peace upon the sea,
    With all my world in your white arms
    You gave yourself to me.

    "For that one night, my Yanna,
    Within the dying year,
    Was it not well to love, and now
    Can it be well to fear?"

    "O Garvin, there is heartache
    In tales that are half told;
    But ah, thy cheek is pale to-night,
    And thy poor hands are cold!

    "Tell me the course, the voyage,
    The ports, and the new stars;
    Did the long rollers make green surf
    On the white reefs and bars?"

    "O Yanna, Adrianna,
    Though easily I found
    The set of those uncharted tides
    In seas no line could sound,

    "And made without a pilot
    The port without a light,
    No log keeps tally of the knots
    That I have sailed to-night.

    "It fell about mid-April;
    The Trades were holding free;
    We drove her till the scuppers hissed
    And buried in the lee.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "O Yanna, Adrianna,
    Loose hands and let me go!
    The night grows red along the East,
    And in the shifting snow

    "I hear my shipmates calling,
    Sent out to search for me
    In the pale lands beneath the moon
    Along the troubling sea."

    "O Garvin, bonny Garvin,
    What is the booming sound
    Of canvas, and the piping shrill,
    As when a ship comes round?"

    "It is the shadow boatswain
    Piping his hands to bend
    The looming sails on giant yards
    Aboard the Nomansfriend.

    "She sails for Sunken Harbor
    And ports of yester year;
    The tern are shrilling in the lift,
    The low wind-gates are clear.

    "O Yanna, Adrianna,
    The little while is done.
    Thou wilt behold the brightening sea
    Freshen before the sun,

    "And many a morning redden
    The dark hill slopes of pine;
    But I must sail hull-down to-night
    Below the gray sea-line.

    "I shall not hear the snowbirds
    Their morning litany,
    For when the dawn comes over dale
    I must put out to sea."

    "O Garvin, bonny Garvin,
    To have thee as I will,
    I would that never more on earth
    The dawn came over hill."

           *       *       *       *       *

    Then on the snowy pillow,
    Her hair about her face,
    He laid her in the quiet room,
    And wiped away all trace

    Of tears from the poor eyelids
    That were so sad for him,
    And soothed her into sleep at last
    As the great stars grew dim.

    Tender as April twilight
    He sang, and the song grew
    Vague as the dreams which roam about
    This world of dust and dew:

    "O Yanna, Adrianna,
    Dear Love, look forth to sea
    And all year long until the yule,
    Dear Heart, keep watch for me!

    "O Yanna, Adrianna,
    I hear the calling sea,
    And the folk telling tales among
    The hills where I would be.

    "O Yanna, Adrianna,
    Over the hills of sea
    The wind calls and the morning comes,
    And I must forth from thee.

    "But Yanna, Adrianna,
    Keep watch above the sea;
    And when the weary time is o'er,
    Dear Life, come back to me!"

    "O Garvin, bonny Garvin--"
    She murmurs in her dream,
    And smiles a moment in her sleep
    To hear the white gulls scream.

    Then with the storm foreboding
    Far in the dim gray South,
    He kissed her not upon the cheek
    Nor on the burning mouth,

    But once above the forehead
    Before he turned away;
    And ere the morning light stole in,
    That golden lock was gray.

    "O Yanna, Adrianna--"
    The wind moans to the sea;
    And down the sluices of the dawn
    A shadow drifts alee.




THE MARRING OF MALYN


I

THE MERRYMAKERS

    Among the wintry mountains beside the Northern sea
    There is a merrymaking, as old as old can be.

    Over the river reaches, over the wastes of snow,
    Halting at every doorway, the white drifts come and go.

    They scour upon the open, and mass along the wood,
    The burliest invaders that ever man withstood.

    With swoop and whirl and scurry, these riders of the drift
    Will mount and wheel and column, and pass into the lift.

    All night upon the marshes you hear their tread go by,
    And all night long the streamers are dancing on the sky.

    Their light in Malyn's chamber is pale upon the floor,
    And Malyn of the mountains is theirs for evermore.

    She fancies them a people in saffron and in green,
    Dancing for her. For Malyn is only seventeen.

    Out there beyond her window, from frosty deep to deep,
    Her heart is dancing with them until she falls asleep.

    Then all night long through heaven, with stately to and fro,
    To music of no measure, the gorgeous dancers go.

    The stars are great and splendid, beryl and gold and blue,
    And there are dreams for Malyn that never will come true.

    Yet for one golden Yule-tide their royal guest is she,
    Among the wintry mountains beside the Northern sea.

II

A SAILOR'S WEDDING

    There is a Norland laddie who sails the round sea-rim,
    And Malyn of the mountains is all the world to him.
    The Master of the Snowflake, bound upward from the line,
    He smothers her with canvas along the crumbling brine.
    He crowds her till she buries and shudders from his hand,
    For in the angry sunset the watch has sighted land;
    And he will brook no gainsay who goes to meet his bride.
    But their will is the wind's will who traffic on the tide.
    Make home, my bonny schooner! The sun goes down to light
    The gusty crimson wind-halls against the wedding night.

    She gathers up the distance, and grows and veers and swings,
    Like any homing swallow with nightfall in her wings.
    The wind's white sources glimmer with shining gusts of rain;
    And in the Ardise country the spring comes back again.
    It is the brooding April, haunted and sad and dear,
    When vanished things return not with the returning year.
    Only, when evening purples the light in Malyn's dale,
    With sound of brooks and robins, by many a hidden trail,
    With stir of lulling rivers along the forest floor,
    The dream-folk of the gloaming come back to Malyn's door.
    The dusk is long and gracious, and far up in the sky
    You hear the chimney-swallows twitter and scurry by.
    The hyacinths are lonesome and white in Malyn's room;
    And out at sea the Snowflake is driving through the gloom.
    The whitecaps froth and freshen; in squadrons of white surge
    They thunder on to ruin, and smoke along the verge.
    The lift is black above them, the sea is mirk below,
    And down the world's wide border they perish as they go.
    They comb and seethe and founder, they mount and glimmer and flee,
    Amid the awful sobbing and quailing of the sea.
    They sheet the flying schooner in foam from stem to stern,
    Till every yard of canvas is drenched from clew to ear'n'.
    And where they move uneasy, chill is the light and pale;
    They are the Skipper's daughters, who dance before the gale.
    They revel with the Snowflake, and down the close of day
    Among the boisterous dancers she holds her dancing way;
    And then the dark has kindled the harbor light alee,
    With stars and wind and sea-room upon the gurly sea.
    The storm gets up to windward to heave and clang and brawl;
    The dancers of the open begin to moan and call.
    A lure is in their dancing, a weird is in their song;
    The snow-white Skipper's daughters are stronger than the strong.
    They love the Norland sailor who dares the rough sea play;
    Their arms are white and splendid to beckon him away.
    They promise him, for kisses a moment at their lips,
    To make before the morning the port of missing ships,
    Where men put in for shelter, and dreams put forth again,
    And the great sea-winds follow the journey of the rain.
    A bridal with no morrow, no welling of old tears,
    For him, and no more tidings of the departed years!
    For there of old were fashioned the chambers cool and dim,
    In the eternal silence below the twilight's rim.
    The borders of that country are slumberous and wide;
    And they are well who marry the fondlers of the tide.
    Within their arms immortal, no mortal fear can be;
    But Malyn of the mountains is fairer than the sea.
    And so the scudding Snowflake flies with the wind astern,
    And through the boding twilight are blown the shrilling tern.
    The light is on the headland, the harbor gate is wide;
    But rolling in with ruin the fog is on the tide.
    Fate like a muffled steersman sails with that Norland gloom;
    The Snowflake in the offing is neck and neck with doom.
    Ha, ha, my saucy cruiser, crowd up your helm and run!
    There'll be a merrymaking to-morrow in the sun.
    A cloud of straining canvas, a roar of breaking foam,
    The Snowflake and the sea-drift are racing in for home.
    Her heart is dancing shoreward, but silently and pale
    The swift relentless phantom is hungering on her trail.
    They scour and fly together, until across the roar
    He signals for a pilot--and Death puts out from shore.
    A moment Malyn's window is gleaming in the lee,
    And then--the ghost of wreckage upon the iron sea.

    Ah, Malyn, lay your forehead upon your folded arm,
    And hear the grim marauder shake out the reefs of storm!
    Loud laughs the surly Skipper to feel the fog drive in,
    Because a blue-eyed sailor shall wed his kith and kin,
    And the red dawn discover a rover spent for breath
    Among the merrymakers who fondle him to death.
    And all the snowy sisters are dancing wild and grand,
    For him whose broken beauty shall slacken to their hand.
    They wanton in their triumph, and skirl at Malyn's plight;
    Lift up their hands in chorus, and thunder to the night.
    The gulls are driven inland; but on the dancing tide
    The master of the Snowflake is taken to his bride.

    And there when daybreak yellows along the far sea-plain,
    The fresh and buoyant morning comes down the wind again.
    The world is glad of April, the gulls are wild with glee,
    And Malyn on the headland alone looks out to sea.
    Once more that gray Shipmaster smiles, for the night is done,
    And all his snow-white daughters are dancing in the sun.

III

THE LIGHT ON THE MARSH

    The year grows on to harvest, the tawny lilies burn
    Along the marsh, and hillward the roads are sweet with fern.
    All day the windless heaven pavilions the sea-blue,
    Then twilight comes and drenches the sultry dells with dew.
    The lone white star of evening comes out among the hills,
    And in the darkling forest begin the whip-poor-wills.
    The fireflies that wander, the hawks that flit and scream,
    And all the wilding vagrants of summer dusk and dream,
    Have all their will, and reck not of any after thing,
    Inheriting no sorrow and no foreshadowing.
    The wind forgets to whisper, the pines forget to moan,
    And Malyn of the mountains is there among her own.
    Malyn, whom grief nor wonder can trouble nevermore,
    Since that spring night the Snowflake was wrecked beside her door,
    And strange her cry went seaward once, and her soul thereon
    With the vast lonely sea-winds, a wanderer, was gone.
    But she, that patient beauty which is her body fair,
    Endures on earth still lovely, untenanted of care.
    The folk down at the harbor pity from day to day;
    With a "God save you, Malyn!" they bid her on her way.
    She smiles, poor feckless Malyn, the knowing smile of those
    Whom the too sudden vision God sometimes may disclose
    Of his wild, lurid world-wreck, has blinded with its sheen.
    Then, with a fond insistence, pathetic and serene,
    They pass among their fellows for lost minds none can save,
    Bent on their single business, and marvel why men rave.
    Now far away a sighing comes from the buried reef,
    As though the sea were mourning above an ancient grief.
    For once the restless Mother of all the weary lands
    Went down to him in beauty, with trouble in her hands,
    And gave to him forever all memory to keep,
    But to her wayward children oblivion and sleep,
    That no immortal burden might plague one living thing,
    But death should sweetly visit us vagabonds of spring.
    And so his heart forever goes inland with the tide,
    Searching with many voices among the marshes wide.
    Under the quiet starlight, up through the stirring reeds,
    With whispering and lamenting it rises and recedes.
    All night the lapsing rivers croon to their shingly bars
    The wizardries that mingle the sea-wind and the stars.
    And all night long wherever the moving waters gleam,
    The little hills hearken, hearken, the great hills hear and dream.
    And Malyn keeps the marshes all the sweet summer night,
    Alone, foot-free, to follow a wandering wisp-light.
    For every day at sundown, at the first beacon's gleam,
    She calls the gulls her brothers and keeps a tryst with them.
    "O gulls, white gulls, what see you beyond the sloping blue?
    And where away's the Snowflake, she's so long overdue?"
    Then, as the gloaming settles, the hilltop stars emerge
    And watch that plaintive figure patrol the dark sea verge.
    She follows the marsh fire; her heart laughs and is glad;
    She knows that light to seaward is her own sailor lad!
    What are these tales they tell her of wreckage on the shore?
    Delay but makes his coming the nearer than before!
    Surely her eyes have sighted his schooner in the lift!
    But the great tide he homes on sets with an outward drift.
    So will-o'-the-wisp deludes her till dawn, and she turns home
    In unperturbed assurance, "To-morrow he will come."
    This is the tale of Malyn, whom sudden grief so marred.
    And still each lovely summer resumes that sweet regard,--
    The old unvexed eternal indifference to pain;
    The sea sings in the marshes, and June comes back again.
    All night the lapsing rivers lisp in the long dike grass,
    And many memories whisper the sea-winds as they pass;
    The tides disturb the silence; but not a hindrance bars
    The wash of time, where founder even the galleon stars.
    And all night long wherever the moving waters gleam,
    The little hills hearken, hearken, the great hills hear and dream.




THE NANCY'S PRIDE

    On the long slow heave of a lazy sea,
    To the flap of an idle sail,
    The Nancy's Pride went out on the tide;
    And the skipper stood by the rail.

    All down, all down by the sleepy town,
    With the hollyhocks a-row
    In the little poppy gardens,
    The sea had her in tow.

    They let her slip by the breathing rip,
    Where the bell is never still,
    And over the sounding harbor bar,
    And under the harbor hill.

    She melted into the dreaming noon,
    Out of the drowsy land,
    In sight of a flag of goldy hair,
    To the kiss of a girlish hand.

    For the lass who hailed the lad who sailed,
    Was--who but his April bride?
    And of all the fleet of Grand Latite,
    Her pride was the Nancy's Pride.

    So the little vessel faded down
    With her creaking boom a-swing,
    Till a wind from the deep came up with a creep,
    And caught her wing and wing.

    She made for the lost horizon line,
    Where the clouds a-castled lay,
    While the boil and seethe of the open sea
    Hung on her frothing way.

    She lifted her hull like a breasting gull
    Where the rolling valleys be,
    And dipped where the shining porpoises
    Put ploughshares through the sea.

    A fading sail on the far sea-line,
    About the turn of the tide,
    As she made for the Banks on her maiden cruise,
    Was the last of the Nancy's Pride.

    To-day a boy with goldy hair,
    In a garden of Grand Latite,
    From his mother's knee looks out to sea
    For the coming of the fleet.

    They all may home on a sleepy tide,
    To the flap of the idle sail;
    But it's never again the Nancy's Pride
    That answers a human hail.

    They all may home on a sleepy tide
    To the sag of an idle sheet;
    But it's never again the Nancy's Pride
    That draws men down the street.

    On the Banks to-night a fearsome sight
    The fishermen behold,
    Keeping the ghost watch in the moon
    When the small hours are cold.

    When the light wind veers, and the white fog clears,
    They see by the after rail
    An unknown schooner creeping up
    With mildewed spar and sail.

    Her crew lean forth by the rotting shrouds,
    With the Judgment in their face;
    And to their mates' "God save you!"
    Have never a word of grace.

    Then into the gray they sheer away,
    On the awful polar tide;
    And the sailors know they have seen the wraith
    Of the missing Nancy's Pride.




ARNOLD, MASTER OF THE SCUD

    There's a schooner out from Kingsport,
    Through the morning's dazzle-gleam,
    Snoring down the Bay of Fundy
    With a norther on her beam.

    How the tough wind springs to wrestle,
    When the tide is on the flood!
    And between them stands young daring--
    Arnold, master of the Scud.

    He is only "Martin's youngster,"
    To the Minas coasting fleet,
    "Twelve year old, and full of Satan
    As a nut is full of meat."

    With a wake of froth behind him,
    And the gold green waste before,
    Just as though the sea this morning
    Were his boat pond by the door,

    Legs a-straddle, grips the tiller
    This young waif of the old sea;
    When the wind comes harder, only
    Laughs "Hurrah!" and holds her free.

    Little wonder, as you watch him
    With the dash in his blue eye,
    Long ago his father called him
    "Arnold, Master," on the sly,

    While his mother's heart foreboded
    Reckless father makes rash son.
    So to-day the schooner carries
    Just these two whose will is one.

    Now the wind grows moody, shifting
    Point by point into the east.
    Wing and wing the Scud is flying
    With her scuppers full of yeast.

    And the father's older wisdom
    On the sea-line has descried,
    Like a stealthy cloud-bank making
    Up to windward with the tide,

    Those tall navies of disaster,
    The pale squadrons of the fog,
    That maraud this gray world border
    Without pilot, chart, or log,

    Ranging wanton as marooners
    From Minudie to Manan.
    "Heave to, and we'll reef, my master!"
    Cries he; when no will of man

    Spills the foresail, but a clumsy
    Wind-flaw with a hand like stone
    Hurls the boom round. In an instant
    Arnold, Master, there alone

    Sees a crushed corpse shot to seaward,
    With the gray doom in its face;
    And the climbing foam receives it
    To its everlasting place.

    What does Arnold, Master, think you?
    Whimper like a child for dread?
    That's not Arnold. Foulest weather
    Strongest sailors ever bred.

    And this slip of taut sea-faring
    Grows a man who throttles fear.
    Let the storm and dark in spite now
    Do their worst with valor here!

    Not a reef and not a shiver,
    While the wind jeers in her shrouds,
    And the flauts of foam and sea-fog
    Swarm upon her deck in crowds,

    Flies the Scud like a mad racer;
    And with iron in his frown,
    Holding hard by wrath and dreadnought,
    Arnold, Master, rides her down.

    Let the taffrail shriek through foam-heads!
    Let the licking seas go glut
    Elsewhere their old hunger, baffled!
    Arnold's making for the Gut.

    Cleft sheer down, the sea-wall mountains
    Give that one port on the coast;
    Made, the Basin lies in sunshine!
    Missed, the little Scud is lost!

    Come now, fog-horn, let your warning
    Rip the wind to starboard there!
    Suddenly that burly-throated
    Welcome ploughs the cumbered air.

    The young master hauls a little,
    Crowds her up and sheets her home,
    Heading for the narrow entry
    Whence the safety signals come.

    Then the wind lulls, and an eddy
    Tells of ledges, where away;
    Veers the Scud, sheet free, sun breaking,
    Through the rifts, and--there's the bay!

    Like a bird in from the storm-beat,
    As the summer sun goes down,
    Slows the schooner to her moorings
    By the wharf at Digby town.

    All the world next morning wondered.
    Largest letters, there it stood,
    "Storm in Fundy. A Boy's Daring.
    Arnold, Master of the Scud."




THE SHIPS OF ST. JOHN

    Smile, you inland hills and rivers!
    Flush, you mountains in the dawn!
    But my roving heart is seaward
    With the ships of gray St. John.

    Fair the land lies, full of August,
    Meadow island, shingly bar,
    Open barns and breezy twilight,
    Peace and the mild evening star.

    Gently now this gentlest country
    The old habitude takes on,
    But my wintry heart is outbound
    With the great ships of St. John.

    Once in your wide arms you held me,
    Till the man-child was a man,
    Canada, great nurse and mother
    Of the young sea-roving clan.

    Always your bright face above me
    Through the dreams of boyhood shone;
    Now far alien countries call me
    With the ships of gray St. John.

    Swing, you tides, up out of Fundy!
    Blow, you white fogs, in from sea!
    I was born to be your fellow;
    You were bred to pilot me.

    At the touch of your strong fingers,
    Doubt, the derelict, is gone;
    Sane and glad I clear the headland
    With the white ships of St. John.

    Loyalists, my fathers, builded
    This gray port of the gray sea,
    When the duty to ideals
    Could not let well-being be.

    When the breadth of scarlet bunting
    Puts the wreath of maple on,
    I must cheer too,--slip my moorings
    With the ships of gray St. John.

    Peerless-hearted port of heroes,
    Be a word to lift the world,
    Till the many see the signal
    Of the few once more unfurled.

    Past the lighthouse, past the nunbuoy,
    Past the crimson rising sun,
    There are dreams go down the harbor
    With the tall ships of St. John.

    In the morning I am with them
    As they clear the island bar,--
    Fade, till speck by speck the midday
    Has forgotten where they are.

    But I sight a vaster sea-line,
    Wider lee-way, longer run,
    Whose discoverers return not
    With the ships of gray St. John.




THE KING OF YS

    Wild across the Breton country,
    Fabled centuries ago,
    Riding from the black sea border,
    Came the squadrons of the snow.

    Piping dread at every latch-hole,
    Moaning death at every sill,
    The white Yule came down in vengeance
    Upon Ys, and had its will.

    Walled and dreamy stood the city,
    Wide and dazzling shone the sea,
    When the gods set hand to smother
    Ys, the pride of Brittany.

    Morning drenched her towers in purple;
    Light of heart were king and fool;
    Fair forebode the merrymaking
    Of the seven days of Yule.

    Laughed the king, "Once more, my mistress,
    Time and place and joy are one!"
    Bade the balconies with banners
    Match the splendor of the sun;

    Eyes of urchins shine with silver,
    And with gold the pavement ring;
    Bade the war-horns sound their bravest
    In _The Mistress of the King_.

    Mountebanks and ballad-mongers
    And all strolling traffickers
    Should block up the market corners
    With none other name than hers.

    Laughed the fool, "To-day, my Folly,
    Thou shalt be the king of Ys!"
    O wise fool! How long must wisdom
    Under motley hold her peace?

    Then the storm came down. The valleys
    Wailed and ciphered to the dune
    Like huge organ pipes; a midnight
    Stalked those gala streets at noon;

    And the sea rose, rocked and tilted
    Like a beaker in the hand,
    Till the moon-hung tide broke tether
    And stampeded in for land.

    All day long with doom portentous,
    Shreds of pennons shrieked and flew
    Over Ys; and black fear shuddered
    On the hearthstone all night through.

    Fear, which freezes up the marrow
    Of the heart, from door to door
    Like a plague went through the city,
    And filled up the devil's score;

    Filled her tally of the craven,
    To the sea-wind's dismal note;
    While a panic superstition
    Took the people by the throat.

    As with morning still the sea rose
    With vast wreckage on the tide,
    And their pasture rills, grown rivers,
    Thundered in the mountain side,

    "Vengeance, vengeance, gods to vengeance!"
    Rose a storm of muttering;
    And the human flood came pouring
    To the palace of the king.

    "Save, O king, before we perish
    In the whirlpools of the sea,
    Ys thy city, us thy people!"
    Growled the king then, "What would ye?"

    But his wolf's eyes talked defiance,
    And his bearded mouth meant scorn.
    "O our king, the gods are angry;
    And no longer to be borne

    "Is the shameless face that greets us
    From thy windows, at thy side,
    Smiling infamy. And therefore
    Thou shall take her up, and ride

    "Down with her into the sea's mouth,
    And there leave her; else we die,
    And thy name goes down to story
    A new word for cruelty."

    Ah, but she was fair, this woman!
    Warm and flaxen waved her hair;
    Her blue Breton eyes made summer
    In that bleak December air.

    There she stood whose burning beauty
    Made the world's high roof tree ring,
    A white poppy tall and wind-blown
    In the garden of the king.

    Her throat shook, but not with terror;
    Her eyes swam, but not with fear;
    While her two hands caught and clung to
    The one man they had found dear.

    "Lord and lover,"--thus she smiled him
    Her last word,--"it shall be so,
    Only the sea's arms shall hold me,
    When from out thine arms I go."

    Swore he, "By the gods, my mistress,
    Thou shall have queen's burial.
    Pearls and amber shall thy tomb be;
    Shot with gold and green thy pall.

    "And a million-throated chorus
    Shall take up thy dirge to-night;
    Where thy slumber's starry watch-fires
    Shall a thousand years be bright."

    Then they brought the coal-black stallion,
    Chafing on the bit. Astride
    Sprang the young king; shouted, "Way there!"
    Caught the girl up to his side;

    And a path through that scared rabble
    Rode in pageant to the sea.
    And the coal-black mane was mingled
    With gold hair against his knee.

    Sure as the wild gulls make seaward,
    From the west gate to the beach
    Rode these two for whom now freedom
    Landward lay beyond their reach.

    And the great horse, scenting peril,
    Snorted at the flying spume,
    Flicked with courage, as how often,
    When the tides were racing doom,

    Ridden, he had plunged to rescue
    From that seething icy hell
    Some poor sailor wrecked a-fishing
    On the coast. What fears should quell

    That high spirit? Knee to shoulder,
    King and stallion reared and sprang
    Clear above the long white combers
    And that turmoil's iron clang.

    What a launching! For a moment,
    While the tempest held its breath
    And a thousand eyes looked wonder,
    Swimming in that trough of death,

    Steering seaward through the welter,
    Ere they settled out of sight,
    Waved above them one gold streamer.
    Valor, bid the world good-night!...

    Not a trace, while the long summers
    Warm the heart of Brittany,
    Save one stone of Ys, as remnant,
    For a white mark in the sea.




THE KELPIE RIDERS


I

    Buried alive in calm Rochelle,
    Six in a row by a crystal well,

    All Summer long on Bareau Fen
    Slumber and sleep the Kelpie men;

    By the side of each to cheer his ghost,
    A flagon of foam with a crumpet of frost.

    Hear me, friends, for the years are fleet;
    Soon I leave the noise and the street

    For the silent uncompanioned way
    Where the inn is cold and the night is gray.

    But noon is warm and the world is still
    Where the Kelpie riders have their will.

    For never a wind dare stir or stray
    Over those marshes salt and gray;

    No bit of shade as big as your hand
    To traverse or trammel the sleeping land,

    Save where a dozen poplars fleck
    The long gray grass and the well's blue beck.

    Yet you mark their leaves are blanched and sear,
    Whispering daft at a nameless fear.

    While round the hole of one is a rune,
    Black in the wash of the bleaching noon.

    "Ride, for the wind is awake and away.
    Sleep, for the harvest grain is gray."

    No word more. And many a mile,
    A ghostly bivouac rank and file,

    They sleep to-day on the marshes wide;
    Some far night they will wake and ride.

    Once they were riders hot with speed,
    "Kelpie, Kelpie, gallop at need!"

    With hills of the barren sea to roam,
    Housing their horses on the foam.

    But earth is cool and the hush is long
    Beneath the lull of the slumber song

    The crickets falter and strive to tell
    To the dragon-fly of the crystal well;

    And love is a forgotten jest,
    Where the Kelpie riders take their rest,

    And blossoming grasses hour by hour
    Burn in the bud and freeze in the flower.

    But never again shall their roving be
    On the shifting hills of the tumbling sea,

    With the salt, and the rain, and the glad desire
    Strong as the wind and pure as fire.

II

    One doomful night in the April tide
    With riot of brooks on the mountain side,

    The goblin maidens of the hills
    Went forth to the revel-call of the rills.

    Many as leaves of the falling year,
    To the swing of a ballad wild and clear

    They held the plain and the uplands high;
    And the merry-dancers held the sky.

    The Kelpie riders abroad on the sea
    Caught sound of that call of eerie glee,

    Over their prairie waste and wan;
    And the goblin maidens tolled them on.

    The yellow eyes and the raven hair
    And the tawny arms blown fresh and bare,

    Were more than a mortal might behold
    And live with the saints for a crown of gold.

    The Kelpie riders were stricken sore;
    They wavered, and wheeled, and rode for the shore.

    "Kelpie, Kelpie, treble your stride!
    Never again on the sea we ride.

    "Kelpie, Kelpie, out of the storm;
    On, for the fields of earth are warm!"

    Knee to knee they are riding in:
    "Brother, brother,--the goblin kin!"

    The meadows rocked as they clomb the scaur;
    The pines re-echo for evermore

    The sound of the host of Kelpie men;
    But the windflowers died on Bareau Fen.

    Over the marshes all night long
    The stars went round to a riding song:

    "Kelpie, Kelpie, carry us through!"
    And the goblin maidens danced thereto.

    Till dawn,--and the revel died with a shout,
    For the ocean riders were wearied out.

    They looked, and the grass was warm and soft;
    The dreamy clouds went over aloft;

    A gloom of pines on the weather verge
    Had the lulling sound of their own white surge;

    A whip-poor-will, far from their din,
    Was saying his litanies therein.

    Then voices neither loud nor deep:
    "Tired, so tired; sleep! ah, sleep!

    "The stars are calm, and the earth is warm,
    But the sea for an earldom is given to storm.

    "Come now, inherit the houses of doom;
    Your fields of the sun shall be harried of gloom."

    They laid them down; but over long
    They rest,--for the goblin maids are strong.

    The sun goes round; and Bareau Fen
    Is a door of earth on the Kelpie men,--

    Buried at dawn, asleep, unslain,
    With not a mound on the sunny plain,

    Hard by the walls of calm Rochelle,
    Row on row by the crystal well.

    And never again they are free to ride
    Through all the years on the tossing tide,

    Barred from the breast of the barren foam,
    Where the heart within them is yearning home,--

    For one long drench of the surf to quell
    The cursing doom of the goblin spell.

    Only, when bugling snows alight
    To smother the marshes stark and white,

    Or a low red moon peers over the rim
    Of a winter twilight crisp and dim,

    With a sound of drift on the buried lands,
    The goblin maidens loose their hands;

    A wind comes down from the sheer blue North;
    And the Kelpie riders get them forth.

III

    Twice have I been on Bareau Fen,
    But the son of my son is a man since then.

    Once as a lad I used to bear
    St. Louis' cross through the chapel square,

    Leading the choristers' surpliced file
    Slow up the dusk Cathedral aisle.

    I was the boy of all Rochelle
    The pure old father trusted well.

    But one clear night in the winter's heart,
    I wandered out to that place apart.

    The shafts of smoke went up to the stars,
    Straight as the Northern Streamer spars,

    From the town's white roofs, so still it was.
    The night in her dream let no word pass,

    Nor ever a breath that one could feel;
    Only the snow shrieked under my heel.

    Yet it seemed when I reached the poplar hole,
    The ghost of a voice was crying, "Skoal!

    "Rouse thee and drink, for the well is sweet,
    And the crystal snow is good to eat!"

    I heeded little, but stooped on my knee,
    And ate of a handful dreamily.

    'Twas cool to the mouth and slaking at first,
    But the lure of it was ill for thirst.

    The voice cried, "Soul of the mortal span,
    Art thou not of the Kelpie clan?"

    "What are you doing there in the ground,
    Kelpie rider, and never a sound

    "To roam the night but the ghost of a cry?"
    Ringing and swift there came reply,

    "He is asleep where thou art afraid,
    In the tawny arms of a goblin maid!"

    Then I knew the voice was the voice of a girl,
    And I marvelled much (while a little swirl

    Of snow leaped up far off on the plain
    Of sparkling dust and died again),

    For what do the cloisters know, think ye,
    Of women's ways? They be hard to see.

    Again the voice cried, "Kin of my kin,
    The child of the Sun shall win, shall win!"

    'Twas an evil weird that so befell;
    Yet I leaned and drank of the bubbling well.

    I looked for my face in the crystal spring,
    But the face that flickered there was a thing

    To make the nape of your neck grow chill,
    And every vein surge back and thrill

    With a passion for something not their own--
    In a life their life has never known.

    For raven hair and eyes like the sun
    Are merry but dour to look upon.

    She smiled through her lashes under the wave,
    And my soul went forth her bartered slave.

    I swore, "By St. Louis, I'll come to thee,
    Though I ride to my doom in the gulfs of the sea!

    "Thy Kelpie rider shall wake and rue
    His ruined life in the loss of you."

    Then I fled in the start of a terror of joy,
    O'er leagues where a legion might deploy;

    For the acres of snow were level and hard,
    Every flake like a crystal shard.

    I was the runner of all Rochelle,
    Could run with the hounds on Haric Fell;

    And something stark as a gust of the sea
    Had a grip of the whimsy boy in me.

    I ran like the drift on the ice low curled
    When the winds of Yule are abroad on the world.

    Sudden, the beat of a throbbing sound
    Lost in the core of the blue profound:

    "Kelpie, Kelpie, Kelpie, come!"
    Was it my heart?--But my heart was numb.

    "Kelpie, Kelpie!" Was it the sea?
    Far on, at the verge of Bareau lea,

    I saw like an army, shield and casque,
    The breakers roll in the Roads of Basque.

    "Kelpie, Kelpie!" Was it the wolves?
    In the dusk of pines where night dissolves

    To streamers and stars through the mountain gorge,
    I heard the blast of a giant forge.

    Then I knew the wind was awake from the North,
    And the ocean riders were freed and forth.

    Time, there is time (now gallop, my heart!)
    Ere the black riders disperse and depart.

    The dawn is late, but the dawn comes round,
    And Fleetfoot Jean has the wind of a hound.

    The hue and cry of the Kelpie horde
    Was growing and grim on that white seaboard.

    It rolled and gathered and died and grew
    Far off to the rear; a smile thereto

    I turned; a fathom behind my ear
    A rider rode with a shadowy leer.

    I sickened and sped. He laughed aloud,
    "Wind for a mourner, snow for a shroud!"

    On and on, half blown, half blind,
    Shadow and self, and the wind behind!

    I slackened, he slackened; I fled, he flew;
    In a swirl of snow-drift all night through

    I scoured along the gusty fen,
    A quarry for hunting Kelpie men.

    But only one could hold at my side:
    "Brother, brother, I love thy stride.

    "Wilt thou follow thy whim to win
    My merry maid of the goblin kin?"

    I swerved from my trail, for he haunted my ear
    With his moaning jibe and his shadowy leer.

    So by good hap as we sped it fell,
    I fetched a circuit back for the well.

    Like a spilth of spume on the crest of the bore
    When the combing tides make in for shore,

    That runner ran whose love was a wraith;
    But the rider rode with revenge in his teeth.

    Another league, and I touch the goal,--
    The mystic rune on the poplar bole,--

    When the dusky eyes and the raven hair
    And the lithe brown arms shall greet me there.

    I ran like a harrier on the trace
    In the leash of that ghoul, and the wind gave chase.

    A furlong now; I caught the gleam
    Of the bubbling well with its tiny stream;

    An arrowy burst; I cleared the beck;
    And--the Kelpie rider bestrode my neck.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Dawn, the still red winter dawn;
    I awoke on the plain; the wind was gone;--

    All gracious and good as when God made
    The living creatures, and none was afraid.

    I stooped to drink of the wholesome spring
    Under the poplars whispering:

    Face to my face in that water clear--
    The Kelpie rider's jabbering leer!

    Ah, God! not me: I was never so!
    Sainted Louis, who can know

    The lords of life from the slaves of death?
    What help avail the speeding breath

    Of the spirit that knows not self's abode,--
    When the soul is lost that knows not God?

    I turned me home by St. Louis' Hall,
    Where the red sun burns on the windows tall.

    And I thought the world was strange and wild,
    And God with his altar only a child.

IV

    Again one year in the prime of June,
    I came to the well in the heated noon,

    Leaving Rochelle with its red roof tiles
    By the Pottery Gate before St. Giles,--

    There where the flower market is,
    Where every morning up from Duprisse

    The flower girls come by the long white lane
    That skirts the edge of Bareau plain;--

    To the North, the city wall in the sun,
    To the left, the fen where the eye may run

    And have its will of the blazing blue.
    The while I loitered the market through,

    Halting a moment to converse
    With old Babette who had been my nurse,

    There passed through the stalls a woman, bright
    With a kirtle of cinnabar and white

    Among the kerseys blue; and I said,
    "Who is it, Babette, with lifted head,

    "And the startled look, possessed and strange,
    Under the paint--secure from change?"

    "Ah, 'Sieur Jean, do ye not ken
    Of the eerie folk of Bareau Fen?"

    I blenched, and she knew too well I wist
    The fearsome fate of the goblin tryst.

    "The street is a cruel home, 'Sieur Jean,
    But a weird uncanny drives her on.

    "'Tis a bitter tale for Christian folk,
    How once she dreamed, and how she woke."

    "Ay, ay!" I passed and reached the spring
    Where the poplars kept their whispering,

    Hid for an hour in the shade,
    In the rank marsh grass of a tiny glade.

    There crossed the moor from the town afar,
    In kirtle of white and cinnabar,

    A wanderer on that plain of tears,
    Bowed with a burden not of the years,

    As one that goeth sorrowing
    For many an unforgotten thing.

    To the crystal well as the sun drew low
    There came that harridan of woe.

    She stooped to drink; I heard her cry:
    "Ah, God, how tired out am I!

    "I called him by the dearest name
    A girl may call; I have my shame.

    "'Yet death is crueller than life,'
    Once they said, 'for all the strife.'

    "And so I lived; but the wild will,
    Broken and bitter, drives to ill.

    "And now I know, what no one saith,
    That love is crueller than death.

    "How I did love him! Is love too high,
    My God, for such lost folk as I?"

    Her tears went down to the grass by the well,
    In that passion of grief, and where they fell

    Windflowers trembled pale and white.
    A craven I crept away from the sight;

    And turned me home to St. Louis' Hall,
    Where the sunflowers burn by the eastern wall.

    The vesper frankincense that day
    Rose to the rafters and melted away,

    And was no more than a cloud that stirs
    Among the spires of Norway firs.

    And I said, "The holy solitude
    Of the hoary crypt and the wild green wood

    "Are one to the God I have never known,
    Whose kingdom has neither bourn nor throne."

V

    Now I am old, and the years delay;
    But I know, I know, there will come a day,--

    When April is over the Norland town.
    And the loosened brooks from the hills go down,

    When tears have quenched the sorrow of time,--
    Wherein the earth shall rebuild her prime,

    And the houses of dark be overthrown;
    When the goblin maids shall love their own,--

    Their arms forever unlaced from their hold
    Of the earls of the sea on that alien wold,--

    And the feckless light of their golden eyes
    Shall forget the desire that made them wise;

    When the hands of the foam shall beckon and flee.
    And the Kelpie riders ride for the sea;

    And the whip-poor-will the whole night long
    Repeat his litanies of song,

    Till morning whiten the world again,
    And the flowers revive on Bareau Fen,

    Over the acres of calm Rochelle
    Fresh by the stream of the crystal well.




NOONS OF POPPY

    Noons of poppy, noons of poppy,
    Scarlet leagues along the sea;
    Flaxen hair afloat in sunlight,
    Love, come down the world to me!

    There's a Captain I must ship with,
    (Heart, that day be far from now!)
    Wears his dark command in silence
    With the sea-frost on his brow.

    Noons of poppy, noons of poppy,
    Purple shadows by the sea;
    How should love take thought to wonder
    What the destined port may be?

    Nay, if love have joy for shipmate
    For a night-watch or a year,
    Dawn will light o'er Lonely Haven,
    Heart to happy heart, as here.

    Noons of poppy, noons of poppy,
    Scarlet acres by the sea
    Burning to the blue above them;
    Love, the world is full for me.




LEGENDS OF LOST HAVEN

    There are legends of Lost Haven,
    Come, I know not whence, to me,
    When the wind is in the clover,
    When the sun is on the sea.

    There are rumors in the pine-tops,
    There are whispers in the grass;
    And the flocking crows at nightfall
    Bring home hints of things that pass

    Out upon the broad dike yonder,
    All day long beneath the sun,
    Where the tall ships cloud and settle
    Down the sea-curve, one by one.

    And the crickets in fine chorus--
    Every slim and tiny reed--
    Strive to chord the broken rhythmus
    Of the world, and half succeed.

    There are myriad traditions
    Treasured by the talking rain;
    And with memories the moonlight
    Walks the cold and silent plain.

    Where the river tells his hill-tales
    To the lone complaining bar,
    Where the midgets thread their dances
    To the yellow twilight star,

    Where the blossom bends to hearken
    To the bee with velvet bands,
    There are chronicles enciphered
    Of the yet uncharted lands.

    All the musical marauders
    Of the berry and the bloom
    Sing the lure of soul's illusion
    Out of darkness, out of doom.

    But the sure and great evangel
    Comes when half alone I hear,
    At the rosy door of silence,
    Love, the lord of speech, draw near.

    Then for once across the threshold,
    Darkling spirit, thou art free,--
    As thy hope is every ship makes
    Some lost haven of the sea.




THE SHADOW BOATSWAIN

    Don't you know the sailing orders?
    It is time to put to sea,
    And the stranger in the harbor
    Sends a boat ashore for me.

    With the thunder of her canvas
    Coming on the wind again,
    I can hear the Shadow Boatswain
    Piping to his shadow men.

    Is it firelight or morning,
    That red flicker on the floor?
    Your good-by was braver, sweetheart,
    When I sailed away before.

    Think of this last lovely summer!
    Love, what ails the wind to-night?
    What's he saying in the chimney
    Turns your berry cheek so white?

    What a morning! How the sunlight
    Sparkles on the outer bay,
    Where the brig lies waiting for me
    To trip anchor and away!

    That's the Doomkeel. You may know her
    By her clean run aft; and, then,
    Don't you hear the Shadow Boatswain
    Piping to his shadow men?

    Off the freshening sea to windward,
    Is it a white tern I hear
    Shrilling in the gusty weather
    Where the far sea-line is clear?

    What a morning for departure!
    How your blue eyes melt and shine!
    Will you watch us from the headland
    Till we sink below the line?

    I can see the wind already
    Steer the scurf marks of the tide,
    As we slip the wake of being
    Down the sloping world and wide.

    I can feel the vasty mountains
    Heave and settle under me,
    And the Doomkeel veer and shudder,
    Crumbling on the hollow sea.

    There's a call, as when a white gull
    Cries and beats across the blue;
    That must be the Shadow Boatswain
    Piping to his shadow crew.

    There's a boding sound, like winter
    When the pines begin to quail;
    That must be the gray wind moaning
    In the belly of the sail.

    I can feel the icy fingers
    Creeping in upon my bones;
    There must be a berg to windward
    Somewhere in these border zones.

    Stir the fire.... I love the sunlight,--
    Always loved my shipmate sun.
    How the sunflowers beckon to me
    From the dooryard one by one!

    How the royal lady roses
    Strew this summer world of ours!
    There'll be none in Lonely Haven;
    It is too far north for flowers.

    There, sweetheart! And I must leave you.
    What should touch my wife with tears?
    There's no danger with the Master;
    He has sailed the sea for years.

    With the sea-wolves on her quarter,
    And a white bone in her teeth,
    He will steer the shadow cruiser,
    Dark before and doom beneath,

    Down the last expanse, till morning
    Flares above the broken sea,
    And the midnight storm is over,
    And the Isles are close alee.

    So some twilight, when your roses
    Are all blown and it is June,
    You will turn your blue eyes seaward
    Through the white dusk of the moon,

    Wondering, as that far sea-cry
    Comes upon the wind again,
    And you hear the Shadow Boatswain
    Piping to his shadow men.




THE MASTER OF THE ISLES

    There is rumor in Dark Harbor,
    And the folk are all astir;
    For a stranger in the offing
    Draws them down to gaze at her,

    In the gray of early morning,
    Black against the orange streak,
    Making in below the ledges,
    With no colors at her peak.

    Something makes their hearts uneasy
    As they watch the long black hull,
    For she brings the storm behind her
    While before her there is lull.

    With no pilot and unspoken,
    Where the dancing breakers are,
    Presently she veers and races
    In across the roaring bar,--

    Rounds and luffs and comes to anchor,
    While the wharf begins to throng.
    Silence falls upon the women.
    And misgiving stirs the strong.

    Then with some obscure foreboding,
    As a gray-haired watcher smiles,
    They perceive the fearless captain
    Is the Master of the Isles.

    They recall the bleak December
    Many streaming years ago,
    When the stranger had been sighted
    Driving shoreward with the snow;

    When the Master came among them
    With his calm and courtly pride,
    And had sailed away at sundown
    With pale Dora for his bride;

    How again he came one summer
    When the herring schools were late,
    And had cleared before the morning
    With old Alec's son for mate.

    There was glamour with the Master;
    He had tales of far-off seas;
    But his habit and demeanor
    Were of other lands than these.

    He had never made the Harbor
    But there sailed away with him
    Wife or child or friend or lover,
    Leaving eyes to strain and swim,--

    Strain and wait for their returning;
    Yet they never had come back;
    For the pale wake of the Master
    Is a wandering, fading track.

    Just beyond our utmost fathom
    Is the anchorage we crave,
    But the Master knows the soundings
    By the reach of every wave.

    Just beyond the last horizon,
    Vague upon the weather-gleam,
    Loom the Faroff Isles forever,
    The tradition of a dream.

    There a white and brooding summer
    Haunts upon the gray sea-plain,
    Where the gray sea-winds are quiet
    At the sources of the rain.

    There where all world-weary dreamers
    Get them forth to their release,
    Lie the colonies of the kindred,
    In the provinces of peace.

    Thither in the stormy sunset
    Will the Master sail to-night;
    And the village will be silent
    When he drops below the light.

    Not a soul on all the hillside
    But will watch her when she clears,
    Dreaming of the Port o' Strangers
    In the roadstead of the years.

    "Port o' Strangers, Port o' Strangers!"
    "Where away?" "On the weather bow."
    "Drive her down the closing distance!"...
    That's to-morrow, but not now.

    What imperial adventure
    Some wide morning it will be,
    Sweeping in to Lonely Haven
    From the chartless round of sea!

    How imposing a departure,
    While this little harbor smiles,
    Steering for the outer sea-rim
    With the Master of the Isles!




THE LAST WATCH

    Comrades, comrades, have me buried
    Like a warrior of the sea,
    With a flag across my breast
    And my sword upon my knee.

    Steering out from vanished headlands
    For a harbor on no chart,
    With the winter in the rigging,
    With the ice-wind in my heart,

    Down the bournless slopes of sea-room,
    With the long gray wake behind,
    I have sailed my cruiser steady
    With no pilot but the wind.

    Battling with relentless pirates
    From the lower seas of Doom,
    I have kept the colors flying
    Through the roar of drift and gloom.

    Scudding where the shadow foemen
    Hang about us grim and stark,
    Broken spars and shredded canvas,
    We are racing for the dark.

    Sped and blown abaft the sunset
    Like a shriek the storm has caught;
    But the helm is lashed to windward,
    And the sails are sheeted taut.

    Comrades, comrades, have me buried
    Like a warrior of the night.
    I can hear the bell-buoy calling
    Down below the harbor light

    Steer in shoreward, loose the signal,
    The last watch has been cut short;
    Speak me kindly to the islesmen,
    When we make the foreign port.

    We shall make it ere the morning
    Rolls the fog from strait and bluff;
    Where the offing crimsons eastward
    There is anchorage enough.

    How I wander in my dreaming!
    Are we northing nearer home,
    Or outbound for fresh adventure
    On the reeling plains of foam?

    North I think it is, my comrades,
    Where one heart-beat counts for ten,
    Where the loving hand is loyal,
    And the women's sons are men;

    Where the red auroras tremble
    When the polar night is still,
    Lighting home the worn seafarers
    To their haven in the hill.

    Comrades, comrades, have me buried
    Like a warrior of the North.
    Lower me the long-boat, stay me
    In your arms, and bear me forth;

    Lay me in the sheets and row me,
    With the tiller in my hand,
    Row me in below the beacon
    Where my sea-dogs used to land.

    Has your captain lost his cunning
    After leading you so far?
    Row me your last league, my sea-kings;
    It is safe within the bar.

    Shoulder me and house me hillward,
    Where the field-lark makes his bed,
    So the gulls can wheel above me,
    All day long when I am dead;

    Where the keening wind can find me
    With the April rain for guide,
    And come crooning her old stories
    Of the kingdoms of the tide.

    Comrades, comrades, have me buried
    Like a warrior of the sun;
    I have carried my sealed orders
    Till the last command is done.

    Kiss me on the cheek for courage,
    (There is none to greet me home,)
    Then farewell to your old lover
    Of the thunder of the foam;

    For the grass is full of slumber
    In the twilight world for me,
    And my tired hands are slackened
    From their toiling on the sea.




OUTBOUND

    A lonely sail in the vast sea-room,
    I have put out for the port of gloom.

    The voyage is far on the trackless tide,
    The watch is long, and the seas are wide.

    The headlands blue in the sinking day
    Kiss me a hand on the outward way.

    The fading gulls, as they dip and veer,
    Lift me a voice that is good to hear.

    The great winds come, and the heaving sea,
    The restless mother, is calling me.

    The cry of her heart is lone and wild,
    Searching the night for her wandered child.

    Beautiful, weariless mother of mine,
    In the drift of doom I am here, I am thine.

    Beyond the fathom of hope or fear,
    From bourn to bourn of the dusk I steer,

    Swept on in the wake of the stars, in the stream
    Of a roving tide, from dream to dream.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Ballads of Lost Haven, by Bliss Carman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BALLADS OF LOST HAVEN ***

***** This file should be named 18268.txt or 18268.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/6/18268/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions
(www.canadiana.org))


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
