Project Gutenberg's The Case of the Registered Letter, by Augusta Groner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Case of the Registered Letter

Author: Augusta Groner

Translator: Grace Isabel Colbron

Posting Date: November 6, 2008 [EBook #1833]
Release Date: July, 1999
Last Updated: June 28, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASE OF THE REGISTERED LETTER ***




Produced by An Anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer





THE CASE OF THE REGISTERED LETTER

By Augusta Groner


Translated by Grace Isabel Colbron




INTRODUCTION TO JOE MULLER

Joseph Muller, Secret Service detective of the Imperial Austrian police,
is one of the great experts in his profession. In personality he differs
greatly from other famous detectives. He has neither the impressive
authority of Sherlock Holmes, nor the keen brilliancy of Monsieur Lecoq.
Muller is a small, slight, plain-looking man, of indefinite age, and of
much humbleness of mien. A naturally retiring, modest disposition, and
two external causes are the reasons for Muller's humbleness of manner,
which is his chief characteristic. One cause is the fact that in early
youth a miscarriage of justice gave him several years in prison, an
experience which cast a stigma on his name and which made it impossible
for him, for many years after, to obtain honest employment. But the
world is richer, and safer, by Muller's early misfortune. For it was
this experience which threw him back on his own peculiar talents for
a livelihood, and drove him into the police force. Had he been able to
enter any other profession, his genius might have been stunted to a mere
pastime, instead of being, as now, utilised for the public good.

Then, the red tape and bureaucratic etiquette which attaches to every
governmental department, puts the secret service men of the Imperial
police on a par with the lower ranks of the subordinates. Muller's
official rank is scarcely much higher than that of a policeman, although
kings and councillors consult him and the Police Department realises to
the full what a treasure it has in him. But official red tape, and his
early misfortune... prevent the giving of any higher official standing
to even such a genius. Born and bred to such conditions, Muller
understands them, and his natural modesty of disposition asks for no
outward honours, asks for nothing but an income sufficient for his
simple needs, and for aid and opportunity to occupy himself in the way
he most enjoys.

Joseph Muller's character is a strange mixture. The kindest-hearted man
in the world, he is a human bloodhound when once the lure of the trail
has caught him. He scarcely eats or sleeps when the chase is on, he does
not seem to know human weakness nor fatigue, in spite of his frail body.
Once put on a case his mind delves and delves until it finds a clue,
then something awakes within him, a spirit akin to that which holds
the bloodhound nose to trail, and he will accomplish the apparently
impossible, he will track down his victim when the entire machinery of
a great police department seems helpless to discover anything. The high
chiefs and commissioners grant a condescending permission when Muller
asks, "May I do this? ... or may I handle this case this way?"
both parties knowing all the while that it is a farce, and that the
department waits helpless until this humble little man saves its honour
by solving some problem before which its intricate machinery has stood
dazed and puzzled.

This call of the trail is something that is stronger than anything else
in Muller's mentality, and now and then it brings him into conflict with
the department,... or with his own better nature. Sometimes his unerring
instinct discovers secrets in high places, secrets which the Police
Department is bidden to hush up and leave untouched. Muller is then
taken off the case, and left idle for a while if he persists in his
opinion as to the true facts. And at other times, Muller's own warm
heart gets him into trouble. He will track down his victim, driven by
the power in his soul which is stronger than all volition; but when he
has this victim in the net, he will sometimes discover him to be a
much finer, better man than the other individual, whose wrong at this
particular criminal's hand set in motion the machinery of justice.
Several times that has happened to Muller, and each time his heart got
the better of his professional instincts, of his practical common-sense,
too, perhaps,... at least as far as his own advancement was concerned,
and he warned the victim, defeating his own work. This peculiarity of
Muller's character caused his undoing at last, his official undoing that
is, and compelled his retirement from the force. But his advice is often
sought unofficially by the Department, and to those who know, Muller's
hand can be seen in the unravelling of many a famous case.

The following stories are but a few of the many interesting cases that
have come within the experience of this great detective. But they give
a fair portrayal of Muller's peculiar method of working, his looking on
himself as merely an humble member of the Department, and the comedy
of his acting under "official orders" when the Department is in reality
following out his directions.




THE CASE OF THE REGISTERED LETTER


"Oh, sir, save him if you can--save my poor nephew! I know he is
innocent!"

The little old lady sank back in her chair, gazing up at Commissioner
von Riedau with tear-dimmed eyes full of helpless appeal. The
commissioner looked thoughtful. "But the case is in the hands of the
local authorities, Madam," he answered gently, a strain of pity in his
voice. "I don't exactly see how we could interfere."

"But they believe Albert guilty! They haven't given him a chance!"

"He cannot be sentenced without sufficient proof of his guilt."

"But the trial, the horrible trial--it will kill him--his heart is
weak. I thought--I thought you might send some one--some one of your
detectives--to find out the truth of the case. You must have the best
people here in Vienna. Oh, my poor Albert--"

Her voice died away in a suppressed sob, and she covered her face to
keep back the tears.

The commissioner pressed a bell on his desk. "Is Detective Joseph Muller
anywhere about the building?" he asked of the attendant who appeared at
the door.

"I think he is, sir. I saw him come in not long ago."

"Ask him to come up to this room. Say I would like to speak to him." The
attendant went out.

"I have sent for one of the best men on our force, Madam," continued the
commissioner, turning back to the pathetic little figure in the chair.
"We will go into this matter a little more in detail and see if it is
possible for us to interfere with the work of the local authorities in
G----------."

The little old lady gave her eyes a last hasty dab with a dainty
handkerchief and raised her head again, fighting for self-control. She
was a quaint little figure, with soft grey hair drawn back smoothly from
a gentle-featured face in which each wrinkle seemed the seal of some
loving thought for others. Her bonnet and gown were of excellent
material in delicate soft colours, but cut in the style of an earlier
decade. The capable lines of her thin little hands showed through the
fabric of her grey gloves. Her whole attitude bore the impress of one
who had adventured far beyond the customary routine of her home circle,
adventured out into the world in fear and trembling, impelled by the
stress of a great love.

A knock was heard at the door, and a small, slight man, with a kind,
smooth-shaven face, entered at the commissioner's call. "You sent for
me, sir?" he asked.

"Yes, Muller, there is a matter here in which I need your advice, your
assistance, perhaps. This is Detective Muller, Miss--" (the commissioner
picked up the card on his desk) "Miss Graumann. If you will tell us now,
more in detail, all that you can tell us about this case, we may be able
to help you."

"Oh, if you would," murmured Miss Graumann, with something more of hope
in her voice. The expression of sympathetic interest on the face of
the newcomer had already won her confidence for him. Her slight figure
straightened up in the chair, and the two men sat down opposite her,
prepared to listen to her story.

"I will tell you all I know and understand about this matter,
gentlemen," she began. "My name is Babette Graumann, and I live with my
nephew, Albert Graumann, engineering expert, in the village of Grunau,
which is not far from the city of G----------. My nephew Albert, the dearest,
truest--" sobs threatened to overcome her again, but she mastered them
bravely. "Albert is now in prison, accused of the murder of his friend,
John Siders, in the latter's lodgings in G------."

"Yes, that is the gist of what you have already told me," said the
commissioner. "Muller, Miss Graumann believes her nephew innocent,
contrary to the opinion of the local authorities in G------. She has come
to ask for some one from here who could ferret out the truth of this
matter. You are free now, and if we find that it can be done without
offending the local authorities--"

"Who is the commissioner in charge of the case in G------?" asked Muller.

"Commissioner Lange is his name, I believe," replied Miss Graumann.

"H'm!" Muller and the commissioner exchanged glances.

"I think we can venture to hear more of this," said the commissioner,
as if in answer to their unspoken thought. "Can you give us the details
now, Madam? Who is, or rather who was, this John Siders?"

"John Siders came to our village a little over a year ago," continued
Miss Graumann. "He came from Chicago; he told us, although he was
evidently a German by birth. He bought a nice little piece of property,
not far from our home, and settled down there. He was a quiet man and
made few friends, but he seemed to take to Albert and came to see us
frequently. Albert had spent some years in America, in Chicago, and
Siders liked to talk to him about things and people there. But one day
Siders suddenly sold his property and moved to G------. Two weeks later he
was found dead in his lodgings in the city, murdered, and now--now they
have accused Albert of the crime."

"On what grounds?--oh, I beg your pardon, sir; I did not mean--"

"That's all right, Muller," said the commissioner. "As you may have to
undertake the case, you might as well begin to do the questioning now."

"They say"--Miss Graumann's voice quavered--"they say that Albert was
the last person known to have been in Siders' room; they say that it was
his revolver, found in the room. That is the dreadful part of it--it was
his revolver. He acknowledges it, but he did not know, until the police
showed it to him, that the weapon was not in its usual place in his
study. They tell me that everything speaks for his guilt, but I cannot
believe it--I cannot. He says he is innocent in spite of everything. I
believe him. I brought him up, sir; I was like his own mother to him. He
never knew any other mother. He never lied to me, not once, when he was
a little boy, and I don't believe he'd lie to me now, now that he's a
man of forty-five. He says he did not kill John Siders. Oh, I know, even
without his saying it, that he would not do such a thing."

"Can you tell us anything more about the murder itself?" questioned
Muller gently. "Is there any possibility of suicide? Or was there a
robbery?"

"They say it was no suicide, sir, and that there was a large sum of
money missing. But why should Albert take any one else's money? He has
money of his own, and he earns a good income besides--we have all that
we need. Oh, it is some dreadful mistake! There is the newspaper account
of the discovery of the body. Perhaps Mr. Muller might like to read
that." She pointed to a sheet of newspaper on the desk. The commissioner
handed it to Muller. It was an evening paper, dated G------, September
24th, and it gave an elaborate account, in provincial journalese, of the
discovery that morning of the body of John Siders, evidently murdered,
in his lodgings. The main facts to be gathered from the long-winded
story were as follows:

John Siders had rented the rooms in which he met his death about ten
days before, paying a month's rent in advance. The lodgings consisted of
two rooms in a little house in a quiet street. It was a street of simple
two-story, one and two family dwellings, occupied by artisans and small
tradespeople. There were many open spaces, gardens and vacant lots in
the street. The house in which Siders lodged belonged to a travelling
salesman by the name of Winter. The man was away from home a great deal,
and his wife, with her child and an old servant, lived in the lower
part of the house, while the rooms occupied by Siders were in the upper
story. Siders lived very quietly, going out frequently in the afternoon,
but returning early in the evening. He had said to his landlady that he
had many friends in G------. But during the time of his stay in the house he
had had but one caller, a gentleman who came on the evening of the 23rd
of September. The old maid had opened the door for him and showed him
to Mr. Siders' rooms. She described this visitor as having a full black
beard, and wearing a broad-brimmed grey felt hat. Nobody saw the man
go out, for the old maid, the only person in the house at the time, had
retired early. Mrs. Winter and her little girl were spending the night
with the former's mother in a distant part of the city. The next morning
the old servant, taking the lodger's coffee up to him at the usual hour,
found him dead on the floor of his sitting-room, shot through the heart.
The woman ran screaming from the house and alarmed the neighbours. A
policeman at the corner heard the noise, and led the crowd up to the
room where the dead man lay. It was plain to be seen that this was not
a case of suicide. Everywhere were signs of a terrible struggle. The
furniture was overturned, the dressing-table and the cupboard were open
and their contents scattered on the floor, one of the window curtains
was torn into strips, as if the victim had been trying to escape by way
of the window, but had been dragged back into the room by his murderer.
An overturned ink bottle on the table had spattered wide, and added to
the general confusion. In the midst of the disorder lay the body of the
murdered man, now cold in the rigour of death.

The police commissioner arrived soon, took possession of the rooms, and
made a thorough examination of the premises. A letter found on the desk
gave another proof, if such were needed, that this was not a case of
suicide. This letter was in the handwriting of the dead man, and read as
follows:

Dear Friend:

I appreciate greatly all the kindness shown me by yourself and your good
wife. I have been more successful than I thought possible in overcoming
the obstacles you know of. Therefore, I shall be very glad to join you
day after to-morrow, Sunday, in the proposed excursion. I will call for
you at 8 A.M.--the cab and the champagne will be my share of the trip.
We'll have a jolly day and drink a glass or two to our plans for the
future.

With best greetings for both of you,

Your old friend,

John

G--------, Friday, Sept. 23rd.


An envelope, not yet addressed, lay beside this letter. It was clear
that the man who penned these words had no thought of suicide. On
the contrary, he was looking forward to a day of pleasure in the near
future, and laying plans for the time to come. The murderer's bullet had
pierced a heart pulsing with the joy of life.

This was the gist of the account in the evening paper. Muller read
it through carefully, lingering over several points which seemed to
interest him particularly. Then he turned to Miss Babette Graumann. "And
then what happened?" he asked.

"Then the Police Commissioner came to Grunau and questioned my nephew.
They had found out that Albert was Mr. Siders' only friend here. And
late that evening the Mayor and the Commissioner came to our house with
the revolver they had found in the room in G------, and they--they--" her
voice trembled again, "they arrested my dear boy and took him away."

"Have you visited him in prison? What does he say about it himself?"

"He seems quite hopeless. He says that he is innocent--oh, I know he
is--but everything is against him. He acknowledges that it was he who
was in Mr. Siders' room the evening before the murder. He went there
because Siders wrote him to come. He says he left early, and that John
acted queerly. He knows they will not believe his story. This worry and
anxiety will kill him. He has a serious heart trouble; he has suffered
from it for years, and it has been growing steadily worse. I dare not
think what this excitement may do for him." Miss Graumann broke down
again and sobbed aloud. Muller laid his hands soothingly on the little
old fingers that gripped the arm of the chair.

"Did your nephew send you here to ask for help?" he inquired very
gently.

"Oh, no!" The old lady looked up at him through her tears. "No, he would
not have done that. I'm afraid that he'll be angry if he knows that I
have come. He seemed so hopeless, so dazed. I just couldn't stand it.
It seemed to me that the police in G-------- were taking things for granted,
and just sitting there waiting for an innocent man to confess, instead
of looking for the real murderer, who may be gone, the Lord knows where,
by now!" Miss Graumann's faded cheeks flushed a delicate pink, and she
straightened up in her chair again, while her eyes snapped defiance
through the tears that hung on their lashes.

A faint gleam twinkled up in Muller's eyes, and he did not look at his
chief. Doctor von Riedau's own face glowed in a slowly mounting flush,
and his eyes drooped in a moment of conscious embarrassment at some
recollection, the sting of which was evidently made worse by Muller's
presence. But Commissioner von Riedau had brains enough to acknowledge
his mistakes and to learn from them. He looked across the desk at Miss
Graumann. "You are right, Madam, the police have made that mistake more
than once. And a man with a clear record deserves the benefit of the
doubt. We will take up this case. Detective Muller will be put in charge
of it. And that means, Madam, that we are giving you the very best
assistance the Imperial Police Force affords."

Miss Babette Graumann did not attempt to speak. In a wave of emotion she
stretched out both little hands to the detective and clasped his warmly.
"Oh, thank you," she said at last. "I thank you. He's just like my own
boy to me; he's all the child I ever had, you know."

"But there are difficulties in the way," continued the commissioner in
a business-like tone. "The local authorities in G-------- have not asked for
our assistance, and we are taking up the case over their heads, as it
were. I shall have to leave that to Muller's diplomacy. He will come to
G-------- and have an interview with your nephew. Then he will have to use
his own judgment as to the next steps, and as to how far he may go in
opposition to what has been done by the police there."

"And then I may go back home?" asked Miss Graumann. "Go home with the
assurance that you will help my poor boy?"

"Yes, you may depend on us, Madam. Is there anything we can do for you
here? Are you alone in the city?"

"No, thank you. There is a friend here who will take care of me. She
will put me on the afternoon express back to G------."

"It is very likely that I will take that train myself," said Muller. "If
there is anything that you need on the journey, call on me."

"Oh, thank you, I will indeed! Thank you both, gentlemen. And now
good-bye, and God bless you!"

The commissioner bowed and Muller held the door open for Miss Graumann
to pass out. There was silence in the room, as the two men looked after
the quaint little figure slowly descending the stairs.

"A brave little woman," murmured the commissioner.

"It is not only the mother in the flesh who knows what a mother's love
is," added Muller.

Next morning Joseph Muller stood in the cell of the prison in G--------
confronting Albert Graumann, accused of the murder of John Siders.

The detective had just come from a rather difficult interview with
Commissioner Lange. But the latter, though not a brilliant man, was at
least good-natured. He acknowledged the right of the accused and his
family to ask for outside assistance, and agreed with Muller that it was
better to have some one in the official service brought in, rather than
a private detective whose work, in its eventual results, might bring
shame on the police. Muller explained that Miss Graumann did not want
her nephew to know that it was she who had asked for aid in his behalf,
and that it could only redound to his, Lange's, credit if it were
understood that he had sent to Vienna for expert assistance in this
case. It would be a proof of his conscientious attention to duty,
and would insure praise for him, whichever way the case turned out.
Commissioner Lange saw the force of this argument, and finally gave
Muller permission to handle the case as he thought best, rather relieved
than otherwise for his own part. The detective's next errand was to the
prison, where he now stood looking up into the deep-set, dark eyes of a
tall, broad-shouldered, black-bearded man, who had arisen from the cot
at his entrance. Albert Graumann had a strong, self-reliant face and
bearing. His natural expression was somewhat hard and stern, but it
was the expression of a man of integrity and responsibility. Muller had
already made some inquiries as to the prisoner's reputation and business
standing in the community, and all that he had heard was favourable.
A certain hardness and lack of amiability in Graumann's nature made it
difficult for him to win the hearts of others, but although he was not
generally loved, he was universally respected. Through the signs of
nagging fear, sorrow, and ill-health, printed clearly on the face before
him, Muller's keen eyes looked down into the soul of a man who might
be overbearing, pitiless even, if occasion demanded, but who would not
murder--at least not for the sake of gain. This last possibility Muller
had dismissed from his mind, even before he saw the prisoner. The man's
reputation was sufficient to make the thought ridiculous. But he had
not made up his mind whether it might not be a case of a murder after
a quarrel. Now he began to doubt even this when he looked into the
intelligent, harsh-featured face of the man in the cell. But Muller had
the gift of putting aside his own convictions, when he wanted his mind
clear to consider evidence before him.

Graumann had risen from his sitting position when he saw a stranger.
His heavy brows drew down over his eyes, but he waited for the other to
speak.

"I am Detective Joseph Muller, from Vienna," began the newcomer, when he
had seen that the prisoner did not intend to start the conversation.

"Have you come to question me again?" asked Graumann wearily. "I can
say no more than I have already said to the Police Commissioner. And no
amount of cross-examination can make me confess a crime of which I
am not guilty--no matter what evidence there may be against me."
The prisoner's voice was hard and determined in spite of its note of
physical and mental weariness.

"I have not come to extort a confession from you, Mr. Graumann," Muller
replied gently, "but to help you establish your innocence, if it be
possible."

A wave of colour flooded the prisoner's cheek. He gasped, pressed his
hand to his heart, and dropped down on his cot. "Pardon me," he said
finally, hesitating like a man who is fighting for breath. "My heart is
weak; any excitement upsets me. You mean that the authorities are not
convinced of my guilt, in spite of the evidence? You mean that they will
give me the benefit of the doubt--that they will give me a chance for
life?"

"Yes, that is the reason for my coming here. I am to take this case in
hand. If you will talk freely to me, Mr. Graumann, I may be able to help
you. I have seen too many mistakes of justice because of circumstantial
evidence to lay any too great stress upon it. I have waited to hear your
side of the story from yourself. I did not want to hear it from others.
Will you tell it to me now? No, do not move, I will get the stool
myself."

Graumaun sat back on the cot, his head resting against the wall. His
eyes had closed while Muller was speaking, but his quieter breathing
showed that he was mastering the physical attack which had so shaken
him at the first glimpse of hope. He opened his eyes now and looked at
Muller steadily for a moment. Then he said: "Yes, I will tell you: my
life and my work have taught me to gauge men. I will tell you everything
I know about this sad affair. I will tell you the absolute truth, and I
think you will believe me."

"I will believe you," said Muller simply.

"You know the details of the murder, of course, and why I was arrested?"

"You were arrested because you were the last person seen in the company
of the murdered man?"

"Exactly. Then I may go back and tell you something of my connection
with John Siders?"

"It would be the very best thing to do."

"I live in Grunau, as you doubtless know, and am the engineering expert
of large machine works there. My father before me held an important
position in the factory, and my family have always lived in Grunau.
I have traveled a great deal myself. I am forty-five years old, a
childless widower, and live with my old aunt, Miss Babette Graumann,
and my ward, Miss Eleonora Roemer, a young lady of twenty-two." Muller
looked up with a slight start of surprise, but did not say anything.
Graumann continued:

"A little over a year ago, John Siders, who signed himself as coming
from Chicago, bought a piece of property in our town and came to live
there. I made his acquaintance in the cafe and he seemed to take a fancy
to me. I also had spent several years in Chicago, and we naturally
came to speak of the place. We discovered that we had several mutual
acquaintances there, and enjoyed talking over the old times. Otherwise I
did not take particularly to the man, and as I came to know him better I
noticed that he never mentioned that part of his life which lay back of
the years in Chicago. I asked a casual question once or twice as to
his home and family, but he evaded me every time, and would not give a
direct answer. He was evidently a German by birth and education, a
man with university training, and one who knew life thoroughly. He had
delightful manners, and when he could forget his shyness for a while, he
could be very agreeable. The ladies of my family came to like him, and
encouraged him to call frequently. Then the thing happened that I should
not have believed possible. My ward, Miss Roemer, a quiet, reserved
girl, fell in love with this man about whom none of us knew anything, a
man with a past of which he did not care to speak.

"I was not in any way satisfied with the match, and they seemed
to realise it. For Siders managed to persuade the girl to a secret
engagement. I discovered it a month or two ago, and it made me very
angry. I did not let them see how badly I felt, but I warned Lora not to
have too much to do with the boy, and I set about finding out something
regarding his earlier life. It was my duty to do this, as I was the
girl's guardian. She has no other relative living, and no one to turn to
except my aunt and myself. I wrote to Mr. Richard Tressider in Chicago,
the owner of the factory in which I had been employed while there. John
had told me that Tressider had been his client during the four years in
which he practiced law in Chicago. I received an answer about the middle
of August. Mr. Tressider had been able to find out only that John was
born in the town of Hartberg in a certain year. This was enough. I took
leave of absence for a few days and went to Hartberg, which, as you
know, is about 140 miles from here. Three days later I knew all that I
wanted to know. John Siders was not the man's real name, or, rather, it
was only part of his name. His full name was Theodor John Bellmann, and
his mother was an Englishwoman whose maiden name was Siders. His father
was a county official who died at an early age, leaving his widow and
the boy in deepest poverty. Mrs. Bellmann moved to G--------to give music
lessons. Theodor went to school there, then finally to college, and was
an excellent pupil everywhere. But one day it was discovered that he
had been stealing money from the banker in whose house he was serving
as private tutor to the latter's sons. A large sum of money was missing,
and every evidence pointed to young Bellmann as the thief. He denied
strenuously that he was guilty, but the District Judge (it was the
present Prosecuting Attorney Schmidt in G------) sentenced him. He spent
eight months in prison, during which time his mother died of grief at
the disgrace. There must have been something good in the boy, for he
had never forgotten that it was his guilt that struck down his only
relative, the mother who had worked so hard for him. He had atoned for
this crime of his youth, and during the years that have passed since
then, he had been an honest, upright man."

Graumann paused a moment and pressed his hand to his heart again. His
voice had grown weaker, and he breathed hard. Finally he continued: "I
commanded my ward to break off her engagement, as I could not allow her
to marry a man who was a freed convict. Siders sold his property
some few weeks after that and moved to G------. Eleonora acquiesced in my
commands, but she was very unhappy and allowed me to see very little of
her. Then came the events of the evening of September 23rd, the events
which have turned out so terribly. I will try to tell you the story just
as it happened, so far as I am concerned. I had seen nothing of John
since he left this town. He had made several attempts before his
departure for G-------- to change my opinion, and my decision as to his
marriage to my ward. But I let him see plainly that it was impossible
for him to enter our family with such a past behind him. He asserted
his innocence of the charges against him, and declared that he had been
unjustly accused and imprisoned. I am afraid that I was hard towards
him. I begin to understand now, as I never thought I should, what it
means to be accused of crime. I begin to realise that it is possible for
every evidence to point to a man who is absolutely innocent of the deed
in question. I begin to think now that John may have been right, that
possibly he also may have been accused and sentenced on circumstantial
evidence alone. I have thought much, and I have learned much in these
terrible days."

The prisoner paused again and sat brooding, his eyes looking out into
space. Muller respected his suffering and sat in equal silence, until
Graumann raised his eyes to his again. "Then came the evening of the
23rd of September?"

"Yes, that evening--it's all like a dream to me." Graumann began again.
"John wrote me a letter asking me to come to see him on that evening. I
tore up the letter and threw it away--or perhaps, yes, I remember now, I
did not wish Eleonora to see that he had written me. He asked me to come
to see him, as he had something to say to me, something of the greatest
importance for us both. He asked me not to mention to any one that I was
to see him, as it would be wiser no one should know that we were
still in communication with each other. There was a strain of nervous
excitement visible in his letter. I thought it better to go and see
him as he requested; I felt that I owed him some little reparation for
having denied him the great wish of his heart. It was my duty to make up
to him in other ways for what I had felt obliged to do. I knew him for
a nervous, high-strung man, overwrought by brooding for years on what he
called his wrongs, and I did not know what he might do if I refused his
request. It was not of myself I thought in this connection, but of the
girl at home who looked to me for protection.

"I had no fear for myself; it never occurred to me to think of taking a
weapon with me. How my revolver--and it is undoubtedly my revolver, for
there was a peculiar break in the silver ornamentation on the handle
which is easily recognisable--how this revolver of mine got into his
room, is more than I can say. Until the Police Commissioner showed it to
me two or three days ago, I had no idea that it was not in the box in
my study where it is ordinarily kept." Graumann paused again and looked
about him as if searching for something. He rose and poured himself out
a glass of water. "Let me put some of this in it," said Muller. "It will
do you good." From a flask in his pocket he poured a few drops of brandy
into the water. Graumann drank it and nodded gratefully. Then he took up
his story again.

"I never discovered why Siders had sent for me. When I arrived at the
appointed time I found the door of the house closed. I was obliged to
ring several times before an old servant opened the door. She seemed
surprised that it had been locked. She said that the door was always
unlatched, and that Mr. Siders himself must have closed it, contrary to
all custom, for she had not done it, and there was no one else in the
house but the two of them. Siders was waiting for me at the top of the
stairs, calling down a noisy welcome.

"When I asked him finally what it was so important that he wanted to
say to me, he evaded me and continued to chatter on about commonplace
things. Finally I insisted upon knowing why he had wanted me to come,
and he replied that the reason for it had already been fulfilled, that
he had nothing more to say, and that I could go as soon as I wanted to.
He appeared quite calm, but he must have been very nervous. For as I
stood by the desk, telling him what I thought of his actions, he moved
his hand hastily among the papers there and upset the ink stand. I
jumped back, but not before I had received several large spots of ink on
my trousers. He was profuse in his apologies for the accident, and tried
to take out the spots with blotting paper. Then at last, when I insisted
upon going, he looked out to see whether there was still a light on the
stairs, and led me down to the door himself, standing there for some
time looking after me.

"I was slightly alarmed as well as angry at his actions. I believe
that he could not have been quite in his right mind, that the strain of
nervousness which was apparent in his nature had really made him ill.
For I remember several peculiar incidents of my visit to him. One
of these was that he almost insisted upon my taking away with me,
ostensibly to take care of them, several valuable pieces of jewelry
which he possessed. He seemed almost offended when I refused to do
anything of the kind. Then, as I parted from him at the door, not in a
very good humour I will acknowledge, he said to me: 'You will think of
me very often in the future--more often than you would believe now!'

"This is all the truth, and nothing but the truth, about my visit to
John Siders on the evening of September 23rd. As it had been his wish
I said nothing to the ladies at home, or to any one else about the
occurrence. And as I have told you, I destroyed his letter asking me to
come to him.

"The following day about noon, the Commissioner of Police from G--------
called at my office in the factory, and informed me bluntly that John
Siders had been found shot dead in his lodgings that morning. I was
naturally shocked, as one would be at such news, in spite of the fact
that I had parted from the man in anger, and that I had no reason to
be particularly fond of him. What shocked me most of all was the sudden
thought that John had taken his own life. It was a perfectly natural
thought when I considered his nervousness, and his peculiar actions of
the evening before. I believe I exclaimed, 'It was a suicide!' almost
without realising that I was doing so. The commissioner looked at me
sharply and said that suicide was out of the question, that it was an
evident case of murder. He questioned me as to Siders' affairs, of which
I told only what every one here in the village knew. I did not consider
it incumbent upon me to disclose to the police the disgrace of the man's
early life. I had been obliged to hurt him cruelly enough because of
that, and I saw no necessity for blackening his name, now that he was
dead. Also, as according to what the commissioner said, it was a case
of murder for robbery, I did not wish to go into any details of our
connection with Siders that would cause the name of my ward to be
mentioned. After a few more questions the commissioner left me. I was
busy all the afternoon, and did not return to my home until later than
usual. I found my aunt somewhat worried because Miss Roemer had left the
house immediately after our early dinner, and had not yet returned. We
both knew the girl to be still grieving over her broken engagement,
and we dreaded the effect this last dreadful news might have on her.
We supposed, however, that she had gone to spend the afternoon with a
friend, and were rather glad to be spared the necessity of telling her
at once what had happened. I had scarcely finished my supper, when
the door bell rang, and to my astonishment the Mayor of Grunau was
announced, accompanied by the same Police Commissioner who had visited
me in my office that morning. The Mayor was an old friend of mine and
his deeply grave face showed me that something serious had occurred. It
was indeed serious! and for some minutes I could not grasp the meaning
of the commissioner's questions. Finally I realised with a tremendous
shock that I--I myself was under suspicion of the murder of John Siders.
The description given by the old servant of the man who had visited
Siders the evening before, the very clothes that I wore, my hat and the
trousers spotted by the purple ink, led to my identification as this
mysterious visitor. The servant had let me in but she had not seen me go
out.

"Then I discovered--when confronted suddenly with my own revolver which
had been found on the floor of the room, some distance from the body of
the dead man, that this same revolver had been identified as mine by my
ward, Eleonora Roemer, who had been to the police station at G-------- in
the early afternoon hours. Some impulse of loyalty to her dead lover,
some foolish feminine fear that I might have spoken against him in my
earlier interviews with the commissioner had driven the girl to this
step. A few questions sufficed to draw from her the story of her secret
engagement, of its ending, and of my quarrel with John. I will say for
her that I am certain she did not realise that all these things were
calculated to cast suspicion on me. The poor girl is too unused to the
ways of police courts, to the devious ways of the law, to realise what
she was doing. The sight of my revolver broke her down completely
and she acknowledged that it was mine. That is all. Except that I was
arrested and brought here as you see. I told the commissioner the story
of my visit to John Siders exactly as I told it to you, but it was plain
to be seen that he did not believe me. It is plain to be seen also, that
he is firmly convinced of my guilt and that he is greatly satisfied with
himself at having traced the criminal so soon."

"And yet he was not quite satisfied," said Muller gently. "You see that
he has sent to the Capital for assistance on the case." Muller felt this
little untruth to be justified for the sake of the honour of the police
force.

"Yes, I'm surprised at that," said Graumann in his former tone of
weariness. "What do you think you will be able to do about it?"

"I must ask questions here and there before I can form a plan of
campaign," replied Muller. "What do you think about it yourself? Who do
you think killed Siders?"

"How can I know who it was? I only know it is not I," answered Graumann.

"Did he have any enemies?"

"No, none that I knew of, and he had few friends either."

"You knew there was a sum of money missing from his rooms?"

"Yes, the sum they named to me was just about the price that he had
received for the sale of his property here. They did me the honour to
believe that if I had taken the money at all, I had done so merely as a
blind. At least they did not take me for a thief as well as a murderer.
If the money is really missing, it was for its sake he was murdered I
suppose."

"Yes, that would be natural," said Muller. "And you know nothing of any
other relations or connections that the man may have had? Anything that
might give us a clue to the truth?"

"No, nothing. He stood so alone here, as far as I knew. Of course, as I
told you, his actions of the evening before having been so peculiar--and
as I knew that he was not in the happiest frame of mind--I naturally
thought of suicide at once, when they told me that he had been found
shot dead. Then they told me that the appearance of the room and many
other things, proved suicide to have been out of the question. I know
nothing more about it. I cannot think any more about it. I know only
that I am here in danger of being sentenced for the crime that I never
committed--that is enough to keep any man's mind busy." He leaned back
with an intense fatigue in every line of his face and figure.

Muller rose from his seat. "I am afraid I have tired you, Mr. Graumann,"
he said, "but it was necessary that I should know all that you had to
tell me. Try and rest a little now and meanwhile be assured that I am
doing all I can to find out the truth of this matter. As far as I can
tell now I do not believe that you have killed John Siders. But I must
find some further proofs that will convince others as well as myself. If
it is of any comfort to you, I can tell you that during a long career as
police detective I have been most astonishingly fortunate in the cases I
have undertaken. I am hoping that my usual good luck will follow me here
also. I am hoping it for your sake."

The man on the cot took the hand the detective offered him and
pressed it firmly. "You will let me know as soon as you have found
anything--anything that gives me hope?"

"I will indeed. And now save your strength and do not worry. I will help
you if it is in my power."

After leaving the prison, Muller took the train for the village of
Grunau, about half an hour distant from the city. He found his way
easily to Graumann's home, an attractive old house set in a large garden
amid groups of beautiful old trees. When he sent up his card to Miss
Graumann, the old lady tripped down stairs in a flutter of excitement.

"Did you see him?" she asked. "You have been to the prison? What do you
think? How does he seem?"

"He seems calm to-day," replied Muller, "although the confinement and
the anxiety are evidently wearing on him."

"And you heard his story? And you believe him innocent?"

"I am inclined to do so. But there is more yet for me to investigate in
this matter. It is certainly not as simple as the police here seem to
believe. May I speak to your ward, Miss Roemer? She is at home now?"

"Yes, Lora is at home. If you will wait here a moment I will send her
in."

Muller paced up and down the large sunny room, casting a glance over the
handsome old pieces of furniture and the family portraits on the wall.
It was evidently the home of generations of well-to-do, well-bred
people, the narrow circle of whose life was made rich by congenial
duties and a comfortable feeling of their standing in the community.

While he was studying one of the portraits more carefully, he became
aware that there was some one in the room. He turned and saw a tall
blond girl standing by the door. She had entered so softly that even
Muller's quick ear had not heard the opening of the door.

"Do you wish to speak to me?" she said, coming down into the room. "I am
Eleonora Roemer"

Her face, which could be called handsome in its even regularity of
feature and delicate skin, was very pale now, and around her eyes were
dark rings that spoke of sleepless nights. Grief and mental shock were
preying upon this girl's mind. "She is not the one to make a confidant
of those around her," thought Muller to himself. Then he added aloud:
"If it does not distress you too much to talk about this sad affair, I
will be very grateful if you will answer a few questions."

"I will tell you whatever I can," said the girl in the same low even
tone in which she had first spoken. "Miss Graumann tells me that you
have come from Vienna to take up this case. It is only natural that we
should want to give you every assistance in our power."

"What is your opinion about it?" was Muller's next remark, made rather
suddenly after a moment's pause.

The directness of the question seemed to shake the girl out of her
enforced calm. A slow flush mounted into her pale cheeks and then died
away, again leaving them whiter than before. "I do not know--oh, I do
not know what to believe."

"But you do not think Mr. Graumann capable of such a crime, do you?"

"Not of the robbery, of course not; that would be absurd! But has
it been clearly proven that there is a robbery? Might it not have
been--might they not have--"

"You mean, might they not have quarreled? Of course there is that
possibility. And that is why I wanted to speak to you. You are the one
person who could possibly throw light on this subject. Was there any
other reason beyond the dead man's past that would render your guardian
unwilling to have you marry him?"

Again the slow flush mounted to Eleonora Roemer's cheeks and her head
drooped.

"I fear it may be painful for you to answer this," said Muller gently,
"and yet I must insist on it in the interest of justice."

"He--my guardian--wished to marry me himself," the girl's words came
slowly and painfully.

Muller drew in his breath so sharply that it was almost like a whistle.
"He did not tell me that; it might make a difference."

"That... that is... what I fear," said the girl, her eyes looking keenly
into those of the man who sat opposite. "And then, it was his revolver."

"Then you do believe him guilty?"

"It would be horrible, horrible--and yet I do not know what to think."

There was silence in the room for a moment. Miss Roemer's head drooped
again and her hands twisted nervously in her lap. Muller's brain was
very busy with this new phase of the problem. Finally he spoke.

"Let us dismiss this side of the question and talk of another phase of
it, a phase of which it is necessary for me to know something. You would
naturally be the person nearest the dead man, the one, the only one,
perhaps, to whom he had given his confidence. Do you know of any enemies
he might have had in the city?"

"No, I do not know of any enemies, or even of any friends he had there.
When the terrible thing happened that clouded his past, when he had
regained his freedom, after his term of imprisonment, there was no one
left whom he cared to see again. He does not seem to have borne any
malice towards the banker who accused him of the theft. The evidence
was so strong against him that he felt the suspicion was justified. But
there was hatred in his heart for one man, for the Justice who sentenced
him, Justice Schmidt, who is now Attorney General in G------."

"The man who, in the name of the State, will conduct this case?" asked
Muller quickly.

"Yes, I believe it is so. Is it not an irony that this man, the only one
whom John really hated, should be the one to avenge him now?"

"H'm! yes. But did you know of any friends in G------?"

"No, none at all."

"No friends whom he might have made while he was in America and then met
again in Germany?"

"No, he never spoke of any such to me. He told me that he made few
friends. He did not seek them for he was afraid that they might find out
what had happened and turn from him. He was morbidly sensitive and could
not bear the disappointment."

"Why did he return to Germany?"

"He was lonely and wanted to come home again. He had made money in
America--John was very clever and highly educated--but his heart longed
for his own tongue and his own people."

Muller took a folded piece of paper from his pocket. "Do you know this
handwriting?"

Miss Roemer read the few lines hastily and her voice trembled as she
said: "This is John's handwriting. I know it well. This is the letter
that was found on the table?"

"Yes, this letter appears to be the last he had written in life. Do you
know to whom it could have been written? The envelope, as I suppose you
know from the newspaper reports, was not addressed. Do you know of any
friends with whom he could have been on terms of sufficient intimacy to
write such a letter? Do you know what these plans for the future could
have been? It would certainly be natural that he should have spoken to
you first about them."

"No; I cannot understand this letter at all," replied the girl. "I have
thought of it frequently these terrible days. I have wondered why it was
that if he had friends in the city, he did not speak to me of them. He
repeatedly told me that he had no friends there at all, that his life
should begin anew after we were married."

"And did he have any particular plans, in a business way, perhaps?"

"No; he had a comfortable little income and need have no fear for the
future. John was, of course, too young a man to settle down and do
nothing. But the only definite plans he had made were that we should
travel a little at first, and then he would look about him for a
congenial occupation. I always thought it likely he would resume a law
practice somewhere. I cannot understand in the slightest what the plans
are to which the letter referred."

"And do you think, from what you know of his state of mind when you saw
him last, that he would be likely so soon to be planning pleasures like
this?"

"No, no indeed! John was terribly crushed when my guardian insisted on
breaking off our engagement. Until my twenty-fourth birthday I am
still bound to do as my guardian says, you know. John's life and early
misfortune made him, as I have already said, morbidly sensitive and the
thought that it would be a bar to anything we might plan in the future,
had rendered him so depressed that--and it was not the least of my
anxieties and my troubles--that I feared... I feared anything might
happen."

"You feared he might take his own life, do you mean?"

"Yes, yes, that is what I feared. But is it not terrible to think that
he should have died this way--by the hand of a murderer?"

"H'm! And you cannot remember any possible friend he may have
found--some schoolboy friend of his youth, perhaps, with whom he had
again struck up an acquaintance."

"Oh, no, no, I am positive of that. John could not bear to hear the
names even of the people he had known before his misfortune. Still, I do
remember his once having spoken of a man, a German he had met in Chicago
and rather taken a fancy to, and who had also returned to Germany."

"Could this possibly have been the man to whom the letter is addressed?"

"No, no. This friend of John's was not married; I remember his
saying that. And he lived in Germany somewhere--let me think--yes, in
Frankfort-on-Main."

"And do you remember the man's name?"

"No, I cannot, I am sorry to say. John only mentioned it once. It was
only by a great effort that I could remember the incident at all."

"And has it not struck you as rather peculiar that this friend, the one
to whom the cordial letter was addressed, did not come forward and make
his identity known? G-------- is a city, it is true, but it is not a very
large city, and any man being on terms of intimate acquaintance with one
who was murdered would be apt to come forward in the hope of throwing
some light on the mystery."

"Why, yes, I had not thought of that. It is peculiar, is it not? But
some people are so foolishly afraid of having anything to do with the
police, you know."

"That is very true, Miss Roemer. Still it is a queer incident and
something that I must look into."

"What do you believe?" asked the girl tensely.

"I am not in a position to say as yet. When I am, I will come to you and
tell you."

"Then you do not think that my guardian killed John--that there was a
quarrel between the men?"

"There is, of course, a possibility that it may have been so. You know
your guardian better than I do, naturally. Our knowledge of a man's
character is often a far better guide than any circumstantial evidence."

"My guardian is a man of the greatest uprightness of character. But he
can be very hard and pitiless sometimes. And he has a violent temper
which his weak heart has forced him to keep in control of late years."

"All this speaks for the possibility that there may have been a quarrel
ending in the fatal shot. But what I want to know from you is this--do
you think it possible, that, this having happened, Albert Graumann would
not have been the first to confess his unpremeditated crime? Is not
this the most likely thing for a man of his character to do? Would he so
stubbornly deny it, if it had happened?"

The girl started. "I had not thought of that! Why, why, of course, he
might have killed John in a moment of temper, but he was never a man to
conceal a fault. He is as pitiless towards his own weakness, as towards
that of others. You are right, oh, you must be right. Oh, if you could
take this awful fear from my heart! Even my grief for John would be
easier to bear then."

Muller rose from his chair. "I think I can promise you that this load
will be lifted from your heart, Miss Roemer."

"Then you believe--that it was just a case of murder for robbery? For
the money? And John had some valuable jewelry, I know that."

"I do not know yet," replied Muller slowly, "but I will find out, I
generally do."

"Oh, to think that I should have done that poor man such an injustice!
It is terrible, terrible! This house has been ghastly these days.
His poor aunt knows that he is innocent--she could never believe
otherwise--she has felt the hideous suspicion in my mind--it has made
her suffering worse--will they ever forgive me?"

"Her joy, if I can free her nephew, will make her forget everything. Go
to her now, Miss Roemer, comfort her with the assurance that you also
believe him to be innocent. I must hasten back to G-------- and go on with
this quest."

The girl stood at the doorway shaded by the overhanging branches of
two great trees, looking down the street after the slight figure of the
detective. "Oh, it is all easier to hear, hard as it is, easier now that
this horrible suspicion has gone from my mind--why did I not think of
that before?"

Alone in the corner of the smoking compartment in the train to G------,
Muller arranged in his mind the facts he had already gathered. He had
questioned the servants of John Siders' former household, had found
that the dead man received very few letters, only an occasional business
communication from his bank. Of the few others, the servants knew
nothing except that he had always thrown the envelopes carelessly in the
waste paper basket and had never seemed to have any correspondence which
he cared to conceal. No friend from elsewhere had ever visited him in
Grunau, and he had made few friends there except the Graumann family.

The facts of the case, as he knew them now, were such as to make it
extremely doubtful that Graumann was the murderer. Muller himself had
been inclined to believe in the possibility of a quarrel between the two
men, particularly when he had heard that Graumann himself was in love
with his handsome ward. But the second thought that came to him then,
impelled by the unerring instinct that so often guided him to the truth,
was the assurance that in a case of this kind, in a case of a quarrel
terminating fatally, a man like Albert Graumann would be the very first
to give himself up to the police and to tell the facts of the case.
Albert Graumann was a man of honour and unimpeachable integrity. Such
a man would not persist in a foolish denial of the deed which he had
committed in a moment of temper. There would be nothing to gain from it,
and his own conscience would be his severest judge. "The disorder in the
room?" thought Muller. "It'll be too late for that now. I suppose they
have rearranged the place. I can only go by what the local detectives
have seen, by the police reports. But I do not understand this extreme
disorder. There is no reason why there should be a struggle when the
robber was armed with a pistol. If Siders was supposed to have been
interrupted when writing a letter, interrupted by a thief come with
intent to steal, a thief armed with a revolver, the sight of this weapon
alone would be sufficient to insure his not moving from his seat. I
can understand the open drawers and cupboard; that is explained by the
thief's hasty search for booty. But the torn window curtain and the
overturned chairs are peculiar.

"Of course there is always a possibility that the thief might have
entered one room while Siders was in the other; that the latter might
have surprised the robber in his search for money or valuables, and that
there might have been a hand-to-hand struggle before the intruder could
pull out his revolver. Oh, if I could only have seen the body! This
is working under terrific difficulties. The marks of a hand-to-hand
struggle would have been very plain on the clothes and on the person of
the murdered man. But this letter? I do not understand this letter at
all. It is the dead man's handwriting, that we know, but why did not the
friend to whom it was addressed come forward and make himself known? As
far as I can learn from the police reports in G------, there was no personal
interest shown, no personal inquiries made about the dead man. There was
only the natural excitement that a murder would create. Now a family,
expecting to make a pleasure excursion with a friend in a day or two
and suddenly hearing that this friend had been found murdered in his
lodgings, would be inclined to take some little personal interest in
the matter. These people must have been in town and at home, for the
excursion spoken of in the letter was to occur two days after the
murder. Miss Roemer's remark about the dread that some people have as to
any connection with the police, is true to a limited extent only. It is
true only of the ignorant mind, not of a man presumably well-to-do and
properly educated. I do not understand why the man to whom this letter
was addressed has not made himself known. The only explanation
is--that there was no such man!" A sudden sharp whistle broke from the
detective's lips.

"I must examine the dead man's personal effects, his baggage, his
papers; there may be something there. His queer letter to Graumann--his
desire that the latter's visit should be kept secret--a visit which
apparently had no cause at all, except to get Graumann to the house, to
get him to the house in a way that he should be seen coming, but should
not be seen going away. What does this mean?

"Graumann was the only person against whom Siders had an active cause of
quarrel for the moment. There was one other man whom he hated, and this
other man was the prosecuting attorney who would conduct any case of
murder that came up in the town of G------.

"Now John Siders is found murdered--is found killed, in his lodgings,
the morning after he has arranged things so that his antagonist, his
rival in love, Albert Graumann, shall come under suspicion of having
murdered him.

"What evidence have we that this man did not commit suicide? We have the
evidence of the disorder in the room, a disorder that could have been
made just as well by the man himself before he ended his own life. We
have the evidence of a letter to some unknown, making plans for
pleasure during the next days, and speaking of further plans, presumably
concerning business, for the future. In a town the size of G------, where
every one must have read of the murder, no one has come forward claiming
to be the friend for whom this letter was written. Until this Unknown
makes himself known, the letter as an evidence points rather to
premeditated suicide than to the contrary. Oh, if I could only have seen
the body! They tell me the pistol was found some little distance from
the body. Is it at all likely that a murderer would go away leaving such
evidence behind him? If Graumaun had killed Siders in a hasty quarrel,
he might possibly, in his excitement, have left his revolver. But I have
already disposed of this possibility. A man of sufficient brains to
so carefully plan his suicide as to conceal every trace of it and cast
suspicion upon the man who had made him unhappy, such a one would be
quite clever enough to throw the pistol far away from his body and to
leave no traces of powder on his coat or any such other evidence.

"If I were to say now what I think, I would say that John Siders
deliberately took his own life and planned it in such a way as to cast
suspicion upon Albert Graumann. But that would indeed be a terrible
revenge. And I must have some tangible proof of it before any court will
accept my belief. This proof must be hidden somewhere. The thing for me
to do is to find it."

The evidence gathered at the time of the death went to show that Siders
had been paid a considerable sum in cash for the sale of his property at
Grunau. And there was no trace of his having deposited this sum in any
bank in G-------- or in Grunau, in both of which places he had deposited
other securities. Therefore the money had presumably been in his room
at the time of his death. A search had been made for this money in every
possible place of concealment among the dead man's belongings, and it
had not been found. Muller asked the Police Commissioner to give him the
key to the rooms, which were still officially closed, and also the keys
to the dead man's pieces of baggage. Commissioner Lange seemed to think
all this extra search quite unnecessary, as it did not occur to him that
anything else was to be looked for except the money.

It was quite late when Muller began his examination of the dead man's
effects. He was struck by the fact that there was scarcely a bit of
paper to be found anywhere, no letters, no business papers, except bank
books showing the amount of his securities in the bank in G-------- and in
Grunau, and giving facts about some investments in Chicago. There was
nothing of more recent date and no personal correspondence whatever. The
same was true of the pockets of the suit Siders had been wearing at the
time of his death. A man of any property or position at all in the world
gathers about him so much of this kind of material that its absence
shows premeditation. The suit Siders had been wearing when he was killed
was lying on the table in the room. It was a plain grey business suit
of good cut and material. The body had been prepared for burial in
a beseeming suit of black. Muller made a careful examination of the
clothes, and found only what the police reports showed him had already
been found by the examination made by the local authorities. Upon a
second careful examination, however, he found that in one of the vest
pockets there was a little extra pocket, like a change pocket, and in
it he found a crumpled piece of paper. He took it out, smoothed and read
it. It was a post office receipt for a registered letter. The date was
still clear, but the name of the person to whom the letter had been
addressed was illegible. The creases of the paper and a certain
dampness, as if it had been inadvertently touched by a wet finger, had
smeared the writing. But the letter had been sent the day before the
death of John Siders, and it had been registered from the main post
office in G------. This was sufficient for Muller. Then he turned to the
desk. Here also there was nothing that could help him. But a sudden
thought, came to him, and he took up the blotting pad. This, to his
delight, was in the form of a book with a handsome embroidered cover. It
looked comparatively new and was, as Muller surmised, a gift from Miss
Roemer to her betrothed. But few of the pages had been used, and on two
of them a closely written letter had been blotted several times, showing
that there had been several sheets of the letter. Muller held it up to
the looking-glass, but the repeated blotting had blurred the writing
to such an extent that it was impossible to decipher any but a few
disconnected words, which gave no clue. On a page further along on
the blotter, however, he saw what appeared to be the impression of an
address. He held it up to the glass and gave a whistle of delight. The
words could be plainly deciphered here:

                      "MR. LEO PERNBURG,
                      "FRANKFURT AM MAIN,
                      "MAINZER LANDSTRASSE."

and above the name was a smear which, after a little study, could be
deciphered as the written word "Registered."

With this page of the blotter carefully tucked away in his pocketbook,
Muller hurried to the post office, arriving just at closing hour. He
made himself known at once to the postmaster, and asked to be shown
the records of registered letters sent on a certain date. Here he found
scheduled a letter addressed to Mr. Leo Pernburg, Frankfurt am Main,
sent by John Siders, G------, Josef Street 7.

Muller then hastened to the telegraph office and despatched a lengthy
telegram to the postal authorities in Frankfurt am Main. When the answer
came to him next morning, he packed his grip and took the first express
train leaving G------. He first made a short visit, however, to Albert
Graumann's cell in the prison. Muller was much too kind-hearted not to
relieve the anxiety of this man, to whom such mental strain might easily
prove fatal. He told Graumann that he was going in search of evidence
which might throw light on the death of Siders, and comforted the
prisoner with the assurance that he, Muller, believed Graumann innocent,
and believed also that within a day or two he would return to G-------- with
proofs that his belief was the right one.

Three days later Muller returned to Grunau and went at once to the
Graumann home. It was quite late when he arrived, but he had already
notified Miss Roemer by telegram as to his coming, with a request that
she should be ready to see him. He found her waiting for him, pale and
anxious-eyed, when he arrived. "I have been to Frankfurt am Main," he
said, "and I have seen Mr. Pernburg--"

"Yes, yes, that is the name; now I remember," interrupted the girl
eagerly. "That is the name of John's friend there."

"I have seen Mr. Pernburg and he gave me this letter." Muller laid a
thick envelope on the girl's lap.

She looked down at it, her eyes widening as if she had seen a ghost.
"That--that is John's writing," she exclaimed in a hoarse whisper.
"Where did it come from?"

"Pernburg gave it to me. The day before his death John Siders sent him
this letter, requesting that Pernburg forward it to you before a certain
date. When I explained the circumstances to Mr. Pernburg, he gave me the
letter at once. I feel that this paper holds the clue to the mystery.
Will you open it?"

With trembling hands the girl tore open the envelope. It enclosed still
another sealed envelope, without an address. But there was a sheet of
paper around this letter, on which was written the following:


My beloved Eleonore:

Before you read what I have to say to you here I want you to promise
me, in memory of our love and by your hope of future salvation, that you
will do what I ask you to do.

I ask you to give the enclosed letter, although it is addressed to you,
to the Judge who will preside in the trial against Graumann. The letter
is written to you and will be given back to you. For you, the beloved of
my soul, you are the only human being with whom I can still communicate,
to whom I can still express my wishes. But you must not give the letter
to the Judge until you have assured yourself that the prosecuting
attorney insists upon Graumann's guilt. In case he is acquitted, which I
do not think probable, then open this letter in the presence of Graumann
himself and one or two witnesses. For I wish Graumann, who is innocent,
to be able to prove his innocence.

You will know by this time that I have determined to end my life by my
own hand. Forgive me, beloved. I cannot live on without you--without
the honour of which I was robbed so unjustly.

God bless you.

One who will love you even beyond the grave, Remember your promise. It
was given to the dead.

JOHN.


"Oh, what does it all mean?" asked Eleonora, dropping the letter in her
lap.

"It is as I thought," replied Muller. "John Siders took his own life,
but made every arrangement to have suspicion fall upon Graumann."

"But why? oh, why?"

"It was a terrible revenge. But perhaps--perhaps it was just
retribution. Graumaun would not understand that Siders could have been
suspected of, and imprisoned for, a theft he had not committed. He must
know now that it is quite possible for a man to be in danger of sentence
of death even, for a crime of which he is innocent."

"Oh, my God! It is terrible." The girl's head fell across her folded
arms on the table. Deep shuddering sobs shook her frame.

Muller waited quietly until the first shock had passed. Finally her sobs
died away and she raised her head again. "What am I to do?" she asked.

"You must open this letter to-morrow in the presence of the Police
Commissioner and Graumaun."

"But this promise? This promise that he asks of me--that I should wait
until the trial?"

"You have not given this promise. Would you take it upon yourself to
endanger your guardian's life still more? Every further day spent in his
prison, in this anxiety, might be fatal."

"But this promise? The promise demanded of me by the man to whom I had
given my love? Is it not my duty to keep it?"

Muller rose from his chair. His slight figure seemed to grow taller,
and the gentleness in his voice gave way to a commanding tone of firm
decision.

"Our duty is to the living, not to the dead. The dead have no right to
drag down others after them. Believe me, Miss Roemer, the purpose
that was in your betrothed's mind when he ended his own life, has been
fulfilled. Albert Graumann knows now what are the feelings of a man
who bears the prison stigma unjustly. He will never again judge his
fellow-men as harshly as he has done until now. His soul has been
purged in these terrible days; have you the right to endanger his life
needlessly?"

"Oh, I do not know! I do not know what to do."

"I have no choice," said Muller firmly. "It is my duty to make known
the fact to the Police Commissioner that there is such a letter in
existence. The Police Commissioner will then have to follow his duty in
demanding the letter from you. Mr. Pernburg, Sider's friend, saw this
argument at once. Although he also had a letter from the dead man,
asking him to send the enclosure to you, registered, on a certain date,
he knew that it was his duty to give all the papers to the authorities.
Would it not be better for you to give them up of your own free will?"
Muller took a step nearer the girl and whispered: "And would it not be
a noble revenge on your part? You would be indeed returning good for
evil."

Eleonora clasped her hands and her lips moved as if in silent prayer.
Then she rose slowly and held out the letters to Muller. "Do what you
will with them," she said. "My strength is at an end."

The next day, in the presence of Commissioner Lange and of the accused
Albert Graumann, Muller opened the letter which he had received from
Miss Roemer and read it aloud. The girl herself, by her own request, was
not present. Both Muller and Graumann understood that the strain of this
message from the dead would be too much for her to bear. This was the
letter:


G-------- September 21st.

My beloved:

When you put this letter in the hands of the Judge, I will have found in
death the peace that I could never find on earth. There was no chance
of happiness for me since I have realised that I love you, that you love
me, and that I must give you up if I am to remain what I have always
been--in spite of everything--a man of honour.

Albert Graumann would keep his word, this I know. Wherever you might
follow me as my wife, there his will would have been before us, blasting
my reputation, blackening the flame which you were to bear.

I could not have endured it. My soul was sick of all this secrecy, sick
at the injustice of mankind. In spite of worldly success, my life was
cold and barren in the strange land to which I had fled. My home called
to me and I came back to it.

I kissed the earth of my own country, and I wept at my mother's grave. I
was happy again under the skies which had domed above my childhood. For
I am an honest man, beloved, and I always have been.

One day I sat at table beside the man--the Judge who condemned me, here
in G-------- in those terrible days. He naturally did not know me again.
I, myself, brought the conversation around to a professional subject.
I asked him if it were not possible that circumstantial evidence could
lie; if the entire past, the reputation of the accused would not be a
factor in his favour. The Judge denied it. It was his opinion, beyond a
doubt, that circumstantial evidence was sufficient to convict anyone.

My soul rose within me. This infallibility, this legal arrogance,
aroused my blood. "That man should have a lesson!" I said to myself.

But I had forgotten it all--all my anger, all my hatred and bitterness,
when I met you. I dare not trust myself to think of you too much, now
that everything is arranged for the one last step. It takes all my
control to keep my decision unwavering while I sit here and tell you how
much your love, your great tenderness, your sweet trust in me, meant to
me.

Let me talk rather of Albert Graumann. I will forgive him for believing
in my guilt, but I cannot forgive him that he, the man of cultivation
and mental grasp, could not believe it possible for a convicted thief
to have repented and to have lived an honest life after the atonement of
his crime. I still cannot believe that this was Graumann's opinion. I
am forced to think that it was an excuse only on his part, an excuse to
keep us apart, an excuse to keep you for himself.

You are lost to me now. There is nothing more in life for me. If the
injustice of mankind has stained my honour beyond repair, has robbed me
of every chance of happiness at any time and in any place, then I die
easily, beloved, for there is little charm in such a life as would be
mine after this.

But I do not wish to die quite in vain. There are two men who have
touched my life, who need the lesson my death can teach them. These men
are Albert Graumann and the prosecuting attorney Gustav Schmidt, the man
who once condemned me so cruelly. His present position would make
him the representative of the state in a murder trial, and I know his
opinions too well not to foresee that he would declare Graumann guilty
because of the circumstantial evidence which will be against him. My
letter, given to the Presiding Judge after the Attorney has made his
speech, will cause him humiliation, will ruin his brilliant arguments
and cast ridicule upon him.

Do not think me hard or revengeful. I do not hate anyone now that death
is so near. But is it inhuman that I should want to teach these two men
a lesson? a lesson which they need, believe me, and it is such a slight
compensation for the torture these last eight years have been to me!

And now I will explain in detail all the circumstances. I have arranged
that Albert Graumann shall come to me on the evening of September 23rd
between 7 and 8 o'clock. I asked him to do so by letter, asking him
also to keep the fact of his visit to me a secret. To-night, the 22nd of
September, I received his answer promising that he would come. Therefore
I can look upon everything that is to happen, as having already
happened, for now there need be no further change in my plans. I will
send this letter this evening to my friend Pernburg in Frankfurt am
Main. In case anything should happen that would render impossible for
me to carry out my plans, I will send Pernburg another letter asking him
not to carry out the instructions of the first.

I can now proceed to tell you what will happen here to-morrow evening,
the 23rd of September.

Albert Graumann will come to me, unknown to his family or friends, as I
have asked him to come. I will so arrange it that the old servant will
see him come in but will not see him go out. My landlady will not be in
my way, for she has already told me that she will spend the night of
the 23rd with her mother, in another part of the city. It is to be a
birthday celebration I believe, so that I can be certain her plans will
not be changed.

Graumann and I will be alone, therefore, with no reliable witnesses
near. I will keep him there for a little while with commonplace
conversation, for I have nothing to say to him. If he moves near the
desk I will upset the inkbottle. The spots on his clothes will be
another evidence against him. I will endeavour to get him to keep my
jewelry which is, as you know, of considerable value. I will tell him
that I am going away for a while and ask him to take charge of it for
me. I, myself, will take him down to the door and let him out, when I
have satisfied myself that the old servant is in bed or at least at the
back of the house. The revolver which shall end my misery is Graumann's
property. I took it from its place without his knowledge.

The 10,000 gulden which I told my landlady were still in the house,
and which would therefore be thought missing after my death, I have
deposited in a bank in Frankfort in your name. Here is the certificate
of deposit.

I will endeavour not to hold the revolver sufficiently close to have the
powder burn my clothes. And I will exert every effort of mind and body
to throw it far from me after I have fired the fatal shot. I think that
I will be able to do this, for I am a very good shot and I have no
fear of death. One thing more I will do, to turn aside all suspicion
of suicide. I will write a letter to some person who does not exist, a
letter which will make it appear as if I were in excellent humour and
planning for the future.

And now, good-bye to life. People have called me eccentric, they may be
right. This last deed of mine at least, is out of the ordinary. No one
will say now that ended my life in a moment of darkened mind, in a rush
of despair. My brain is perfectly clear, my heart beats calmly, now that
I have arranged everything for my departure from this world of falsehood
and unreality. My last deed shall go to prove to the world how little
actual, apparent facts can be trusted.

The one thing real, the one thing true in all this world of falsehood
was your love and your trust. I thank you for it.

                                                 THEODOR BELLMANN,
                                                 known as
                                                 JOHN SIDERS.

Joseph Muller refuses to take any particular credit for this case. The
letter would have come in time to prevent Graumann's conviction without
his assistance, he says. The only person whose gratitude he has a right
to is Prosecuting Attorney Gustav Schmidt. He managed to have the Police
Commissioner in G-------- read the letter in detail to the attorney. But
Muller himself knows that it failed of its effect, so far as that
dignitary was concerned. For nothing but open ridicule could ever
convince a man of such decided opinions that he is not the one
infallible person in the world.

But Albert Graumann had learned his lesson. And he told Muller himself
that the few days of life which might remain to him were a gift to him
from the detective. He felt that his weak heart would not have stood the
strain and the disgrace of an open trial, even if that trial ended in
acquittal. Two months later he was found dead in his bed, a calm smile
on his lips.

Before he died he had learned that it was the undaunted courage of his
timid little old aunt that had brought Muller to take charge of the case
and to free her beloved nephew from the dreaded prison. And the last
days that these two passed together were very happy.

But as aforesaid, Muller refuses to have this case included in the
list of his successes. He did not change the ultimate result, he merely
anticipated it, he says.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Case of the Registered Letter, by
Augusta Groner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASE OF THE REGISTERED LETTER ***

***** This file should be named 1833.txt or 1833.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/3/1833/

Produced by An Anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
