The Project Gutenberg EBook of Food Remedies, by Florence Daniel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Food Remedies
       Facts About Foods And Their Medicinal Uses

Author: Florence Daniel

Release Date: June 1, 2006 [EBook #18487]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOOD REMEDIES ***




Produced by Feorag NicBhride, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






FOOD REMEDIES


HEALTHY LIFE BOOKLETS

No. 2.


       *       *       *       *       *

    HEALTHY LIFE BOOKLETS

NO. 1. THE LEAGUE AGAINST HEALTH.

  By ARNOLD EILOART, B.Sc., Ph.D.


NO. 2. FOOD REMEDIES.

  By FLORENCE DANIEL.


_Ready in September, 1908._

NO. 3. INSTEAD OF DRUGS.

  By ARNOLD EILOART, B.Sc., Ph.D.

NO. 4. HEALTHY LIFE COOK BOOK.

  By FLORENCE DANIEL.


_Ready in December, 1908._

NO. 5. MIND _VERSUS_ MEDICINE.

  By ARNOLD EILOART, B.Sc., Ph.D.

NO. 6. DISTILLED WATER.

  By FLORENCE DANIEL.

       *       *       *       *       *

            FOOD REMEDIES

FACTS ABOUT FOODS AND THEIR MEDICINAL USES

                  BY
           FLORENCE DANIEL



               LONDON
            C. W. DANIEL
      11 CURSITOR STREET, E.C.
                1908




_PREFACE_


There is a sentence in the Talmud to the effect that the Kingdom of God
is nigh when the teacher gives the name of the author of the information
that he is passing on. With every desire to fulfil the rabbinical
precept and acknowledge the sources of this booklet, I find myself in a
quandary. If I make my acknowledgments duly I must begin with my
grandmother and Culpeper's Herbal. Following upon those come the results
of my own and friends' practical experience. After this I should,
perhaps, give a list of the periodicals from whose pages I have culled
much helpful information. But as space and memory preclude individual
mention I must content myself with this general acknowledgment. Lastly,
I desire to record my thanks to Dr. Fernie, whose _Meals Medicinal_, a
large and exhaustive collection of facts about food, has afforded not
the least valuable assistance.
                                                    F. D.




_CONTENTS_


PART 1.--INTRODUCTORY
                                         PAGE
While there is Fruit there is Hope          1
Fruit and the Teeth                         5
Fruit is Food                               6
Objections to Fruit                         8
A Pioneer of Food Remedies                 10
The Simple Life                            12
Fruit or Fasting                           13
Acute Illness                              14


PART II.--FOODS AND THEIR
MEDICINAL USES

Almond                                     15
Apple                                      16
Asparagus                                  20
Banana                                     20
Barley                                     23
Blackberry                                 24
Black Currant                              26
Brazil Nuts                                26
Beans, Peas, and Lentils                   27
Beet                                       28
Cabbage                                    28
Caraway Seed                               29
Carrot                                     30
Celery                                     31
Cresses                                    31
Chestnut                                   32
Cinnamon                                   32
Cocoanut                                   33
Coffee                                     33
Date                                       34
Elderberry                                 34
Fig                                        38
Grape                                      39
Gooseberry                                 43
Lavender                                   43
Lemon                                      44
Lettuce                                    46
Nettle                                     47
Nuts                                       47
Oat                                        51
Olive                                      52
Onion                                      53
Orange                                     56
Parsley                                    57
Pear                                       58
Pea Nut                                    59
Pine-Apple                                 60
Pine Kernel                                64
Plum, Prune                                64
Potatoe                                    66
Radish                                     67
Raspberry                                  68
Rice                                       68
Rhubarb                                    69
Sage                                       71
Strawberry                                 72
Spinach                                    72
Tomato                                     73
Turnip                                     74
Thyme                                      75
Walnut                                     75
Wheat                                      76


PART III.--INDICES

Index to Diseases and Remedies             79
Index to Prescriptions and Recipes         86
Index--Miscellaneous                       87




FOOD REMEDIES




PART I.--INTRODUCTORY

_While there is Fruit there is hope._


While there is life--and fruit--there is hope. When this truth is
realised by the laity nine hundred and ninety-nine out of every thousand
professors of the healing art will be obliged to abandon their
profession and take to fruit-growing for a living.

Many people have heard vaguely of the "grape cure" for diseases arising
from over-feeding, and the lemon cure for rheumatism, but for the most
part these "cures" remain mere names. Nevertheless it is almost
incredible to the uninitiated what may be accomplished by the
abandonment for a time of every kind of food in favour of fruit. Of
course, such a proceeding should not be entered upon in a careless or
random fashion. Too sudden changes of habit are apt to be attended with
disturbances that discourage the patient, and cause him to lose patience
and abandon the treatment without giving it a fair trial. In countries
where the "grape cure" is practised the patient starts by taking one
pound of grapes each day, which quantity is gradually increased until he
can consume six pounds. As the quantity of grapes is increased that of
the ordinary food is decreased, until at last the patient lives on
nothing but grapes.[1] I have not visited a "grape cure" centre in
person, but I have read that it is not only persons suffering from the
effects of over-feeding who find salvation in the "grape cure," but that
consumptive patients thrive and even put on weight under it.

The _Herald of Health_ stated, some few years back, that in the South of
France where the "grape cure" is practised consumptive patients are fed
on grapes alone, and become quite strong and well in a year or two. And
I have myself known wonderful cures to follow on the adoption of a
fruitarian dietary in cases of cancer, tumour, gout, eczema, all kinds
of inflammatory complaints, and wounds that refused to heal.

H. Benjafield, M.B., writing in the _Herald of Health_, says: "Garrod,
the great London authority on gout, advises his patients to take
oranges, lemons, strawberries, grapes, apples, pears, etc. Tardieu, the
great French authority, maintains that the salts of potash found so
plentifully in fruits are the chief agents in purifying the blood from
these rheumatic and gouty poisons.... Dr. Buzzard advises the scorbutic
to take fruit morning, noon, and night. Fresh lemon juice in the form of
lemonade is to be his ordinary drink; the existence of diarrhoea should
be no reason for withholding it." The writer goes on to show that
headache, indigestion, constipation, and all other complaints that
result from the sluggish action of bowels and liver can never be cured
by the use of artificial fruit salts and drugs.

Salts and acids as found in organised forms are quite different in their
effects to the products of the laboratory, notwithstanding that the
chemical composition may be shown to be the same. The chemist may be
able to manufacture a "fruit juice," but he cannot, as yet, manufacture
the actual fruit. The mysterious life force always evades him. Fruit is
a vital food, it supplies the body with something over and above the
mere elements that the chemist succeeds in isolating by analysis. The
vegetable kingdom possesses the power of directly utilising minerals,
and it is only in this "live" form that they are fit for the consumption
of man. In the consumption of sodium chloride (common table salt),
baking powders, and the whole army of mineral drugs and essences, we
violate that decree of Nature which ordains that the animal kingdom
shall feed upon the vegetable and the vegetable upon the mineral.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] This was the original treatment; now other food is added, although
excellent results were obtained under the old _regime_.


_Fruit and the Teeth._

I mention the above because one of the objections that I have heard
cited against the free use of fruit is that "the acids act injuriously
upon the teeth." Until I became a vegetarian I used to visit a dentist
regularly every six months. I had done this for ten years, and nearly
every tooth in my gums had its gold filling. The last time I visited the
dentist I told him that I had become a vegetarian, and he replied that
he rather thought my teeth would decay quicker in future on account of
an increased consumption of vegetable acids. But from that day, now
nearly six years ago, to the present time, I have never been near a
dentist. My teeth seem to have taken a new lease of life. It is a fact
that the acids in fruit and vegetables so far from injuring the teeth
benefit them. Many of these acids are strongly antiseptic and actually
destroy the germs that cause the teeth to decay. On the other hand, they
do _not_ attack the enamel of the teeth, while inorganic acids do.
Nothing cleanses the teeth so effectually as to thoroughly chew a large
and juicy apple.


_Fruit is a Food._

Until quite recently the majority of English-speaking people have been
accustomed to look upon fruit not as a food, but rather as a sweetmeat,
to be eaten merely for pleasure, and therefore very sparingly. It has
consequently been banished from its rightful place at the beginning of
meals. But fruit is not a "goody," it is a food, and, moreover, a
complete food. All vegetable foods (in their natural state) contain all
the elements necessary to form a complete food. At a pinch human life
might be supported on any one of them. I say "at a pinch" because if
the nuts cereals and pulses were ruled out of the dietary it would, for
most people, be deficient in fat and proteid (the flesh and
muscle-forming element). Nevertheless, fruit alone _will_ sustain life
if taken in large quantities with small output of energy on the part of
the person living upon it, as witness the "grape cure."[2] The
percentage of proteid in grapes is particularly high for fruit.

Those people who desire to make a fruitarian dietary their daily
_regime_ cannot do better than take the advice of O. Hashnu Hara, an
American writer. He says: "Every adult requires from twelve to sixteen
ounces of dry food, _free from water_, daily. To supply this a quarter
of a pound of _shelled_ nuts and three-quarters of a pound of any dried
fruit must be used. In addition to this, from two to three pounds of
any _fresh fruit_ in season goes to complete the day's allowance. These
quantities should be weighed out ... and will sustain a full-grown man
in perfect health and vitality. The quantity of ripe fresh fruit may be
slightly increased in summer, with a corresponding decrease in the dried
fruit."

FOOTNOTE:

[2] Recent years have witnessed a modification of the original cure.
Other food is now included, but I have not heard that the results are
better.


_Objections to Fruit._

Some vegetarians object that it is possible to eat too much fruit, and
recommend caution in the use of it to people of nervous temperament, or
those who seem predisposed to skin ailments. It is true that the
consumption of large quantities of fruit may appear to render the
nervous person more irritable, and to increase the external
manifestations of a skin disease. But in the latter event the fruit is
merely assisting Nature to throw the disease out and off more quickly,
while in the former case the real cause lies not in the fruit but in
some nerve irritant, tea, for example, the effects of which are more
acutely felt under the new _regime_. The nervous system tends to become
much more sensitive upon a vegetarian, especially fruitarian, diet, and
people often attribute their increased nervousness and irritability to
the diet when it is simply that they now react more quickly to poisons.
This is not a bad thing, on the contrary, it shows that the system has
become more alert. Under the old _regime_ we tend to store up poisons
and impurities in the body, but the effect of a vegetable diet,
especially when united with the use of distilled water, is to cause all
our diseases and impurities to be expelled outwards and downwards. Tea
is a slow poison, and so is coffee except under exceptional conditions
when it is used as a medicine, and then it should always be
pale-roasted.

Fruit should always be eaten at the beginning of a meal. Again, when the
diet consists of a mixture of cooked and uncooked foods, the uncooked
should always be eaten first. Also when the meal consists of two
courses, a sweet and a savoury dish, sufferers from indigestion should
try taking the sweet course first. I have known several cases where this
simple expedient has resulted in a complete cessation of the discomfort
of which the patient complained.


_A Pioneer of Food Remedies._

The pioneer, in England, of the treatment of all sorts and conditions of
disease by means of a vegetable (chiefly fruit) dietary was Dr. Lambe, a
contemporary of the poet Shelley. His last book appeared in 1815, and in
it and the one preceding are recorded some wonderful cures, especially
in cases of cancer. It is only fair to add here that in Dr. Lambe's
opinion no system of cure is completely efficacious so long as the
patient is allowed to drink the ordinary tap or well water. Distilled
water was the only drink he advised. But he held it better still not to
drink at all if the necessary liquid could be supplied to the body by
means of fresh, juicy fruits. He contended that man is not naturally a
drinking animal; that his thirst is a morbid symptom, the outcome of a
carnivorous diet and other unwholesome habits. And I think that anyone
may prove the truth of this for him or herself if he or she will adopt a
fruitarian dietary and abstain from the use of salt and other
condiments.

I have cited so out-of-date a personage as Dr. Lambe for two reasons.
The first is that I know many of the so-called new and unorthodox ideas
are more likely to appeal to some readers, if it can be shown that they
originated with a duly qualified medical practitioner who recorded the
results of his observations and experiments in black and white. The
second is that the principles and practices of Dr. Lambe are
incorporated with those of the Physical Regeneration Society, a large
and ever-increasing body of enthusiasts having its head-quarters in
London, to whose annals I must refer those readers who desire up-to-date
instances of the efficacy of the use of fruit in disease. Lack of space
will not allow me to quote them here.


_The Simple Life._

We hear a great deal about the "Simple Life" and "Returning to Nature"
nowadays, but most of us are so situated that the proposed simplicity
simply spells increased complexity. The "vegetarian chop" costs the
housewife more than double the time and labour involved in preparing its
fleshly namesake. And when it comes to illness some of the systems of
bathing and exercising prescribed by the "naturopath" are infinitely
more troublesome to the patient and his friends than the simple
expedient of sending for the doctor and taking the prescribed doses. I
do not want to be misunderstood here. I am not condemning treatment
with water and exercises. On the contrary, I hope to pass on what I have
learnt about these methods of treatment. But so many people lack the
time, help, and conveniences necessary to carry them out successfully.
It is to these that I would say that the patient's cure may be effected
just as surely, if more slowly, by means of fruit alone.


_Fruit or Fasting._

Treatment of disease by fasting has come into fashion of late, and there
is really no lack of proof as to the benefits to be obtained from
abstaining entirely from food for a short period. I know of an elderly
man who fasts for a fortnight every spring, and gains, not loses, weight
during the process! He accounts for this by explaining that certain
stored up, undigested food particles come out and are digested while he
fasts. Whether this is the correct explanation I do not know, but the
fact remains, and it is not by any means a solitary case. Of course, the
majority of people lose weight when fasting, but this is very quickly
recovered. Now I do not think fasting should be undertaken recklessly,
but only under competent direction. But an excellent and safe substitute
for a fast is an exclusive fruit diet.


_Acute Illness._

The simplest and quickest method of recovering from attacks of acute
illness, fevers, inflammatory diseases, etc., is to rest quietly in bed
in a warm but well-ventilated room, and to take three meals a day of
fresh ripe fruit, grapes by preference. If the grapes are grown out of
doors and ripened in the sun so much the better. I have found from two
to three pounds of grapes per day sufficient. If there is thirst, barley
water flavoured with lemon juice should be taken between the meals.




PART II.--FOODS AND THEIR MEDICINAL USES




_Almond._

Almond soup is an excellent substitute for beef-tea for convalescents.
It is made by simply blanching and pounding a quarter of a pound of
sweet almonds with half a pint of milk, or vegetable stock. Another pint
of milk or stock is then to be added and the whole warmed. After this
add another pint and a half of stock if the soup is to be a vegetable
one, or rice water if milk has been used.

An emulsion of almonds is useful in chest affections. It is made by well
macerating the nuts in a nut butter machine, and mixing with orange or
lemon juice.

Almonds should always be blanched, that is, skinned by pouring boiling
water on the nuts and allowing them to soak for one minute, after which
the skins are easily removed. The latter possess irritating properties.

Bitter almonds should not be used as a food. They contain a poison
identical with prussic acid.


_Apple._

It is hardly possible to take up any newspaper or magazine now a days
without happening on advertisements of patent medicines whose chief
recommendation is that they "contain phosphorus." They are generally
very expensive, but the reader is assured that they are worth ten times
the price asked on account of their wonderful properties as nerve and
brain foods. The proprietors of these concoctions seemingly flourish
like green bay trees and spend many thousands of pounds per annum in
advertising. From which it may be deduced that sufferers from nervous
exhaustion and brain fag number millions. And surely only a sufferer
from brain fag would suffer himself to be led blindly into wasting his
money, and still further injuring his health, by buying and swallowing
drugs about whose properties and effects he knows absolutely nothing.
How much simpler, cheaper, and more enjoyable to eat apples!

The apple contains a larger percentage of phosphorus than any other
fruit or vegetable. For this reason it is an invaluable nerve and brain
food. Sufferers from nerve and brain exhaustion should eat at least two
apples _at the beginning of each meal_. At the same time they should
avoid tea and coffee, and supply their place with barley water or bran
tea flavoured with lemon juice, or even apple tea.

Apples are also invaluable to sufferers from the stone or calculus. It
has been observed that in cider countries where the natural unsweetened
cider is the common beverage, cases of stone are practically unknown.
Food-reformers do not deduce from this that the drinking of cider is to
be recommended, but that even better results may be obtained from eating
the fresh, ripe fruit.

Apples periodically appear upon the tables of carnivorous feeders in the
form of apple sauce. This accompanies bilious dishes like roast pork and
roast goose. The cook who set this fashion was evidently acquainted with
the action of the fruit upon the liver. All sufferers from sluggish
livers should eat apples.

Apples will afford much relief to sufferers from gout. The malic acid
contained in them neutralises the chalky matter which causes the gouty
patient's sufferings.

Apples, when eaten ripe and without the addition of sugar, diminish
acidity in the stomach. Certain vegetable salts are converted into
alkaline carbonates, and thus correct the acidity.

An old remedy for weak or inflamed eyes is an apple poultice. I am told
that in Lancashire they use rotten apples for this purpose, but
personally I should prefer them sound.

A good remedy for a sore or relaxed throat is to take a raw ripe apple
and scrape it to a fine pulp with a silver teaspoon. Eat this pulp by
the spoonful, very slowly, holding it against the back of the throat as
long as possible before swallowing.

A diet consisting chiefly of apples has been found an excellent cure for
inebriety. Health and strength may be fully maintained upon fine
wholemeal unleavened bread, pure dairy or nut butter, and apples.

Apple water or apple tea is an excellent drink for fever patients.

Apples possess tonic properties and provoke appetite for food. Hence the
old-fashioned custom of eating an apple before dinner.


_Apple Tea._

The following are two good recipes for apple tea:-- (1) Take 2 sound
apples, wash, but do not peel, and cut into thin slices. Add some strips
of lemon rind. Pour on 1 pint of boiling water (distilled). Strain when
cold. (2) Bake 2 apples. Pour over them 1 pint boiling water. Strain
when cold.


_Asparagus._

Asparagus is said to strengthen and develop the artistic faculties. It
also calms palpitation of the heart. It is very helpful to rheumatic
patients on account of its salts of potash. It should be steamed, not
boiled, otherwise part of the valuable salts are lost.


_Banana._

The banana is invaluable in inflammation of all kinds. For this reason
it is very useful in cases of typhoid fever, gastritis, peritonitis,
etc., and may constitute the only food allowed for a time.

Not only does it actually subdue the inflammation of the intestines,
but, in the opinion of at least one authority, as it consists of 95 per
cent. nutriment, it does not possess sufficient waste matter to irritate
the inflamed spots.

But great care should be taken in its administration. The banana should
be _thoroughly sound and ripe_, and all the stringy portion carefully
removed. It should then be mashed and beaten to a cream. In severe cases
I think it is better to give this neat, but if not liked by the patient
a little lemon juice, well mixed in, may render it more acceptable. It
may also be taken with fresh cream.

A friend who has had a very wide experience in illness told me that she
was once hurriedly sent for at night to a girl suffering from
peritonitis. Not knowing what she might, or might not, find in the way
of remedies when she arrived at her destination, my friend took with her
some strong barley water, bananas, and an enema syringe. She found the
girl lying across the bed screaming, obviously in agony. First of all my
friend administered a warm water enema. A pint of plain warm water was
injected first, and after this had come away as much warm water as could
be got in was injected and then allowed to come away. The object of this
was to thoroughly wash out the bowels. Then the barley water was warmed,
the bananas mashed, beaten to cream, and mixed in with the barley water.
A soothing nutrient lotion was thus prepared, and as much as the patient
could bear comfortably was injected in the bowel and retained as long as
possible. The effect was magical. The pain subsided, and the patient
ultimately recovered.

In the absence of _perfectly_ ripe bananas, baked bananas may be used.
But, although better than no fruit at all, cooked fruit is never so
valuable as the fresh fruit, if only the latter be perfectly ripe.
Bananas should be baked in their skins, and the stringy pieces carefully
removed before eating. From twenty minutes to half an hour's slow
cooking is required.

Bananas are excellent food for anaemic persons on account of the iron
they contain. A very palatable way of taking them is with fresh orange
juice.

A comparatively old-fashioned remedy, for sprained or bruised places
that show a tendency to become inflamed is to apply a plaster of banana
skin.


_Barley._

Barley is excellent food for the anaemic and nervous on account of its
richness in iron and phosphoric acid. It is also useful in fevers and
all inflammatory diseases, on account of its soothing properties. From
the earliest times barley water has been the recognised drink of the
sick.


_Barley Water._

When using pearl barley for making barley water it must be well washed.
The fine white dust that adheres to it is most unwholesome. For this
reason the cook is generally directed to first boil the barley for five
minutes, and throw this water away. But in this way some of the valuable
properties are thrown away with the dirt. The best results are obtained
by well washing it in cold water, but this must be done over and over
again. Half-a-dozen waters will not be too many. After the last washing
the water should be perfectly clear.

When barley water is being used for curative purposes it should be
strong. The following recipe is an excellent one. A 1/2 pint of barley
to 21/2 pints water (distilled if possible). Boil for three hours, or
until reduced to 2 pints. Strain and add 4 teaspoonfuls fresh lemon
juice. Sweeten to taste with pure cane sugar.

Fine Scotch barley is to be preferred to the pearl barley if it can be
obtained.


_Blackberry._

Fresh blackberries are one of the most effectual cures for diarrhoea
known. Mr. Broadbent records the case of a child who was cured by eating
an abundance of blackberries after five doctors had tried all the known
remedies in vain.


_Blackberry Tea._

In the absence of the fresh fruit a tea made of blackberry jelly and hot
water (a large tablespoonful of jelly to half a pint water) will be
found very useful. A teacupful should be taken at short intervals.


_Blackberry Jelly._

To make blackberry jelly get the first fruit of the season if possible,
and see that it is ripe or it will yield very little juice. Put it into
the preserving pan, crush it, and allow it to simmer slowly until the
juice is well drawn out. This will take from three-quarters to one hour.
Strain through a jelly bag, or fine clean muslin doubled will do. Then
measure the juice, and to every pint allow 3/4 lb. best cane sugar.
Return to the pan and boil briskly for from twenty minutes to half an
hour. Stir with a wooden spoon and keep well skimmed. To test, put a
little of the jelly on a cold plate, and if it sets when cold it is
done. While still at boiling point pour into clean, dry, and _hot_
jars, and tie down with parchment covers immediately.


_Black Currant._

Black currant tea is one of the oldest of old-fashioned remedies for
sore throats and colds. It is made by pouring half a pint of boiling
water on to a large tablespoonful of the jelly or jam. To make the jelly
use the same recipe as for blackberry jelly.

The fresh juice pressed from the fruit is, of course, better than tea
made from the jelly, but as winter is the season of coughs and colds the
fruit is least obtainable when most needed.


_Brazil Nut._

Brazil nuts are excellent for constipation. They are also a good
substitute for suet in puddings. Use 5 oz. nuts to 1 lb. flour. They
should be grated in a nut mill or finely chopped.


_Beans, Peas, and Lentils._

Beans, peas, and lentils are tabooed by the followers of Dr. Haig, the
gout specialist, on account of the belief that they tend to increase the
secretion of uric acid. But this evil propensity is stoutly denied by
other food-reformers. For myself I am inclined to believe that their
supposed indigestibility, etc., arises from the fact that they are
generally cooked in hard water. They should be cooked in distilled or
boiled and filtered rain water. The addition of lemon juice while
cooking renders them much more digestible.

According to Sir Henry Thomson haricot beans are more easily digested
than meat by most stomachs. "Consuming weight for weight, the eater
feels lighter and less oppressed, as a rule, after the leguminous dish;
while the comparative cost is greatly in favour of the latter."

Lentils are the most easily digested of all the pulse foods, and
therefore the most suitable for weakly persons. A soup made of
distilled water and red lentils may be taken twice a week with
advantage. Lentils contain a good percentage of iron, and also
phosphates.


_Beet._

The red beet is useful in some diseases of the womb, while the white
beet is good for the liver. It is laxative and diuretic. The juice mixed
with olive oil is also recommended to be applied externally for burns
and all kinds of running sores.


_Cabbage._

All the varieties of the colewort tribe, including cabbage, cauliflower,
brussels-sprouts, broccoli, and curly greens, have been celebrated from
very ancient times for their curative virtues in pulmonary complaints.
And Athenian doctors prescribed cabbage for nursing mothers. On account
of the sulphur contained in them cabbages are good for rheumatic
patients. They may be eaten steamed, or, better still, boiled in soft
water and the broth only taken. The ordinary boiled cabbage is an
indigestible "windy" vegetable, and should never be eaten.


_Caraway Seed._

Caraway seeds sharpen the vision, promote the secretion of milk, and are
good against hysterical affections. They are also useful in cases of
colic. When used to flavour cakes the seeds should be pounded in a
mortar, especially if children are to partake thereof.

When used medicinally 20 grains of the powdered seeds may be taken in a
wineglassful of hot water. But for children half an ounce of the bruised
seeds are to be infused in cold water for six hours, and from 1 to 3
teaspoonfuls of this water given.

A poultice of crushed caraway seeds moistened with hot water is good for
sprains.

Caraway seeds are narcotic, and should therefore be used with caution.


_Carrot._

Carrots are strongly antiseptic. They are said to be mentally
invigorating and nerve restoring. They have the reputation of being very
indigestible on account of the fact that they are generally boiled, not
steamed. When used medicinally it is best to take the fresh, raw juice.
This is easily obtained by grating the carrot finely on a common penny
bread grater, and straining and pressing the pulp thus obtained.

Raw carrot juice, or a raw carrot eaten fasting, will expel worms. The
cooked carrot is useless for this purpose.

A poultice of fresh carrot pulp will heal ulcers.

Fresh carrot juice is also good for consumptives on account of the large
amount of sugar it contains.

Carrots are very good for gouty subjects and for derangements of the
liver.


_Celery._

Celery is almost a specific for rheumatism, gout, and nervous
indigestion. The most useful plants for this purpose are small, not too
rapidly grown nor very highly manured.

It may be eaten raw, or steamed, or in soup. Strong celery broth
flavoured with parsley is excellent.


_Cresses._

All the cresses are anti-scorbutic, that is, useful against the scurvy.
The ancient Greeks also believed them to be good for the brain.

The ordinary "mustard and cress" of our salads is good for rheumatic
patients, while the water-cress is valuable in cases of tubercular
disease. Anaemic patients may also eat freely of it on account of the
iron it contains. Care should be taken, however, from whence it is
procured, as a disease peculiar to sheep but communicable to man may be
carried by it. It should not be gathered from streams running through
meadows inhabited by sheep.


_Chestnut._

Chestnuts, when cooked, are valuable food for persons with weak
digestive powers. They should be put on the fire in a saucepan of cold
water and cooked for twenty minutes from the time the water first boils.
John Evelyn, F.R.S., a seventeenth century writer, says of them: "They
are a lusty and masculine food for rustics at all times, and of better
nourishment for husbandmen than cole and rusty bacon, yea, or beans to
boot."


_Cinnamon._

Cinnamon is a very old-fashioned remedy for soothing the pain of
internal or unbroken cancer. One prescription is the following: Take
1 lb. of Ceylon sticks. Simmer in a closed vessel with 1 quart of water
until the liquid is reduced to 1 pint. Pour off without straining, and
shake or stir well before taking. Take half a pint every twenty-four
hours. Divide into small doses and take regularly.

Cinnamon has a powerful influence over disease germs, but care must be
taken to obtain it pure. It is often adulterated with cassia.

Cinnamon tea may be taken with advantage in cases of consumption,
influenza, and pneumonia.


_Cocoanut._

Cocoanut is an old and very efficacious remedy for intestinal worms of
all kinds. A tablespoonful of freshly-ground cocoanut should be taken at
breakfast until the cure is complete. The dessicated cocoanut is useless
for curative purposes.


_Coffee._

Coffee is a most powerful antiseptic, and therefore very useful as a
disinfectant. It has been used as a specific against cholera with
marvellous results, and is useful in all cases of intestinal
derangement. But only the pale-roasted varieties should be taken, as the
roasting develops the poisonous, irritating properties. There is
_always_ danger in the roasting of grains or berries on account of the
new substances that may be developed.

I do not recommend coffee as a beverage, but as a medicine.


_Date._

The nourishing properties of dates are well known. They are easily
digested, and for this reason are often recommended to consumptive
patients.

According to Dr. Fernie half a pound of dates and half a pint of new
milk will make a satisfying repast for a person engaged in sedentary
work.


_Elderberry._

The elderberry has fallen into neglect of late years, owing to the lazy
and disastrous modern habit of substituting the mineral drugs of the
chemist for the home-made vegetable remedies of our grandmothers.
Nevertheless, the elderberry is one of the most ancient and tried of
medicines, held in such great esteem in Germany that, according to the
German folk-lore, men should take off their hats in the presence of an
elder-tree. In Denmark there is a legend to the effect that the trees
are under the protection of a being known as the Elder-Mother, who has
been immortalised in one of the fairy tales of Hans Andersen.

The berries of the elder-tree are not palatable enough to be used as a
common article of food, but in the days when nearly every garden boasted
its elder-tree few housewives omitted to make elderberry wine in due
season.

It is not permitted to "food-reformers" to make "wine," but those
readers who are fortunate enough to possess an elder-tree might well
preserve the juice of the berries against winter coughs and colds.


_Preserved Fruit Juice._

The following is E. and B. May's recipe for preserving fruit juice. Put
the fruit into a preserving-pan, crush it and allow it to simmer slowly
until the juice is well drawn out. This will take about an hour. Press
out the juice and strain through a jelly-bag until quite clear. Put the
juice back into the pan, and to every quart add a quarter of a pound of
best cane sugar. Stir until dissolved. Put the juice into clean, dry
bottles. Stand the bottles in a pan of hot water, and when the latter
has come to the boil allow the bottles to remain in the boiling water
for fifteen minutes. The idea is to bring the juice inside the bottles
to boiling point just before sealing up, but not to boil it. See that
the bottles are _full_. Cork _immediately_ on taking out of the pan,
and then seal up. To seal mix a little plaster of Paris with water and
spread it well over the cork. Let it come a little below the cork so as
to exclude all air.

The juice of the elderberry is famous for promoting perspiration, hence
its efficacy in the cure of colds. Two tablespoonfuls should be taken at
bed-time in a tumbler of hot water.

The juice of the elderberry is excellent in fevers, and is also said to
promote longevity.


_Elderberry Poultice._

"The leaves of the elder, boiled until they are soft, with a little
linseed oil added thereto," laid upon a scarlet cloth and applied, as
hot as it can be borne, to piles, has been said to be an infallible
remedy. Each time this poultice gets cold it must be renewed for "the
space of an hour." At the end of this time the final dressing is to be
"bound on," and the patient "put warm to bed." If necessary the whole
operation is to be repeated; but the writer assures us that "this hath
not yet failed at the first dressing to cure the disease." If any reader
desires to try the experiment I would suggest that the leaves be steamed
rather than boiled, and pure olive oil used in the place of linseed oil.
It must also be remembered that no outward application can be expected
to effect a permanent cure, since the presence of piles indicates an
effort of Nature to clear out some poison from the system. But if this
expulsion is assisted by appropriate means the pain may well be
alleviated by external applications. (Pepper should be avoided by
sufferers from piles.)


_Fig._

A "lump of figs" laid on the boil of King Hezekiah, as recorded in 2
Kings xx. 7, brought about that monarch's recovery. The figs used were
doubtless ripe figs, not the dried figs of our grocers.

"This fruit," says Dr. Fernie, "is soft, easily digested, and corrective
of strumous disease." The large blue fig may be grown in England, in the
milder parts and under a warm wall. The fresh figs were rarely seen at
one time outside of the large "high-class" fruit shops, but for the last
year or two I have seen them peddled in the streets of London like
apples and oranges in due season.

Green figs (not unripe) were commonly eaten by Roman gladiators, which
is surely a sufficient tribute to the fruit's strength-giving qualities.

The best way of preparing dried figs for eating is to wash them very
quickly in warm water, and steam for twenty minutes or until tender.


_Grape._

The special value of the grape lies in the fact that it is a very quick
repairer of bodily waste, the grape sugar being taken immediately into
the circulation without previous digestion. For this reason is grape
juice the best possible food for fever patients, consumptives, and all
who are in a weak and debilitated condition. The grapes should be well
chewed, the juice and pulp swallowed, and the skin and stones rejected.

In countries where the grape cure is practised, consumptive patients are
fed on the sweeter varieties of grape, while those troubled with liver
complaints, acid gout, or other effects of over-feeding, take the less
sweet kinds.

Dr. Fernie deprecates the use of grapes for the ordinary gouty or
rheumatic patient, but with all due deference to that learned authority,
I do not believe the fruit exists that is not beneficial to the gouty
person. One of the most gouty and rheumatic people I know, a vegetarian
who certainly never over-feeds himself, derives great benefit from a few
days' almost exclusive diet of grapes.

Cream of tartar, a potash salt obtained from the crust formed upon
bottles and casks by grape juice when it is undergoing fermentation in
the process of becoming wine, is often used as a medicine. It has been
cited as an infallible specific in cases of smallpox, but I do not
recommend its use, as it probably gets contaminated with other
substances during the process of manufacture. In any case its value
cannot be compared with the fresh, ripe fruit. I have little doubt but
that an exclusive diet of grapes, combined with warmth, proper bathing,
and the absence of drugs, would suffice to cure the most malignant case
of smallpox.

Sufferers from malaria may use grapes with great benefit. For this
purpose the grapes, with the skins and stones, should be well pounded in
a mortar and allowed to stand for three hours. The juice should then be
strained off and taken. Or persons with good teeth may eat the grapes,
including the skins and stones, if they thoroughly macerate the latter.

In the absence of fresh grapes raisin-tea is a restoring and nourishing
drink. Dr. Fernie notes that it is of the same proteid value as milk, if
made in the proportions given below. It is much more easily digested
than milk, and therefore of great use in gastric complaints. Sufferers
from chronic gastritis could not do better than make raisin-tea their
sole drink, and bananas their only food for a time.


_Raisin Tea._

To make raisin-tea, take half a pound of good raisins and wash well, but
quickly, in lukewarm water. Cut up roughly and put into the
old-fashioned beef-tea jar with a quart of _distilled_ or boiled and
filtered _rain_ water. Cook for four hours, or until the liquid is
reduced to 1 pint. Scald a fine hair sieve and press through it all
except the skins and stones. If desired a little lemon juice may be
added.


_Gooseberry._

The juice of green gooseberries "cureth all inflammations," while the
red gooseberry is good for bilious subjects. But it has been said that
gooseberries are not good for melancholy persons.

Gooseberries are an excellent "spring medicine."


_Lavender._

It is very much to be regretted that the nerve-soothing vegetable
perfumes of our grandmothers have been superseded, for the most part, by
the cheap mineral products of the laboratory. Scents really prepared
from the flowers that give them their names are expensive to make, and
consequently high-priced. The cheap scents are all mineral concoctions,
and their use is more or less injurious. A penny-worth of dried lavender
flowers in a muslin bag is even cheaper to buy, inoffensive to
smell--which is more than can be said of cheap manufactured scents--and
possesses medicinal properties.

Lavender flowers were formerly used for their curative virtues in all
disorders of the head and nerves.

An oil, prepared by infusing the crushed lavender flowers in olive oil,
is recommended for anointing palsied limbs, and at one time a spirit was
prepared from lavender flowers which was known as "palsy drops."

A tea made with hot water and lavender tops will relieve the headache
that comes from fatigue.

Dr. Fernie advises 1 dessertspoonful per day of pure lavender water for
eczema.

The scent of lavender will keep away flies, fleas, and moths.


_Lemon._

Lemons are invaluable in cases of gout, malaria, rheumatism, and scurvy.
They are also useful in fevers and liver complaints.

I have found the juice of one lemon taken in a little hot water remove
dizzy feelings in the head, accompanied by specks and lights dancing
before the eyes, consequent upon the liver being out of order, in half
an hour.

The juice of a lemon in hot water may be taken night and morning with
advantage by sufferers from rheumatism. In the "lemon cure" for gout and
rheumatism, the patients begin with one lemon per day and increase the
quantity until they arrive at a dozen or more. But I think this is
carrying it to excess. Dr. Fernie recommends the juice of one lemon
mixed with an equal proportion of hot water, to be taken pretty
frequently, in cases of rheumatic fever.

A prescription for malaria, given in the _Lancet_, is the following:
"Take a full-sized lemon, cut it in thin transverse slices, rind and
all, boil these down in an earthenware jar containing a pint and a half
of water, until the decoction is reduced to half a pint. Let this cool
on the window-sill overnight, and drink it off in the morning."

A Florentine doctor discovered that fresh lemon juice will alleviate
the pain of cancerous ulceration of the tongue. His patient sucked
slices of lemon.

A German doctor found that fresh lemon juice kills the diptheria
bacillus, and advises a gargle of diluted lemon juice to diptheric
patients. Such a gargle is excellent for sore throat.

Dr. Fernie recommends lemon juice for nervous palpitation of the heart.

Lemon juice rubbed on to corns will eventually do away with them, and if
applied to unbroken chilblains will effect a cure.

Lemon juice is also an old remedy for the removal of freckles and
blackheads from the face. It should be rubbed in at bedtime, after
washing with warm water.


_Lettuce._

Lettuce is noted for its sedative properties, although these are not
great in the large, highly-manured, commercial specimens. It is very
easily digested, and may, therefore, be eaten by those with whom salads
disagree in the ordinary way.


_Nettle._

The tender tops of young nettles picked in the spring make a delicious
vegetable, somewhat resembling spinach. They are excellent for sufferers
from gout and skin eruptions.

Fresh nettle juice is prescribed in doses of from 1 to 2 tablespoonfuls
for loss of blood from the lungs, nose, or internal organs.


_Nuts._

Nuts are the true substitute for flesh meat. They contain everything in
the way of nourishment that meat contains, minus the poisonous
constituents of the latter. They are very rich in proteid (flesh and
muscle former) and fat. In addition they possess all the constituents
that go to make up a perfect food. Nuts and water form a complete
dietary, although I do not suggest that any reader should try it. If he
did so he would probably eat too many nuts, not realising how great an
amount of nourishment is contained in a concentrated form. No one should
eat more than a quarter of a pound of nuts per day, in addition to other
food. A pound per day would be more than sufficient if no other food
were taken. I have little doubt but that the diet of the future will
consist solely of nuts and fresh fruit. After all it is the food most
favoured by monkeys, and our teeth and digestive apparatus more nearly
resemble those of the monkey than the carnivorous and herbivorous
animals so many of us seemingly prefer to imitate.

The chief objection to nuts is supposed to be on account of their
indigestibility. But this has its foundation, not in the nut, but in the
manner of eating it. I recommend all those people who find nuts
indigestible to pay a visit to the Zoo and see how the monkey eats his
nuts. He chews and chews and chews. And after that he chews!

I know, alas! that the majority of people do not possess teeth like the
monkey, and to these I can only suggest that they macerate their nuts in
a nut butter machine. There are several of these machines on the market,
and they are stocked by all large "Food-Reform" provision dealers. They
cost anything from six or seven shillings. The daily allowance of nuts
may be thoroughly macerated and eaten with fruit in the place of cream.
Ordinary people may use a nut-mill, which flakes, not macerates, the
nuts. But people with bad teeth and a weak digestion will do better to
invest in a nut butter machine. I may add that the nuts will not
macerate properly unless they are crisp, and to this end they must be
put in a warm oven for a short time, just before grinding. I have found
new, English-grown walnuts crisp enough without this preparation. But if
the nuts are _not_ crisp enough they will simply clog the machine.

Now to our nuts! Almonds are the most nourishing. Next in order come
walnuts, hazel or cob nuts, and Brazil nuts. The proteid value of these
three does not differ much. After these come the chestnut and cocoanut,
and lastly we have the pine kernel. Speaking very roughly, we may liken
walnuts, hazel nuts, and Brazil nuts to beef for flesh and
muscle-forming value, while pine kernels correspond more nearly to fish.
Almonds are nearly double the value of beef.


_Nut Cream._

Doctor Fernie recommends the following nut-cream for brain-workers.
Pound in a mortar, or mince finely, 3 blanched almonds, 2 walnuts, 2
ounces of pine kernels. Steep overnight in orange or lemon juice.

It should be made fresh daily, and may be used in place of butter.


_Oat._

The oat is generally cited as the most nourishing of all the cereals,
and a good nerve food. The fine oatmeal gruel of our grandmothers has
gone almost entirely out of fashion, but its use might be revived with
advantage. Like wheat, it is a complete food. A good preparation of
groats (ground oats from which the husk has been entirely removed) may
be taken by those who find other preparations indigestible.

Some persons seem unable to take oatmeal, its use being followed by a
skin eruption. This is supposed to be due to a special constituent
called "avenin," the existence of which, however, is denied by some
authorities.

There is little doubt but that persons of weak digestive powers and
sedentary habits cannot digest porridge comfortably. In any case
quickly-cooked porridge is an abomination.


_Olive._

The chief use of the olive, at least in this country, consists in the
oil expressed from it. Unfortunately our so-called olive oil is
generally cotton-seed oil. Captain Diamond of San Francisco, aged 111,
and the oldest living athlete in the world, attributes much of his
health to the use of olive oil. But he lays great stress upon the
importance of obtaining it pure. Cotton-seed oil consists partly of an
indigestible gum, and its continued ingestion tends to produce kidney
trouble and heart failure.

A simple test for purity is to use, the suspected sample for oiling
floors or furniture. If pure, it will leave a beautiful polish minus
grease. But if it contains cotton-seed oil, part of it will evaporate,
leaving the gummy portion behind.

When pure olive oil is shaken in a half-filled bottle, the bubbles
formed thereby rapidly disappear, but if the sample is adulterated the
bubbles continue some time before they burst.

Pure olive oil is pale and a greenish yellow.

If equal volumes of strong nitric acid (this may be obtained from any
chemist) and olive oil are mixed together and shaken in a flask the
resulting product has a greenish or orange tinge which remains unchanged
after standing for ten minutes. But if cotton-seed oil is present, the
mixture is reddish in colour, and becomes brown or black on standing.

Olive oil is slightly laxative, and therefore useful to sufferers from
constipation. It is also an excellent vermifuge.

Olive oil has been used with great success in the treatment of gall
stones. A Dr. Rosenberg reported that of twenty-one cases treated by
"the ingestion of a considerable quantity of olive oil, only two failed
of complete recovery."


_Onion._

The uses of the onion are many and varied. Fresh onion juice promotes
perspiration, relieves constipation and bronchitis, induces sleep, is
good for cases of scurvy and sufferers from lead colic. It is also
excellent for bee and wasp stings.

Onions are noted for their nerve-soothing properties. They are also
beautifiers of the complexion. But moderation must be observed in their
use or they are apt to disagree. Not everyone can digest onions,
although I believe them to be more easily digested raw than cooked.

A raw onion may be rubbed on unbroken chilblains with good results. If
broken, the onion should be roasted. The heart of a roasted onion placed
in the ear is an old-fashioned remedy for earache.

Raw onions are a powerful antiseptic. They also attract disease germs to
themselves, and for this reason may be placed in a sickroom with
advantage. Needless to say, they should afterwards be burnt or buried.
Culpeper, the ancient herbalist, says that they "draw corruption unto
them." It is possibly for this reason that the Vedanta forbids them to
devout Hindoos.

Garlic possesses the same properties as the onion, but in a very much
stronger degree. Leeks are very much milder than the onion.


_Onion Juice._

The following prescription is excellent for sufferers from bronchitis or
coughs: Slice a Spanish onion; lay the slices in a basin and sprinkle
well with pure cane sugar. Cover the basin tightly and leave for twelve
hours. After this time the basin should contain a quantity of juice.
Give a teaspoonful every now and then until relief is afforded. If too
much be taken it may induce headache and vomiting.


_Onion Poultice._

An excellent poultice for the chest may be made by placing one or two
English onions in a muslin bag and pounding them to a pulp. This should
be renewed every three or four hours, and the chest washed. I have been
told that, at the age of six weeks old, I was saved from dying of
bronchitis by such an onion poultice applied to the soles of my feet.


_Orange._

The orange possesses most of the virtues of the lemon, but in a modified
form. But it has the advantage of being more palatable.

The juice of oranges has been observed to exert such a beneficial
influence on the blood as to prevent and cure influenza. Taken freely
while the attack is on they seemingly prevent the pneumonia that so
often follows. By far the quickest way to overcome influenza is to
subsist solely on oranges for three or four days. Hot distilled water
may be taken in addition.

The peel of the bitter Seville orange is an excellent tonic and remedy
in cases of malaria and ague. A drink may be prepared from it according
to the prescription under the heading "Lemon."

The "orange cure" is used with great success for consumptive patients,
for chest affections of all kinds, for asthma, and some stomach
complaints. Oranges are taken freely at every meal. The "navel" kind are
generally used.

Herbalists sell dried orange pips to be crushed to a powder and taken in
the proportion of 1 teaspoonful to a cup of hot water. This is a
harmless sedative, and useful in hysterical affections.


_Marmalade Tonic._

A drink made with half a pint of hot water poured over a tablespoonful
of good, home-made marmalade will often give relief in cases of
neuralgia and pains in the head.


_Parsley._

Parsley is useful in cases of menstrual obstruction and diseases of the
kidneys. The bruised leaves applied to the breasts of nursing mothers
are said to cure painful lumps and threatened abscess. It may also be
taken with advantage by cancerous patients. In all these cases parsley
may be taken in the form of a soup, in common use among members of the
Physical Regeneration Society, which consists of onions, tomatoes,
celery, and parsley, stewed together in distilled water.

Dr. Fernie remarks that when uncooked parsley has been eaten to excess
it has been observed to produce epilepsy in certain bodily systems. The
oil of parsley has also been found useful in cases of epilepsy. This
would naturally follow on the homeopathic principle of similars.


_Pear._

The pear possesses most of the virtues of the apple. But, unlike the
latter, it is credited with producing a constipating effect if eaten
without its skin. In an old recipe book I found the following tribute to
Bergamot pears. The writer says: "I had for some years been afflicted
with the usual symptoms of the stone in the bladder, when meeting with
Dr. Lobb's "Treatise of Dissolvents for the Stone and Gravel," I was
induced on his recommendation to try Bergamot pears, a dozen or more
every day with the rind, when in less than a week I observed a large red
flake in my urine, which, on a slight touch, crumbled into the finest
powder, and this was the same for several succeeding days. It is ten
years since I made the experiment, and I have been quite free from any
complaints of that nature ever since. The pears were of the small sort
and full of knots."


_Pea Nut._

The pea nut--or monkey nut--is especially recommended as a cure for
indigestion. I have not been able to find out why. As a matter of fact
it is such a highly-concentrated food that, unless taken in very small
quantities, it is liable to upset weak digestions. I suspect the secret
to lie in the chewing. Almost any kind of nut will cure the habitual
indigestion induced by "bolting" the food, if only it be chewed until it
is liquid. Hard biscuits will do instead of nuts, although an uncooked
food like the nut is the better. But whatever is taken must be
"Fletcherised," that is, chewed and chewed and chewed until it is all
reduced to liquid.

Pea nuts contain a good deal of oil, and for this reason are recommended
for consumptives. They are the cheapest nuts to buy, for the reason that
they are not really nuts but beans.


_Pine-apple._

Pine-apple juice is the specific for diphtheria. This seems to have
been first brought to the notice of Europeans by the fact that negroes
living round about the swamps of Louisiana were observed to use it with
great success. A writer who records this says: "The patient should be
forced to swallow the juice. This fluid is of so pungent and corrosive a
nature that it cuts out the diphtheria mucous and causes it to
disappear."

The above direction looks satisfactory enough on paper, and it is
eminently cheering to read of how the pine-apple juice causes the
diphtheria mucous to disappear, but anyone who knows anything about
diphtheria knows that to "force" a diphtheria patient to swallow is more
easily written about than accomplished. Fortunately I have been able to
obtain the following explicit directions from an experienced nurse and
mother:

The pine-apple should be cut up and well pounded in a mortar. The juice
must then be pressed out and strained through well-scalded muslin. The
patient's mouth must be washed out with warm water. The juice may now be
given with a silver teaspoon. It is possible that the patient may be
quite unable to swallow any of it. If this be so, the juice will serve
as a mouth and throat wash. It will gradually dissolve the membrane, and
enable it to be scraped gently away with the spoon. The juice should be
given, and the throat scraped as far down as the nurse can reach, as
often as the patient can bear it. The time will come, sooner or later,
when the juice is swallowed. No other food should be given. The nurse
may have to work away for some hours before any juice is swallowed, but
my friend assures me that if the scraping be done gently and skilfully,
even children will bear it patiently. Only a silver or bone spoon should
be used, and, needless to say, it must be well scalded in boiling water
in the intervals of using.

It is a remarkable fact that while pine-apple juice exercises this
remarkable corrosive power upon diseased mucous, its effect upon the
most delicate, healthy membrane is absolutely harmless. I have seen
sweet pine-apple juice given to six-months-old babies as a supplement to
the mother's milk, with excellent results.

Dr. Hillier, writing in the _Herald of Health_ in 1897, says "Sliced
pine-apples, laid in pure honey for a day or two, when used in
moderation, will relieve the human being from chronic impaction of the
bowels, reestablish peristaltic motion, and induce perfect digestion."

"A slice of fresh pine-apple," writes Dr. Fernie, "is about as wise a
thing as one can take by way of dessert after a substantial meal." This
is because fresh pine-apple juice has been found to act upon animal food
in very much the same way that the gastric juice acts within the
stomach. But vegetarians should eat fresh fruit at the beginning of
meals rather than at the end.

The pine-apple is useful in all ordinary cases of sore-throat.

One pine-apple of average size should yield half a pint of juice.

Tinned or cooked pine-apple is useless for curative purposes.


_Pine Kernel._

Pine kernels are recommended to those who find other nuts difficult to
digest. They are the most easily digested of all the nuts. They are
often used for cooking in the place of suet, being very oily.


_Plum, Prune._

The disfavour with which "stone fruits," especially plums, are generally
regarded owes its being to the fact that they are too often eaten when
unripe. When ripe, they are as wholesome as any other fruit. Unripe they
provoke choleraic diarrhoea.

The prune, a variety of dried plum, has been recommended as a remedy
against viciousness and irritability. An American doctor declares that
there is a certain medicinal property in the prune which acts directly
upon the nervous system, and that is where the evil passions have their
seat. He reports that he tried the experiment of including prunes in the
meals of the vicious, intractable youths of a reformatory, and that by
the end of a week they were peaceable as lambs. Most writers who comment
on this seem to suggest that any fruit which is mildly aperient would
produce the same effect. But the mother of a large family tells me that
she has observed that prunes seem to possess a soothing property that is
all their own.


_Prune Tea._

Prune tea is an excellent drink for irritable persons. It is made as
follows: To every pint of washed prunes allow 1 quart of distilled
water. Soak the prunes all night, and afterwards simmer to rags in the
same water. Strain, and flavour with lemon juice if desired.


_Potato._

The potato is a cheap and homely remedy against gout, scurvy, and
rickets. Dr. Lambe tells how he cured a case of scurvy solely with raw
potatoes. One of the favourite dishes of that good old doctor was a
salad composed of sliced raw potatoes and olive oil.

In order to preserve the medicinal properties of potatoes when cooked,
they must always be steamed in their jackets. The skin may be removed
before eating, but care should be taken not to allow a particle of the
potato to adhere to it. The valuable potash salts chiefly lie just under
the skin.

A raw potato scraped or powdered to a pulp is an excellent remedy for
burns and scalds.

Dr. Fernie recommends the following decoction with which to bathe the
swollen and inflamed joints of rheumatic sufferers. Take 1 lb.
potatoes, cut each into four, but do not peel them. Boil in 2 pints of
water until stewed down to 1 pint. Strain, and use the liquid.

Eaten to excess potatoes are apt to cause dullness and laziness.


_Radish._

The radish is commonly cited as indigestible, but for all that it is
commended by old writers as a potent remedy for stone. If not too old,
well masticated, and eaten at the beginning of a meal, I do not think it
is more indigestible than the majority of vegetables.

A syrup made with the juice expressed from pounded radishes and cane
sugar is recommended for rheumatism, bronchial troubles, whooping-cough,
and pustular eruptions.

Dr. Fernie notes that the black radish is especially useful against
whooping-cough, probably by reason of its volatile, sulphureted oil.
"It is employed in Germany for this purpose by cutting off the top, and
then making a hole within the root, which hole is filled with treacle,
or honey, and allowed to stand thus for two or three days; afterwards a
teaspoonful of the medicated liquid is to be given two or three times in
the day, with a dessertspoonful of water, when required."

I am not acquainted with the "black radish," but mothers might do worse,
in cases of whooping-cough, than give their children the juice of
pounded radishes mixed with pure honey.


_Raspberry._

Raspberries are excellent against the scurvy, and, like the blackberry,
good for relaxed bowels. They are a very wholesome fruit, and should be
given to those who have "weak and queasy stomachs."


_Rice._

The chief medicinal value of rice lies in the quickness with which it
is digested. One authority says that "it can be taken four times a day
and the patient still get twenty hours' rest." It is consequently of
great value in digestive and intestinal troubles. But it should be
_unpolished_, otherwise it is an ill-balanced, deficient food. It should
likewise be boiled in only just enough soft water to be absorbed during
the cooking. One cup of rice should be put on in a double saucepan with
three cups of cold water and tightly covered. When the water is all
absorbed the rice will be cooked.

The large-grained, unpolished rice sold at "Food-Reform" stores at 3d.
per lb. absorbs the water and cooks much more easily than a smaller
variety sold at 2d. I have found the latter most unsatisfactory.


_Rhubarb._

Rhubarb is a wholesome and cooling spring vegetable, and may well take
the place of cooked fruit when the latter is scarce. But it is
generally forbidden to rheumatic and gouty patients on account of its
oxalic acid. This oxalic acid is supposed to combine with the lime in
the blood of the gouty person, and to form crystals of oxalate of lime,
which are eliminated by the kidneys. At the same time the general health
suffers. "Dr. Prout," writes Dr. Fernie, "says he has seen well-marked
instances in which an oxalate of lime kidney attack has followed the use
of garden rhubarb in a tart or pudding, likewise of sorrel in a salad,
particularly when at the same time the patient has been drinking hard
water. But chemists explain that oxalates may be excreted in the urine
without having necessarily been a constituent, as such, of vegetable or
other foods taken at table, seeing that citric, malic, and other organic
acids which are found distributed throughout the vegetable world are
liable to chemical conversion into oxalic acid through a fermentation or
perverted digestion."

I think the moral of the above is: "Do not drink hard water."
Especially do not cook fruit and vegetables in hard water. They are
nearly always rendered indigestible by such a process, and
"vegetarianism," not the hard water, is often blamed for the sufferings
of the consumers.

Rhubarb is apt to be over-valued as a "spring medicine" on account of
its association with the Turkey rhubarb of _materia medica_. It should
be thoroughly ripe before eating.

I am _not_ recommending Turkey rhubarb.


_Sage._

Sage is said to promote longevity, to quicken the senses and memory, and
to strengthen the nerves.

Sage tea is recommended for pulmonary consumption and for excessive
perspiration of the feet. A teaspoonful of dried sage, or rather more if
the fresh leaves be used, is steeped in half a pint of water for
twenty-four hours. A teacupful is to be taken night and morning.

Sage, like so many of the fragrant herbs, is antiseptic.


_Strawberry._

The strawberry is exceptionally wholesome on account of its being so
easily digested. It is recommended for gout, rheumatism, and the stone.
Also for anaemic patients on account of the iron it contains.

H. Benjafield, M.B., advises anaemic girls to take 1 quart of
strawberries per day, and when these are not obtainable several ripe
bananas.


_Spinach._

Professor Bunge declared that iron should never be taken in its mineral
form, but that those who are in need of an iron tonic should take it as
it exists in vegetables and fruit. To this end he especially commends
spinach.

Dr. Luff puts spinach first on a list of vegetables recommended to
those who suffer from gouty tendencies.

Spinach is very easily digested, and so juicy that no added water is
needed in which to cook it.


_Tomato._

The tomato, according to an American physician, is one of the most
powerful _deobstruents_ (remover of disease particles, and opener of the
natural channels of the body) of the _materia medica_. It should be used
in all affections of the liver, etc., where calomel is indicated.

The superstition that tomatoes are a cause of cancer is absolutely
without foundation. Vegetarian cancer patients who have recovered after
being given up as "hopeless" by the orthodox faculty eat tomatoes
freely. Another belief, strongly supported by some otherwise "advanced"
scientific men, is that tomatoes are bad for those who suffer from a
tendency to gout, or uric acid disease. But this has been contradicted
by others. The evil agency in the tomato is supposed to be the oxalic
salt which it undoubtedly contains. But it has been shown by experiment
how certain chemical compounds as obtained from plants act quite
differently to the same compounds artificially prepared in the
laboratory. So that the contention of those who assert that the tomato
is not only harmless, but even beneficial to gouty subjects, is not
unreasonable. Speaking from experience, I can only say that one of the
goutiest subjects I know eats tomatoes nearly every day of his life, and
continues to progress rapidly towards health.

A tomato poultice is said to cleanse foul ulcers, and promote their
healing. It should be renewed frequently, and applied hot.


_Turnip._

Turnips are anti-scorbutic.

An old remedy for chronic coughs was turnip juice boiled with sugar.
The turnips were grated, the juice pressed out, and 21/2 ozs. candied
sugar were allowed to 1 pint of juice. This was boiled until it slightly
thickened. A teaspoonful to be taken several times a day.

The green turnip tops, steamed until tender, are a good "spring
medicine."


_Thyme._

The common garden thyme, used for flavouring, is credited with many
virtues. It is said to inspire courage and enliven the spirits, and for
this reason should be taken by melancholy persons. It is good against
nervous headache, flatulence, and hysterical affections. It is
antiseptic.


_Walnuts._

The walnut has been called vegetable arsenic because of its curative
value in eczema. An oil obtained from the kernel has been found of great
service when applied externally in cases of skin diseases. The leaves
of the walnut tree are also used for the same purpose, both externally
and internally. One ounce of the leaves to 12 tablespoonfuls of boiling
water make a tea, half a tea-cup of which may be taken several times a
day. The affected parts should also be washed with it.

Walnuts, to be well masticated, have been given to gouty and rheumatic
patients with great success. About one dozen per day is the quantity
prescribed. It is possible that herein lies the secret of the fact that
our ancestors invariably took walnuts with their wine.

The green, unripe walnut is useful for expelling worms.


_Wheat._

Whole wheat is a perfect food. In the form of white flour, however, it
is an imperfect, unbalanced food, on account of its deprivation of the
valuable phosphates which exist in the bran. Rickets and malnutrition
generally are the outcome of the habitual use of white flour, unless the
loss of mineral matter is counter balanced by other foods.

Only the very finest wholemeal, such as "Artox," for example, should be
used for making bread, etc. The ordinary coarse wholemeals are apt to
produce intestinal irritation.

_Cracked wheat_, soaked overnight in water and boiled for a couple of
hours, is a favourite prescription of American writers for habitual
constipation. It may be obtained at most large "Food-Reform" stores.


_Bran Tea._

Nervous or anaemic persons will derive great benefit from a course of
bran tea. It is made as follows:--To every cup of bran allow 2 cups
distilled water. Well wash the bran in cold water; it is generally full
of dust. Put in a saucepan with the cold distilled water, cover tightly,
and boil for thirty minutes. Strain, and flavour with sugar and lemon
juice to taste. Take a teacupful night and morning.




PART III.--INDICES




INDEX TO DISEASES AND REMEDIES


ABSCESS--                                   PAGE
    Parsley                                   58

ACID DYSPEPSIA--
    Apple                                     18

ANAEMIA--
    Banana                                    22
    Barley                                    23
    Bran                                      77
    Lentil                                    27
    Spinach                                   72
    Strawberry                                72
    Water-cress                               31

ASTHMA--
    Orange                                    57

BLACKHEADS--
    Lemon                                     46

BOILS--
    Green Figs                                38

BOWEL IMPACTION--
    Pine-apple                                63

BRAIN FAG--
    Apple                                     16

BRONCHITIS--
    Onion                                     54
    Radish                                    67

BRUISES--
    Banana                                    23

BURNS--
    Beet                                      28
    Potato                                    66

CANCER--
    Cinnamon                                  32
    Lemon                                     46
    Parsley                                   58

CHEST AFFECTIONS--
    Almond                                    15
    Orange                                    57

CHILBLAINS--
    Lemon                                     46
    Onion                                     54

CHOLERA--
    Coffee                                    34

COLDS--
    Black Currant                             26
    Elderberry                                36

COLIC--
    Caraway Seed                              29
    Onion                                     54

CONSTIPATION--
    Brazil Nut                                26
    Cracked Wheat                             77
    Olive Oil                                 53
    Onion                                     54

CONSUMPTION--
    Cabbage, etc.                             28
    Carrot                                    30
    Cinnamon                                  33
    Cresses                                   31
    Date                                      34
    Grape                                  2, 40
    Orange                                    57
    Pea Nut                                   60

CORNS--
    Lemon                                     46

COUGHS--
    Black Currant                             26
    Elderberry                                36
    Turnip                                    75

DIARRHOEA--
    Blackberry                                24
    Raspberry                                 68

DIPHTHERIA--
    Lemon                                     46
    Pine-apple                                60

DYSPEPSIA--
    Apple                                     18
    Celery                                    31
    Pea Nut                                   60

ECZEMA--
    Lavender                                  44
    Walnut                                    75

EPILEPSY--
    Parsley                                   58

EYE, INFLAMMATION OF--
    Apple                                     18

FEVER--
    Apple                                     19
    Barley                                    23
    Elderberry                                37
    Grape                                     40
    Lemon                                     44

FLATULENCE--
    Thyme                                     75

FRECKLES--
    Lemon                                     46

GALL STONE--
    Olive Oil                                 53

GASTRITIS--
    Banana                                    20
    Barley                                    23

GOUT--
    Apple                                     18
    Carrot                                    30
    Celery                                    31
    Grape                                     40
    Lemon                                     44
    Potato                                    66
    Spinach                                   73
    Strawberry                                72
    Walnut                                    76

HAEMORRHAGE--
    Nettle                                    47

HEADACHE--
    Lavender                                  44
    Orange                                    57
    Thyme                                     75

HEART, PALPITATION OF--
    Asparagus                                 20
    Lemon                                     46

HYSTERIA--
    Caraway Seed                              29
    Orange Pips                               57
    Thyme                                     75

INDIGESTION--
    Apple                                     18
    Celery                                    31
    Pea Nut                                   60

INEBRIETY--
    Apple                                     19

INFLAMMATION--
    Apple                                     18
    Banana                                    20
    Barley                                    23
    Green Gooseberry                          43

INFLUENZA--
    Cinnamon                                  33
    Orange                                    56

IRRITABILITY--
    Prune                                     65

KIDNEY DISEASE--
    Parsley                                   58

LIVER COMPLAINTS--
    Apple                                     18
    Carrot                                    31
    Grape                                     40
    Lemon                                     44
    Red Gooseberry                            43
    Tomato                                    73
    White Beet                                28

MALARIA--
    Grape                                     41
    Lemon                                     44
    Orange                                    56

MELANCHOLY--
    Thyme                                     75

MENSTRUAL OBSTRUCTION--
    Parsley                                   57

NERVOUS DYSPEPSIA--
    Celery                                    31

NERVOUS EXCITEMENT--
    Onion                                     54
    Sage                                      71

NERVOUS EXHAUSTION--
    Apple                                     17

NEURALGIA--
    Seville Orange                            57

PALPITATION OF HEART--
    Asparagus                                 20
    Lemon                                     46

PARALYSIS--
    Lavender                                  44

PERITONITIS--
    Banana                                    20

PILES--
    Elderberry                                37

PNEUMONIA--
    Cinnamon                                  33
    Orange                                    56

PULMONARY COMPLAINTS--
    Cabbage, etc.                             28
    Carrot                                    30
    Grape                             1 _et seq_
    Sage                                      71

RHEUMATISM--
    Asparagus                                 20
    Cabbage, etc.                             29
    Celery                                    31
    Cress                                     31
    Lemon                                     44
    Radish                                    67
    Strawberry                                72
    Walnut                                    76

RICKETS--
    Potato                                    66

SCURVY--
    Cress                                     31
    Lemon                                     44
    Potato                                    66
    Raspberry                                 68
    Turnip                                    74

SKIN ERUPTIONS--
    Nettle                                    47
    Radish                                    67

SLEEPLESSNESS--
    Lettuce                                   46
    Onion                                     54

SMALLPOX--
    Grapes                                    41

SORES--
    Beet                                      28

SORE THROAT--
    Apple                                     18
    Black Currant                             26
    Pine-apple                                64

SPRAINS--
    Banana                                    23
    Caraway Seed                              29

STINGS--
    Onion                                     54

STONE--
    Apple                                     17
    Pear                                      59
    Radish                                    67
    Strawberry                                72

TYPHOID FEVER--
    Banana                                    20

UTERINE DISEASE--
    Red Beet                                  28

ULCERS--
    Carrot                                    30
    Tomato                                    74

VICIOUSNESS--
    Prune                                     65

WEAK DIGESTION--
    Chestnut                                  32
    Grape                                     40
    Lettuce                                   46
    Pine Kernal                               64
    Rice                                      69
    Strawberry                                72

WHOOPING COUGH--
    Radish                                    67

WORMS--
    Carrot                                    30
    Cocoanut                                  33
    Olive Oil                                 53
    Walnut                                    76




INDEX TO PRESCRIPTIONS AND RECIPES


Almond Soup                                   15
Apple Tea                                     19
Banana and Barley Injection                   21
Barley Water                                  23
Blackberry Tea                                25
Blackberry Jelly                              25
Black Currant Tea                             26
Bran Tea                                      77
Cinnamon Tea                                  33
Chestnuts, Boiled                             32
Elderberry Leaf Poultice                      37
Figs, Steamed                                 39
Fruit Juice, Preserved                        36
Lemon Prescription for Malaria                45
Marmalade Tonic                               57
Nut Cream                                     50
Onion Juice                                   55
Onion Poultice                                55
Orange Pips, Dried                            57
Pine-apple Juice                              60
Potato Lotion                                 67
Prune Tea                                     65
Radish Juice                                  68
Raisin Tea                                    42
Rice, Boiled                                  69
Sage Tea                                      71
Turnip Juice                                  75
Walnut Leaf Tea                               76




INDEX--MISCELLANEOUS


Artistic Faculties, to Strengthen             20
Cabbage, for Nursing Mothers                  28
Caraway Seeds, promote Secretion of Milk      29
Cresses, good for Brain                       31
Lavender, prevents Flies, Fleas, and Moths    44
Nuts, true Substitute for Flesh Meat          47
Nut Butter Machine                            49
Olive Oil, Tests for Purity of                52
Pulse, not Indigestible                       27
Tomato, not bad for Cancer or Gout            73

       *       *       *       *       *

ADVERTISEMENTS


+A WORD ABOUT THE ADVERTISEMENTS.+

Readers of the Healthy Life Booklets will doubtless be glad to know that
only those advertisements of foods that can be conscientiously
recommended are accepted. This necessarily limits the number of
advertisements, but has the advantage of making them really serviceable.

The publisher has no pecuniary interest in any of the firms mentioned,
and therefore feels quite free to give his testimony to the worth of
their goods.


+"Artox" Flour.+

This is so finely ground that, although wholemeal, it may be used in the
manufacture even of sponge cake, while for bread it is unsurpassable.


+Digestive Tea.+

Tea-drinking is considered to be very injurious, but the habit is
difficult, apparently impossible, for some people to overcome, and
therefore the Universal Digestive Tea supplies a real need. A tea minus
tannin is a boon to everyone, but especially to the sufferers from
dyspepsia and nervous complaints.


+Fry's Cocoa.+

This cocoa has stood the test of time and chemists for so long now as
hardly to need further testimony as to its genuineness.


+International Health Association.+

They supply thoroughly pure foods, and readers will do well to take
advantage of their offer to send samples to test for themselves.


+Mapleton's Nut Foods.+

Their Nutter is quite the best vegetable cooking fat on the market, and
makes excellent pastry. A pie-crust made of Nutter and "Artox" Flour is
a revelation to the uninitiated. The Nut Butters are also very good,
especially the uncoloured varieties labelled "Wallaceite."


+Shearns.+

Mr. Shearn is the acknowledged "Fruit King" of the Food Reform movement.
The grand fruit shop in Tottenham Court Road, to which is now added a
vegetarian restaurant, is familiar to most Food Reformers who live in or
near London. Others will be glad to know of Shearn's Stores where all
the latest "Food Reform" specialities are stocked. A catalogue can be
obtained on application.


+Wallace Bakery.+

This is the only bakery in existence which supplies bread, cakes, etc.,
made with very fine wholemeal flour, and entirely free from yeast and
chemicals. The Wallace Bakery is a boon and a blessing to Physical
Regenerationists.

       *       *       *       *       *

+A HEALTHY LIFE BOOKLET FREE+

It has many valuable recipes for Food Reformers and Invalids, and tells
all about

+"ARTOX" WHOLE MEAL,+

which is made from the finest whole wheat, and is so finely ground by
old-fashioned stone mills that it can be digested by the most delicate.
It makes the most delicious Bread, Cakes, Biscuits, and Pastry, and is
an entire safeguard against Constipation when used regularly in place of
white flour. It is strongly recommended by _The Lancet_ and by Mrs.
Leigh Hunt Wallace (_Herald of Health_) and is used exclusively in the
Wallace Bakery. Sold by Health Stores and Grocers everywhere in 7 lb.
sealed linen bags, or 28 lbs. sent direct for 4s. 6d. carriage paid.
_Important._--"Artox" Wholemeal is only retailed in our sealed bags, and
is _not_ sold loose.

+APPLEYARDS, LTD.+ (Dept. M.)

Millers, ROTHERHAM.

_Mention Healthy Life Booklets._

[Illustration: Grains of Common Sense for Housewife and Epicure.]

       *       *       *       *       *

+WILL YOU TRY A CUP OF TEA+

that, instead of injuring your nerves and toughening your food, is

+Absolutely Safe and Delightful?+

2s. 2d.; 2s. 10d.; and 3s. 6d. per lb.

+THE UNIVERSAL DIGESTIVE TEA+ is ordinary Tea treated with oxygen, which
neutralises the injurious tannin. Every pound of ordinary tea contains
about two ounces of tannin. Tannin is a powerful astringent subject to
tan skins into leather. The tannin in ordinary tea tans, or hardens, the
lining of the digestive organs, also the food eaten. This prevents the
healthful nourishment of the body, and undoubtedly eventuates in nervous
disorders.

On receipt of a post card the UNIVERSAL DIGESTIVE TEA CO., Ltd.,
Colonial Warehouse, Kendal, will send a sample of this Tea and name of
nearest Agent, also a Descriptive Pamphlet compiled by Albert Broadbent,
Author of "Science in the Daily Meal," &c. Where no agent, 1 lb. and
upwards will be sent post free.

_AGENTS WANTED._

       *       *       *       *       *

+Ideal Foods for Every Day.+

The I.H.A. Health Foods are called Health Foods because they do actually
build up the body, and make directly for better health all round.

They are Ideal Foods because they are made only from such products as
wheat, nuts, etc.; because they are thoroughly cooked and easily
digested; because they are absolutely pure; because they are
manufactured with scrupulous care and cleanliness in an ideal factory in
the open country.

They are ideal foods for every day because they furnish a wide variety
of dishes at a low cost, and because they are all pleasant to the taste.

The I.H.A. Health Foods are sold by all Health Food Stores, or direct on
easy terms.

We offer to send you three liberal samples and a beautifully illustrated
price list, containing full details and many valuable recipes, for 2d.
stamps, or price list post free on application.

The International Health Association

Limited.

The Factory in the Beech Woods,

Stanborough Park, Watford, Herts.

_Please write for "Food Remedies."_

       *       *       *       *       *

+A Word about Nut Foods.+

The high value of Nuts has long been known, but until lately no attempt
has been made to manufacture them in a form available for domestic use.
This, however, is now changed, as a splendid variety of excellent
preparations are ready to hand, owing to the enterprise of +Messrs.
Mapleton+, in the shape of such useful products as +Nutter+ and +Nutter
Suet+, which supersedes Lard, Suet, and Cooking Butter in the kitchen.
Also delicious Table Butters--+Walnut+, +Cocoanut+, and +Cashew+--all of
which are four times as nutritious as Dairy Butter. Other goods are +Nut
Meat, Nut Gravy, Nut Biscuits, Nut Cakes, Fruitarian Cakes,+ &c. A Post
Card will bring a Booklet describing these goods, with Recipes for their
use, on application to

THE MANUFACTURERS:

Mapleton's Nut Food Co., Ltd.

LANCASHIRE

MENTION HEALTHY LIFE BOOKLETS.

       *       *       *       *       *

+A GUIDE TO GOOD THINGS.+

There are thousands of folk all over the country who are beginning to
feel vaguely that their usual diet is not all it should be, and that it
tends to produce discomfort and disease. Many of them would be glad to
make a change if they knew how. Our booklet, "A Guide to Good Things,"
will help them. It contains an interesting article on "How To Start,"
and gives a complete menu for a week in which the foods that supply the
place of the less wholesome fish, bacon, or meat, are clearly indicated.

There are also several pages of delightful recipes that will help to
gladden the table of any housewife in the kingdom, and in addition there
is a complete price list of every health food upon the market that can
be recommended, and of the most up-to-date and novel appliances for
cooking and preparing food.

There is an all but endless array of breakfast foods--bread, cakes,
biscuits, etc., etc., that are not only beneficial because of what they
contain, but are free from the injurious chemical adulterants so largely
used nowadays.

But send for our booklet and see for yourself what it contains, or if
you are near give us a call. You may shop, lunch, dine, and take tea
with us. Our Health Food Stores will supply everything you need for a
perfect health diet. Our Fruit Stores will supply you with the choicest
fruit on the most moderate terms, and in large quantities at wholesale
prices. Our Fruit Luncheon Rooms are the talk of London, and you can get
a delightful fruit meal amid flowers and palms from 6d.

If you cannot call, send six penny stamps, and in return we will send
you, together with the booklet, a sample of our Frunut, reg. (a
preparation of selected nuts and fruit that is as delightful as it is
sustaining); samples of Stamanut Wholemeal Biscuits (a valuable and most
economical food), and of our Afternoon Tea Biscuits, and a good sample
of our Special Pale Roasted Coffee. The whole post free for 6d.

You will be delighted with it all.

Write to-day to B. Shearn & Son, 234, Tottenham Court Road, London, W.

Mention this book.

       *       *       *       *       *

+A Bakery based on Principle.+

When so many manufactured foods are more or less adulterated--even such
everyday articles as Bread and Biscuits being no exceptions--it is good
news to know that Delicious Biscuits, Bread, Cakes, &c., can be obtained
which are guaranteed, and proved by frequent analysis to be, absolutely
free from any impurity whatever. The goods referred to are made by

+The WALLACE P.R. FOODS Co.,+

which was founded on certain definite scientific principles, and those
principles are unswervingly applied to every detail of its varied
activities.

Within its clean and airy precincts are manufactured the famous Barley
Malt Biscuits (and some thirty other varieties), rich and wholesome
Cakes, air-raised Bread, pure Preserves, a specially prepared Barley
Malt Meal, Pale Roasted Coffee, and Stamina Food--this last being the
best-balanced food for Infants and Invalids yet produced. In the making
of these foods only the very choicest ingredients are employed; the only
flour used is a very fine wholemeal; the butter and milk are sterilised
and the water distilled, while all such impurities as Yeast, Baking
Powder, and Chemicals are strictly avoided.

The experience of thousands proves that the daily use of "WALLACEITE"
(reg.) P.R. Foods is a veritable highway to health. They build up the
body and keep it in working order as do no other foods.

They can be obtained from all Health Food Stores.

30 Samples of Delicious Bread, Cakes, and Biscuits, Carriage Paid, 1/6

or Box of Larger Samples, 2/6.

_Interesting explanatory literature Free._

+THE WALLACE P.R. FOODS CO.,+

+465, Battersea Park Road, London, S.W.+

       *       *       *       *       *

The Open Road

An unconventional Magazine concerned with Religion, Psychology,
Sociology, Diet, and Hygiene.

EDITED BY

FLORENCE & C. W. DANIEL.

_Price 3d. monthly; postage 1d. Yearly 3/- post free._

       *       *       *       *       *

Love: Sacred and Profane

By F. E. WORLAND.

A remarkable and original work dealing with the subject of love in all
its aspects. All interested in the synthetic treatment of Religion, the
Social Question, and the Sex Question, should read this book.

_Foolscap 8vo. Cloth, gilt letters, 3/6 net._

LONDON: C. W. DANIEL, 11 CURSITOR STREET, E.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

_HOW WE ARE BORN._

A Letter to Parents for their children, setting forth in simple language
the truth about the facts of sex. By Mrs. N. J., with Preface by J. H.
Badley, Headmaster of Bedales School. Cloth. 2s. net. Postage 3d.


     "It would be impossible to name any subject of such general
     importance and interest on which so little has been said." Canon
     Lyttleton, Headmaster of Eton.


       *       *       *       *       *

+CREATIVE LIFE BOOKLETS.+

A series of practical talks to young men and parents. By Lister Gibbons,
M.D. Foolscap 8vo. Cloth. 1s. net each.

_NOW READY._

NO. 1. WHAT MAKES A MAN OF ME.

(_In Preparation._)

NO. 2. THE BODY AND ITS CARE.

NO. 3. THE MIND AND ITS EFFECT UPON THE BODY.

NO. 4. HOW TO CONSERVE MY STRENGTH.

NO. 5. CHASTITY AND MARRIAGE.

NO. 6. MAN AND HIS POWER.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON: C. W. DANIEL, 11 Cursitor St., E.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Works of Mary Everest Boole.


LOGIC TAUGHT BY LOVE.

Rhythm in Nature and in Education. Crown 8vo., Cloth, 3/6 net.


MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY OF GRATRY AND BOOLE.

For Medical Students, showing the light thrown on the nature of the
human brain by the evolution of the mathematical process. Crown 8vo.,
Cloth, 3/6 net.


BOOLE'S PSYCHOLOGY

As a Factor in Education. Crown 8vo., 6d. net.


MISTLETOE AND OLIVE.

An introduction for Children to the Life of Revelation. Royal 16mo.,
Cloth, 1/6 net.


MISS EDUCATION AND HER GARDEN.

A Panoramic View of the great Educational Blunders of the last half
century. Royal 16mo., 6d. net.

_Ready October, 1908._


THE MESSAGE OF PSYCHIC SCIENCE TO MOTHERS & NURSES.

Crown 8vo., Cloth, 3/6 net.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON: C. W. DANIEL, 11 CURSITOR STREET, E.C.

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Food Remedies, by Florence Daniel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOOD REMEDIES ***

***** This file should be named 18487.txt or 18487.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/4/8/18487/

Produced by Feorag NicBhride, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
