The Project Gutenberg EBook of Big Brother, by Annie Fellows-Johnston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Big Brother

Author: Annie Fellows-Johnston

Release Date: June 3, 2006 [EBook #18496]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIG BROTHER ***




Produced by David Garcia, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Kentuckiana Digital Library)











BIG BROTHER

[Illustration: ROBIN]




"_Cosy Corner Series_"


BIG BROTHER

BY

ANNIE FELLOWS-JOHNSTON


[Illustration]


BOSTON
JOSEPH KNIGHT COMPANY
1894




COPYRIGHT, 1893
BY
JOSEPH KNIGHT COMPANY




[Illustration: ILLUSTRATIONS]


                                                               PAGE

 ROBIN                                                _Frontispiece_

 "A BAREFOOT GIRL WEARING A SUNBONNET"                            1

 "MRS. ESTEL WAS LISTENING TO LITTLE SCRAPS OF HISTORY," ETC.     9

 "THE LITTLE WHITE COTTAGE IN NEW JERSEY,"                       19

 "ROBIN FOLLOWED HIM EVERYWHERE"                                 21

 "STEVEN WOULD COAX HIM OVER IN A CORNER TO LOOK AT THE BOOK"    23

 "THE BLACK DANCING BEAR HAD ALWAYS TO BE PUT TO BED"            26

 "ONCE HE TOOK A BALL OF YARN TO ROLL AFTER THE WHITE KITTEN"    29

 "HE WANTED TO GET AWAY FROM THE HOUSE," ETC.                    43

 "THEY COMMENCED TO BUILD A SNOW MAN"                            54




BIG BROTHER.


Every coach on the long western-bound train was crowded with
passengers. Dust and smoke poured in at the windows and even the
breeze seemed hot as it blew across the prairie cornfields burning in
the July sun.

[Illustration]

It was a relief when the engine stopped at last in front of a small
village depot. There was a rush for the lunch counter and the
restaurant door, where a noisy gong announced dinner.

"Blackberries! blackberries!" called a shrill little voice on the
platform. A barefoot girl, wearing a sunbonnet, passed under the car
windows, holding up a basket full, that shone like great black beads.
A gentleman who had just helped two ladies to alight from the steps
of a parlor car called to her and began to fumble in his pockets for
the right change.

"Blackberries! blackberries!" sang another voice mockingly. This time
it came from a roguish-looking child, hanging half-way out of a window
in the next car. He was a little fellow, not more than three years
old. His hat had fallen off, and his sunny tangle of curls shone
around a face so unusually beautiful that both ladies uttered an
exclamation of surprise.

"Look, papa! Look, Mrs. Estel!" exclaimed the younger of the two. "Oh,
isn't he a perfect picture! I never saw such eyes, or such delicate
coloring. It is an ideal head."

"Here, Grace," exclaimed her father, laughingly. "Don't forget your
berries in your enthusiasm. It hasn't been many seconds since you were
going into raptures over them. They certainly are the finest I ever
saw."

The girl took several boxes from her basket, and held them up for the
ladies to choose. Grace took one mechanically, her eyes still fixed on
the child in the window.

"I'm going to make friends with him!" she exclaimed impulsively.
"Let's walk down that way. I want to speak to him."

"Blackberries!" sang the child again, merrily echoing the cry that
came from the depths of the big sunbonnet as it passed on.

Grace picked out the largest, juiciest berry in the box, and held it
up to him with a smile. His face dimpled mischievously, as he leaned
forward and took it between his little white teeth.

"Do you want some more?" she asked.

His eyes shone, and every little curl bobbed an eager assent.

"What's your name, dear," she ventured, as she popped another one into
his mouth.

"Robin," he answered, and leaned farther out to look into her box. "Be
careful," she cautioned; "you might fall out."

He looked at her gravely an instant, and then said in a slow, quaint
fashion: "Why, no; I can't fall out, 'cause big brother's a holdin' on
to my feet."

She drew back a little, startled. It had not occurred to her that any
one else might be interested in watching this little episode. She gave
a quick glance at the other windows of the car, and then exclaimed:
"What is it, papa,--a picnic or a travelling orphan asylum? It looks
like a whole carload of children."

Yes, there they were, dozens of them, it seemed; fair faces and
freckled ones, some dimpled and some thin; all bearing the marks of a
long journey on soot-streaked features and grimy hands, but all
wonderfully merry and good-natured.

Just then a tired-looking man swung himself down the steps, and stood
looking around him, knitting his brows nervously. He heard the girl's
question, and then her father's reply: "I don't know, my dear, I am
sure; but I'll inquire if you wish."

The man's brows relaxed a little and he answered them without waiting
to be addressed. "They are children sent out by an aid society in the
East. I am taking them to homes in Kansas, mostly in the country."

"You don't mean to tell me," the old gentleman exclaimed in surprise,
"that you have the care of that entire car full of children! How do
you ever manage them all?"

The man grinned. "It does look like a case of the old woman that lived
in a shoe, but there are not as many as it would seem. They can spread
themselves over a good deal of territory, and I'm blessed if some of
'em can't be in half a dozen places at once. There's a little English
girl in the lot--fourteen years or thereabouts--that keeps a pretty
sharp eye on them. Then they're mostly raised to taking care of
themselves." Some one accosted him, and he turned away. Grace looked
up at the bewitching little face, still watching her with eager
interest.

"Poor baby!" she said to herself. "Poor little homeless curly head! If
I could only do something for you!" Then she realized that even the
opportunity she had was slipping away, and held up the box. "Here,
Robin," she called, "take it inside so that you can eat them without
spilling them."

"All of 'em?" he asked with a radiant smile. He stretched out his
dirty, dimpled fingers. "_All_ of 'em," he repeated with satisfaction
as he balanced the box on the sill. "All for Big Brother and me!"

Another face appeared at the window beside Robin's, one very much like
it; grave and sweet, with the same delicate moulding of features.
There was no halo of sunny curls on the finely shaped head, but the
persistent wave of the darker, closely cut hair showed what it had
been at Robin's age. There was no color in the face either. The lines
of the sensitive mouth had a pathetic suggestion of suppressed
trouble. He was a manly-looking boy, but his face was far too sad for
a child of ten.

"Gracie," said Mrs. Estel, "your father said the train will not start
for fifteen minutes. He has gone back to stay with your mother. Would
you like to go through the car with me, and take a look at the little
waifs?"

"Yes, indeed," was the answer. "Think how far they have come. I wish
we had found them sooner."

A lively game of tag was going on in the aisle. Children swarmed over
the seats and under them. One boy was spinning a top. Two or three
were walking around on their hands, with their feet in the air. The
gayest group seemed to be in the far end of the car, where two seats
full of children were amusing themselves by making faces at each
other. The uglier the contortion and more frightful the grimace, the
louder they laughed.

In one corner the English girl whom the man had mentioned sat mending
a little crocheted jacket, belonging to one of the children. She was
indeed keeping a sharp eye on them.

"'Enry," she called authoritatively, "stop teasing those girls, Hi
say. Pull the 'airs from your hown 'ead, and see 'ow you like that
naow! Sally, you shall not drink the 'ole enjuring time. Leave the cup
be! No, Maggie, Hi can tell no story naow. Don't you see Hi must be
plying my needle? Go play, whilst the car stops."

Robin smiled on Grace like an old friend when she appeared at the
door, and moved over to make room for her on the seat beside him. He
had no fear of strangers, so he chattered away in confiding baby
fashion, but the older boy said nothing. Sometimes he smiled when she
told some story that made Robin laugh out heartily, but it seemed to
her that it was because the little brother was pleased that he
laughed, not because he listened.

Presently Mrs. Estel touched her on the shoulder. "The time is almost
up. I am going to ask your father to bring my things in here. As you
leave at the next station, I could not have your company much longer,
anyhow. I have all the afternoon ahead of me, and I want something to
amuse me."

"I wish I could stay with you," answered Grace, "but mamma is such an
invalid I cannot leave her that long. She would be worrying about me
all the time."

She bade Robin an affectionate good-by, telling him that he was the
dearest little fellow in the world, and that she could never forget
him. He followed her with big, wistful eyes as she passed out, but
smiled happily when she turned at the door to look back and kiss her
hand to him.

At the next station, where they stopped for a few minutes, he watched
for her anxiously. Just as the train began to pull out he caught a
glimpse of her. There was a flutter of a white handkerchief and a
bundle came flying in through the window.

He looked out quickly, just in time to see her stepping into a
carriage. Then a long line of freight cars obstructed the view. By the
time they had passed them they were beyond even the straggling
outskirts of the village, with wide cornfields stretching in every
direction, and it was of no use to look for her any longer.

Mrs. Estel lost no time in making the young English girl's
acquaintance. She was scarcely settled in her seat before she found an
opportunity. Her umbrella slipped from the rack, and the girl sprang
forward to replace it.

"You have had a tiresome journey," Mrs. Estel remarked pleasantly
after thanking her.

"Yes, indeed, ma'am!" answered the girl, glad of some one to talk to
instead of the children, whose remarks were strictly of an
interrogative nature. It was an easy matter to draw her into
conversation, and in a short time Mrs. Estel was listening to little
scraps of history that made her eyes dim and her heart ache.

[Illustration]

"Do you mind telling me your name?" she asked at length.

"Ellen, ma'am."

"But the other," continued Mrs. Estel.

"We're not to tell, ma'am." Then seeing the look of inquiry on her
face, explained, "Sometimes strangers make trouble, hasking the
little ones hall sorts hof questions; so we've been told not to say
where we're going, nor hany think helse."

"I understand," answered Mrs. Estel quickly. "I ask only because I am
so much interested. I have a little girl at home that I have been away
from for a week, but she has a father and a grandmother and a nurse to
take care of her while I am gone. It makes me feel so sorry for these
poor little things turned out in the world alone."

"Bless you, ma'am!" exclaimed Ellen cheerfully. "The 'omes they're
going to be a sight better than the 'omes they've left behind. Naow
there's 'Enery; 'is mother died hin a drunken fit. 'E never knew
nothink hall 'is life but beating and starving, till the Haid Society
took 'im hin 'and.

"Then there's Sally. Why, Sally's living 'igh naow--hoff the fat hof
the land, has you might say. Heverybody knows 'ow 'er hold huncle
treated 'er!"

Mrs. Estel smiled as she glanced at Sally, to whom the faucet of the
water-cooler seemed a never-failing source of amusement. Ellen had put
a stop to her drinking, which she had been doing at intervals all the
morning, solely for the pleasure of seeing the water stream out when
she turned the stop-cock. Now she had taken a tidy spell. Holding her
bit of a handkerchief under the faucet long enough to get it dripping
wet, she scrubbed herself with the ice-water, until her cheeks shone
like rosy winter apples.

Then she smoothed the wet, elfish-looking hair out of her black eyes,
and proceeded to scrub such of the smaller children as could not
escape from her relentless grasp. Some submitted dumbly, and others
struggled under her vigorous application of the icy rag, but all she
attacked came out clean and shining.

Her dress was wringing wet in front, and the water was standing in
puddles around her feet, when the man who had them in charge came
through the car again. He whisked her impatiently into a seat, setting
her down hard. She made a saucy face behind his back, and began to
sing at the top of her voice.

One little tot had fallen and bumped its head as the train gave a
sudden lurch. It was crying pitifully, but in a subdued sort of
whimper, as if it felt that crying was of no use when nobody listened
and nobody cared. He picked it up, made a clumsy effort to comfort
it, and, not knowing what else to do, sat down beside it. Then for the
first time he noticed Mrs. Estel.

She had taken a pair of scissors from her travelling-bag, and had cut
several newspapers up into soldiers and dolls and all kinds of animals
for the crowd that clamored around her.

They were such restless little bodies, imprisoned so long on this
tedious journey, that anything with a suggestion of novelty was
welcome.

When she had supplied them with a whole regiment of soldiers and
enough animals to equip a menagerie, she took another paper and began
teaching them to fold it in curious ways to make boxes, and boats, and
baskets.

One by one they crowded up closer to her, watching her as if she were
some wonderful magician. They leaned their dusty heads against her
fresh gray travelling-dress. They touched her dainty gloves with
dirty, admiring fingers. They did not know that this was the first
time that she had ever come in close contact with such lives as
theirs.

They did not know that it was the remembrance of another child,--one
who awaited her home-coming,--a petted little princess born to purple
and fine linen, that made her so tender towards them. Remembering what
hers had, and all these lacked, she felt that she must crowd all the
brightness possible into the short afternoon they were together.

Every one of them, at some time in their poor bare lives, had known
what it was to be kindly spoken to by elegant ladies, to be
patronizingly smiled upon, to be graciously presented with gifts.

But this was different. This one took the little Hodge girl right up
in her lap while she was telling them stories. This one did not pick
out the pretty ones to talk to, as strangers generally did. It really
seemed that the most neglected and unattractive of them received the
most of her attention.

From time to time she glanced across at Robin's lovely face, and
contrasted it with the others. The older boy attracted her still more.
He seemed to be the only thoughtful one among them all. The others
remembered no past, looked forward to no future. When they were hungry
there was something to eat. When they were tired they could sleep, and
all the rest of the time there was somebody to play with. What more
could one want?

The child never stirred from his place, but she noticed that he made a
constant effort to entertain Robin. He told him stories and invented
little games. When the bundle came flying in through the window he
opened it with eager curiosity.

Grace had hurried into the village store as soon as the train stopped
and had bought the first toy she happened to see. It was a black
dancing bear, worked by a tiny crank hidden under the bar on which it
stood. Robin's pleasure was unbounded, and his shrieks of delight
brought all the children flocking around him.

"More dancin', Big Brother," he would insist, when the animal paused.
"Robin wants to see more dancin'."

So patient little "Big Brother" kept on turning the crank, long after
every one save Robin was tired of the black bear's antics.

Once she saw the restless 'Enry trying to entice him into a game of
tag in the aisle. Big Brother shook his head, and the fat little legs
clambered up on the seat again. Robin watched Mrs. Estel with such
longing eyes as she entertained the others that she beckoned to him
several times to join them, but he only bobbed his curls gravely and
leaned farther back in his seat.

Presently the man strolled down the aisle again to close a window, out
of which one fidgety boy kept leaning to spit at the flying telegraph
poles. On his way back Mrs. Estel stopped him.

"Will you please tell me about those two children?" she asked,
glancing towards Robin and his brother. "I am very much interested in
them, and would gladly do something for them, if I could."

"Certainly, madam," he replied deferentially. He felt a personal sense
of gratitude towards her for having kept three of his most unruly
charges quiet so long. He felt, too, that she did not ask merely from
idle curiosity, as so many strangers had done.

"Yes, everybody asks about them, for they _are_ uncommon
bright-looking, but it's very little anybody knows to tell."

Then he gave her their history in a few short sentences. Their father
had been killed in a railroad accident early in the spring. Their
mother had not survived the terrible shock more than a week. No trace
could be found of any relatives, and there was no property left to
support them. Several good homes had been offered to the children
singly in different towns, but no one was willing to take both. They
clung together in such an agony of grief, when an attempt was made at
separation, that no one had the heart to part them.

Then some one connected with the management of the Aid Society opened
a correspondence with an old farmer of his acquaintance out West. It
ended in his offering to take them both for a while. His married
daughter, who had no children of her own, was so charmed with Robin's
picture that she wanted to adopt him. She could not be ready to take
him, though, before they moved into their new house, which they were
building several miles away. The old farmer wanted the older boy to
help him with his market gardening, and was willing to keep the little
one until his daughter was ready to take him. So they could be
together for a while, and virtually they would always remain in the
same family.

Mr. Dearborn was known to be such an upright, reliable man, so
generous and kind-hearted in all his dealings, that it was decided to
accept his offer.

"Do they go much farther?" asked the interested listener, when he had
told her all he knew of the desolate little pilgrims.

"Only a few miles the other side of Kenton," he answered.

"Why, Kenton is where I live," she exclaimed. "I am glad it will be so
near." Then as he passed on she thought to herself, "It would be cruel
to separate them. I never saw such devotion as that of the older boy."
His feet could not reach the floor, but he sat up uncomfortably on the
high seat, holding Robin in his lap. The curly head rested heavily on
his shoulder, and his arms ached with their burden, but he never moved
except to brush away the flies, or fan the flushed face of the little
sleeper with his hat.

Something in the tired face, the large appealing eyes, and the droop
of the sensitive mouth, touched her deeply. She crossed the aisle and
sat down by him.

"Here, lay him on the seat," she said, bending forward to arrange her
shawl for a pillow.

He shook his head. "Robin likes best for me to hold him."

"But he will be cooler and so much more comfortable," she urged.
Taking the child from his unwilling arms, she stretched him full
length on the improvised bed.

Involuntarily the boy drew a deep sigh of relief, and leaned back in
the corner.

"Are you very tired?" she asked. "I have not seen you playing with the
other children."

"Yes'm," he answered. "We've come such a long way. I have to amuse
Robin all the time he's awake, or he'll cry to go back home."

"Where was your home?" she asked kindly. "Tell me about it."

He glanced up at her, and with a child's quick instinct knew that he
had found a friend. The tears that he had been bravely holding back
all the afternoon for Robin's sake could no longer be restrained. He
sat for a minute trying to wink them away. Then he laid his head
wearily down on the window sill and gave way to his grief with great
choking sobs.

She put her arm around him and drew his head down on her shoulder. At
first the caressing touch of her fingers, as they gently stroked his
hair, made the tears flow faster. Then he grew quieter after a while,
and only sobbed at long intervals as he answered her questions.

His name was Steven, he said. He knew nothing of the home to which he
was being taken, nor did he care, if he could only be allowed to stay
with Robin. He told her of the little white cottage in New Jersey,
where they had lived, of the peach-trees that bloomed around the
house, of the beehive in the garden.

He had brooded over the recollection of his lost home so long in
silence that now it somehow comforted him to talk about it to this
sympathetic listener.

[Illustration]

Soothed by her soft hand smoothing his hair, and exhausted by the heat
and his violent grief, he fell asleep at last. It was almost dark when
he awoke and sat up.

"I must leave you at the next station," Mrs. Estel said, "but you are
going only a few miles farther. Maybe I shall see you again some day."
She left him to fasten her shawl-strap, but presently came back,
bringing a beautifully illustrated story-book that she had bought for
the little daughter at home.

"Here, Steven," she said, handing it to him. "I have written my name
and address on the fly-leaf. If you ever need a friend, dear, or are
in trouble of any kind, let me know and I will help you."

He had known her only a few hours, yet, when she kissed him good-by
and the train went whirling on again, he felt that he had left his
last friend behind him.

When one is a child a month is a long time. Grandfathers say, "That
happened over seventy years ago, but it seems just like yesterday."
Grandchildren say, "Why, it was only yesterday we did that, but so
much has happened since that it seems such a great while!"

One summer day can stretch out like a lifetime at life's beginning. It
is only at threescore and ten that we liken it to a weaver's shuttle.

It was in July when old John Dearborn drove to the station to meet the
children. Now the white August lilies were standing up sweet and tall
by the garden fence.

"Seems like we've been here 'most always," said Steven as they rustled
around in the hay hunting eggs. His face had lost its expression of
sadness, so pathetic in a child, as day after day Robin's little feet
pattered through the old homestead, and no one came to take him away.

Active outdoor life had put color in his face and energy into his
movements. Mr. Dearborn and his wife were not exacting in their
demands, although they found plenty for him to do. The work was all
new and pleasant, and Robin was with him everywhere. When he fed the
turkeys, when he picked up chips, when he drove the cows to pasture,
or gathered the vegetables for market, Robin followed him everywhere,
like a happy, dancing shadow.

[Illustration]

Then when the work was done there were the kittens in the barn and the
swing in the apple-tree. A pond in the pasture sailed their shingle
boats. A pile of sand, left from building the new ice-house,
furnished material for innumerable forts and castles. There was a
sunny field and a green, leafy orchard. How could they _help but be
happy?_ It was summer time and they were together.

Steven's was more than a brotherly devotion. It was with almost the
tenderness of mother-love that he watched the shining curls dancing
down the walk as Robin chased the toads through the garden or played
hide-and-seek with the butterflies.

"No, the little fellow's scarcely a mite of trouble," Mrs. Dearborn
would say to the neighbors sometimes when they inquired. "Steven is
real handy about dressing him and taking care of him, so I just leave
it mostly to him."

Mrs. Dearborn was not a very observing woman or she would have seen
why he "was scarcely a mite of trouble." If there was never a crumb
left on the doorstep where Robin sat to eat his lunch, it was because
Big Brother's careful fingers had picked up every one. If she never
found any tracks of little bare feet on the freshly scrubbed kitchen
floor, it was because his watchful eyes had spied them first, and he
had wiped away every trace.

He had an instinctive feeling that if he would keep Robin with him he
must not let any one feel that he was a care or annoyance. So he never
relaxed his watchfulness in the daytime, and slept with one arm thrown
across him at night.

Sometimes, after supper, when it was too late to go outdoors again,
the restless little feet kicked thoughtlessly against the furniture,
or the meddlesome fingers made Mrs. Dearborn look at him warningly
over her spectacles and shake her head.

[Illustration]

Sometimes the shrill little voice, with its unceasing questions,
seemed to annoy the old farmer as he dozed over his weekly newspaper
beside the lamp. Then, if it was too early to go to bed, Steven would
coax him over in a corner to look at the book that Mrs. Estel had
given him, explaining each picture in a low voice that could not
disturb the deaf old couple.

It was at these times that the old feeling of loneliness came back so
overwhelmingly. Grandpa and Grandma, as they called them, were kind in
their way, but even to their own children they had been
undemonstrative and cold. Often in the evenings they seemed to draw so
entirely within themselves, she with her knitting and he with his
paper or accounts, that Steven felt shut out, and apart. "Just the
strangers within thy gates," he sometimes thought to himself. He had
heard that expression a long time ago, and it often came back to him.
Then he would put his arm around Robin and hug him up close, feeling
that the world was so big and lonesome, and that he had no one else to
care for but him.

Sometimes he took him up early to the little room under the roof, and,
lying on the side of the bed, made up more marvellous stories than any
the book contained.

Often they drew the big wooden rocking-chair close to the window, and,
sitting with their arms around each other, looked out on the moonlit
stillness of the summer night. Then, with their eyes turned starward,
they talked of the far country beyond; for Steven tried to keep
undimmed in Robin's baby memory a living picture of the father and
mother he was so soon forgetting.

"Don't you remember," he would say, "how papa used to come home in the
evening and take us both on his knees, and sing 'Kingdom Coming' to
us? And how mamma laughed and called him a big boy when he got down on
the floor and played circus with us?

"And don't you remember how we helped mamma make cherry pie for dinner
one day? You were on the doorstep with some dough in your hands, and a
greedy old hen came up and gobbled it right out of your fingers."

Robin would laugh out gleefully at each fresh reminiscence, and then
say: "Tell some more r'members, Big Brother!" And so Big Brother would
go on until a curly head drooped over on his shoulder and a sleepy
voice yawned "Sand-man's a-comin'."

The hands that undressed him were as patient and deft as a woman's. He
missed no care or tenderness.

When he knelt down in his white gown, just where the patch of
moonlight lay on the floor, his chubby hands crossed on Big Brother's
knee, there was a gentle touch of caressing fingers on his curls as
his sleepy voice repeated the evening prayer the far away mother had
taught them.

There was always one ceremony that had to be faithfully performed, no
matter how sleepy he might be. The black dancing bear had always to be
put to bed in a cracker box and covered with a piece of red flannel.

[Illustration]

One night he looked up gravely as he folded it around his treasure and
said, "Robin tucks ze black dancin' bear in bed, an' Big Brother tucks
in Robin. Who puts Big Brother to bed?"

"Nobody, now," answered Steven with a quivering lip, for his child's
heart ached many a night for the lullaby and bedtime petting he so
sorely missed.

"Gramma Deebun do it?" suggested Robin quickly.

"No: Grandma Dearborn has the rheumatism. She couldn't walk
up-stairs."

"She got ze wizzim-tizzim," echoed Robin solemnly. Then his face
lighted up with a happy thought. "Nev' mind; Robin'll put Big Brother
to bed _all_ ze nights when he's a man." And Big Brother kissed the
sweet mouth and was comforted.

During the summer Mr. Dearborn drove to town with fresh marketing
every morning, starting early in order to get home by noon. Saturdays
he took Steven with him, for that was the day he supplied his butter
customers.

The first time the boy made the trip he carried Mrs. Estel's address
in his pocket, which he had carefully copied from the fly-leaf of the
book she had given him. Although he had not the remotest expectation
of seeing her, there was a sense of companionship in the mere thought
that she was in the same town with him.

He watched the lamp-posts carefully as they went along, spelling out
the names of the streets. All of a sudden his heart gave a bound. They
had turned a corner and were driving along Fourth Avenue. He took the
slip of paper from his pocket. Yes, he was right. That was the name of
the street. Then he began to watch for the numbers. 200, 300, 400;
they passed on several more blocks. Mr. Dearborn drove up to the
pavement and handed him the reins to hold, while he took the crock of
butter into the house. Steven glanced up at the number. It was 812.
Then the next one--no, the one after that--must be the place.

It was a large, elegant house, handsomer than any they had passed on
the avenue. As long as it was in sight Steven strained his eyes for a
backward look, but saw no one.

Week after week he watched and waited, but the blinds were always
closed, and he saw no signs of life about the place. Then one day he
saw a carriage stop at the gate. A lady all in black stepped out and
walked slowly towards the house. Her long, heavy veil hid her face,
but he thought he recognized her. He was almost sure it was Mrs.
Estel. He could hardly resist the inclination to run after her and
speak to her; but while he hesitated the great hall door swung back
and shut her from sight. He wondered what great trouble had come to
her that she should be dressed in deep black.

The hope of seeing her was the only thing about his weekly trips to
town that he anticipated with any pleasure. It nearly always happened
that some time during the morning while he was gone Robin got into
trouble. Nobody seemed to think that the reason the child was usually
so good was due largely to Steven's keeping him happily employed. He
always tried to contrive something to keep him busy part of the
morning; but Robin found no pleasure very long in solitary pursuits,
and soon abandoned them.

[Illustration]

Once he took a ball of yarn from the darning-basket to roll after the
white kitten. He did not mean to be mischievous any more than the
white kitten did, but the ball was part of Grandma Dearborn's knitting
work. When she found the needles pulled out and the stitches dropped,
she scolded him sharply. All her children had been grown up so long
she had quite forgotten how to make allowances for things of that
sort.

There was a basket of stiff, highly colored wax fruit on the
marble-topped table in the parlor. Miss Barbara Dearborn had made it
at boarding-school and presented it to her sister-in-law many years
before. How Robin ever managed to lift off the glass case without
breaking it no one ever knew. That he had done so was evident, for in
every waxen red-cheeked pear and slab-sided apple were the prints of
his sharp little teeth. It seemed little short of sacrilege to Mrs.
Dearborn, whose own children had regarded it for years from an
admiring distance, fearing to lay unlawful fingers even on the glass
case that protected such a work of art.

He dropped a big white china button into the cake dough when Molly,
"the help," had her back turned. It was all ready to be baked, and she
unsuspectingly whisked the pan into the oven. Company came to tea,
and Grandpa Dearborn happened to take the slice of cake that had the
button in it. Manlike, he called everyone's attention to it, and his
wife was deeply mortified.

He left the pasture gate open so that the calves got into the garden.
He broke Grandpa Dearborn's shaving-mug, and spilled the lather all
over himself and the lavender bows of the best pin-cushion. He untied
a bag that had been left in the window to sun, to see what made it
feel so soft inside. It was a bag of feathers saved from the pickings
of many geese. He was considerably startled when the down flew in all
directions, sticking to carpet and curtains, and making Molly much
extra work on the busiest day in the week.

But the worst time was when Steven came home to find him sitting in a
corner, crying bitterly, one hand tied to his chair. He had been put
there for punishment. It seemed that busy morning that everything he
touched made trouble for somebody. At last his exploring little
fingers found the plug of the patent churn. The next minute he was a
woebegone spectacle, with the fresh buttermilk pouring down on him,
and spreading in creamy rivers all over the dairy floor.

These weekly trips were times of great anxiety for Steven. He never
knew what fresh trouble might greet him on his return.

One day they sold out much earlier than usual. It was only eleven
o'clock when they reached home. Grandma Dearborn was busy preparing
dinner. Robin was not in sight. As soon as Steven had helped to
unhitch the horses he ran into the house to look for him. There was no
answer to his repeated calls. He searched all over the garden,
thinking maybe the child was hiding from him and might jump out any
moment from behind a tree.

He was beginning to feel alarmed when he saw two little bare feet
slowly waving back and forth above the tall orchard grass. He slipped
over the fence and noiselessly along under the apple-trees. Robin was
lying on his stomach watching something on the ground so intently that
sometimes the bare feet forgot to wave over his back and were held up
motionless.

With one hand he was pulling along at a snail's pace a green leaf, on
which a dead bumble-bee lay in state. With the other he was keeping in
order a funeral procession of caterpillars. It was a motley crowd of
mourners that the energetic forefinger urged along the line of march.
He had evidently collected them from many quarters,--little green
worms that spun down from the apple boughs overhead; big furry brown
caterpillars that had hurried along the honeysuckle trellis to escape
his fat fingers; spotted ones and striped ones; horned and smooth.
They all straggled along, each one travelling his own gait, each one
bent on going a different direction, but all kept in line by that
short determined forefinger.

Steven laughed so suddenly that the little master of ceremonies jumped
up and turned a startled face towards him. Then he saw that there were
traces of tears on the dimpled face and one eye was swollen nearly
shut.

"O Robin! what is it now?" he cried in distress. "How did you hurt
yourself so dreadfully?"

"Ole bumble!" answered Robin, pointing to the leaf. "He flied in ze
kitchen an' sat down in ze apple peelin's. I jus' poked him, nen he
flied up and bit me. He's dead now," he added triumphantly. "Gramma
killed him. See all ze cattow-pillows walkin' in ze p'cession?"

So the days slipped by in the old farmhouse. Frost nipped the gardens,
and summer vanished entirely from orchard and field. The happy
outdoor life was at an end, and Robin was like a caged squirrel.
Steven had his hands full keeping him amused and out of the way.

"Well, my lad, isn't it about time for you to be starting to school?"
Mr. Dearborn would ask occasionally. "You know I agreed to send you
every winter, and I must live up to my promises."

But Steven made first one pretext and then another for delay. He knew
he could not take Robin with him. He knew, too, how restless and
troublesome the child would become if left at home all day.

So he could not help feeling glad when Molly went home on a visit,
and Grandma Dearborn said her rheumatism was so bad that she needed
his help. True, he had all sorts of tasks that he heartily
despised,--washing dishes, kneading dough, sweeping and dusting,--all
under the critical old lady's exacting supervision. But he preferred
even that to being sent off to school alone every day.

One evening, just about sundown, he was out in the corncrib, shelling
corn for the large flock of turkeys they were fattening for market. He
heard Grandma Dearborn go into the barn, where her husband was
milking. They were both a little deaf, and she spoke loud in order to
be heard above the noise of the milk pattering into the pail. She had
come out to look at one of the calves they intended selling.

"It's too bad," he heard her say, after a while. "Rindy has just set
her heart on him, but Arad, he thinks it's all foolishness to get such
a young one. He's willing to take one big enough to do the chores, but
he doesn't want to feed and keep what 'ud only be a care to 'em. He
always was closer'n the bark on a tree. After all, I'd hate to see the
little fellow go."

"Yes," was the answer, "he's a likely lad; but we're gettin' old,
mother, and one is about all we can do well by. Sometimes I think
maybe we've bargained for too much, tryin' to keep even _one_. So it's
best to let the little one go before we get to settin' sech store by
him that we can't."

A vague terror seized Steven as he realized who it was they were
talking about. He lay awake a long time that night smoothing Robin's
tangled curls, and crying at the thought of the motherless baby away
among strangers, with no one to snuggle him up warm or sing him to
sleep. Then there was another thought that wounded him deeply. Twist
it whichever way he might, he could construe Mr. Dearborn's last
remark to mean but one thing. They considered him a burden. How many
plans he made night after night before he fell asleep! He would take
Robin by the hand in the morning, and they would slip away and wander
off to the woods together. They could sleep in barns at night, and he
could stop at the farmhouses and do chores to pay for what they ate.
Then they need not be a trouble to any one. Maybe in the summer they
could find a nice dry cave to live in. Lots of people had lived that
way. Then in a few years he would be big enough to have a house of his
own. All sorts of improbable plans flocked into his little brain under
cover of the darkness, but always vanished when the daylight came.

The next Saturday that they went to town was a cold, blustering day.
They started late, taking a lunch with them, not intending to come
home until the middle of the afternoon.

The wind blew a perfect gale by the time they reached town. Mr.
Dearborn stopped his team in front of one of the principal groceries,
saying, "Hop out, Steven, and see what they're paying for turkeys
to-day."

As he sprang over the wheel an old gentleman came running around the
corner after his hat, which the wind had carried away.

Steven caught it and gave it to him. He clapped it on his bald crown
with a good-natured laugh. "Thanky, sonny!" he exclaimed heartily.
Then he disappeared inside the grocery just as Mr. Dearborn called
out, "I believe I'll hitch the horses and go in too; I'm nearly
frozen."

Steven followed him into the grocery, and they stood with their hands
spread out to the stove while they waited for the proprietor. He was
talking to the old gentleman whose hat Steven had rescued.

He seemed to be a very particular kind of customer.

"Oh, go on! go on!" he exclaimed presently. "Wait on those other
people while I make up my mind."

While Mr. Dearborn was settling the price of his turkeys, the old
gentleman poked around like an inquisitive boy, thumping the pumpkins,
smelling the coffee, and taking occasional picks at the raisins.
Presently he stopped in front of Steven with a broad, friendly smile
on his face.

"You're from the country, ain't you?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," answered Steven in astonishment.

"Came from there myself, once," he continued with a chuckle. "Law,
law! You'd never think it now. Fifty years makes a heap o'
difference."

He took another turn among the salt barrels and cracker boxes, then
asked suddenly, "What's your name, sonny?"

"Steven," answered the boy, still more surprised.

The old fellow gave another chuckle and rubbed his hands together
delightedly. "Just hear that, will you!" he exclaimed. "Why, that's my
name, my very own name, sir! Well, well, well, well!"

He stared at the child until he began to feel foolish and
uncomfortable. What image of his own vanished youth did that boyish
face recall to the eccentric old banker?

As Mr. Dearborn turned to go Steven started after him.

"Hold on, sonny," called the old gentleman, "I want to shake hands
with my namesake."

He pressed a shining half-dollar into the little mittened hand held
out to him.

"That's for good luck," he said. "I was a boy myself, once. Law, law!
Sometimes I wish I could have stayed one."

Steven hardly knew whether to keep it or not, or what to say. The old
gentleman had resumed conversation with the proprietor and waved him
off impatiently.

"I'll get Robin some candy and save all the rest till Christmas," was
his first thought; but there was such a bewildering counter full of
toys on one side of the confectioner's shop that he couldn't make up
his mind to wait that long.

He bought some shining sticks of red and white peppermint and turned
to the toys. There was a tiny sailboat with a little wooden sailor on
deck; but Robin would always be dabbling in the water if he got that.
A tin horse and cart caught his eye. That would make such a clatter on
the bare kitchen floor.

At last he chose a gay yellow jumping-jack. All the way home he kept
feeling the two little bundles in his pocket. He could not help
smiling when the gables of the old house came in sight, thinking how
delighted Robin would be.

He could hardly wait till the horses were put away and fed, and he
changed impatiently from one foot to another, while Mr. Dearborn
searched in the straw of the wagon-bed for a missing package of
groceries. Then he ran to the house and into the big, warm kitchen,
all out of breath.

"Robin," he called, as he laid the armful of groceries on the kitchen
table, "look what Brother's brought you. Why, where's Robin?" he asked
of Mrs. Dearborn, who was busy stirring something on the stove for
supper. She had her back turned and did not answer.

"Where's Robin," he asked again, peering all around to see where the
bright curls were hiding.

She turned around and looked at him over her spectacles. "Well, I
s'pose I may's well tell you one time as another," she said
reluctantly. "Rindy came for him to-day. We talked it over and
thought, as long as there had to be a separation, it would be easier
for you both, and save a scene, if you wasn't here to see him go. He's
got a good home, and Rindy'll be kind to him."

Steven looked at her in bewilderment, then glanced around the cheerful
kitchen. His slate lay on a chair where Robin had been scribbling and
making pictures. The old cat that Robin had petted and played with
that very morning purred comfortably under the stove. The corncob
house he had built was still in the corner. Surely he could not be so
very far away.

He opened the stair door and crept slowly up the steps to their little
room. He could scarcely distinguish anything at first, in the dim
light of the winter evening, but he saw enough to know that the little
straw hat with the torn brim that he had worn in the summer time was
not hanging on its peg behind the door. He looked in the washstand
drawer, where his dresses were kept. It was empty. He opened the
closet door. The new copper-toed shoes, kept for best, were gone, but
hanging in one corner was the little checked gingham apron he had worn
that morning.

Steven took it down. There was the torn place by the pocket, and the
patch on the elbow. He kissed the ruffle that had been buttoned under
the dimpled chin, and the little sleeves that had clung around his
neck so closely that morning. Then, with it held tight in his arms, he
threw himself on the bed, sobbing over and over, "It's too cruel! It's
too cruel! They didn't even let me tell him good-by!"

He did not go down to supper when Mrs. Dearborn called him, so she
went up after a while with a glass of milk and a doughnut.

"There, there!" she said soothingly; "don't take it so hard. Try and
eat something; you'll feel better if you do."

Steven tried to obey, but every mouthful choked him. "Rindy'll be
awful good to him," she said after a long pause. "She thinks he's the
loveliest child she ever set eyes on, but she was afraid her husband
would think he was too much of a baby if she took him home with those
long curls on. She cut 'em off before they started, and I saved 'em. I
knew you'd be glad to have 'em."

She lit the candle on the washstand and handed him a paper. He sat up
and opened it. There lay the soft, silky curls, shining like gold in
the candle-light, as they twined around his fingers. It was more than
he could bear. His very lips grew white.

Mrs. Dearborn was almost frightened. She could not understand how a
child's grief could be so deep and passionate.

He drew them fondly over his wet cheeks, and pressed them against his
quivering lips. Then laying his face down on them, he cried till he
could cry no longer, and sleep came to his relief.

Next morning, when Steven pulled the window curtain aside, he seemed
to be looking out on another world. The first snow of the winter
covered every familiar object, and he thought, in his childish way,
that last night's experience had altered his life as the snowdrifts
had changed the landscape.

He ate his breakfast and did up the morning chores mechanically. He
seemed to be in a dream, and wondered dully to himself why he did not
cry when he felt so bad.

When the work was all done he stood idly looking out of the window. He
wanted to get away from the house where everything he saw made his
heart ache with the suggestion of Robin.

"I believe I'd like to go to church to-day," he said in a listless
tone.

[Illustration]

"Yes, I'd go if I were you," assented Mr. Dearborn readily. "Mother
and me'll have to stay by the fire to-day, but I've no doubt it'll
chirk you up a bit to get outdoors a spell."

He started off, plodding through the deep snow.

"Takes it easier than I thought he would," said Mr. Dearborn. "Well,
troubles never set very hard on young shoulders. He'll get over it in
a little while."

As Steven emerged from the lane into the big road he saw a sleigh
coming towards him, driven by the doctor's son. As it drew nearer a
sudden thought came to him like an inspiration.

"O Harvey!" he cried, running forward. "Will you take me with you as
far as Simpson's?"

"Why, yes, I guess so," answered the boy good-naturedly.

He was not surprised at the request, knowing that Mrs. Dearborn and
Mrs. Simpson were sisters, and supposing that Steven had been sent on
some errand.

It was three miles to the Simpson place, but they seemed to have
reached it in as many minutes. Harvey turned off towards his own home,
while Steven climbed out and hurried along the public road.

"Half-way there!" he said to himself. He was going to town to find
Mrs. Estel.

He was a long time on the way. A piercing wind began to blow, and a
blinding snow-storm beat in his face. He was numb with cold, hungry,
and nearly exhausted. But he thought of little Robin fifteen miles
away, crying at the strange faces around him; and for his sake he
stumbled bravely on.

He had seen Mrs. Dearborn's daughter several times. She was a kind,
good-natured woman, half-way afraid of her husband. As for Arad
Pierson himself, Steven had conceived a strong dislike. He was
quick-tempered and rough, with a loud, coarse way of speaking that
always startled the sensitive child.

Suppose Robin should refuse to be comforted, and his crying annoyed
them. Could that black-browed, heavy-fisted man be cruel enough to
whip such a baby? Steven knew that he would.

The thought spurred him on. It seemed to him that he had been days on
the road when he reached the house at last, and stood shivering on the
steps while he waited for some one to answer his timid ring.

"No, you can't speak to Mrs. Estel," said the pompous colored man who
opened the door, and who evidently thought that he had come on some
beggar's mission. "She never sees any one now, and I'm sure she
wouldn't see you."

"Oh, _please_!" cried Steven desperately, as the door was about to be
shut in his face. "She told me to come, and I've walked miles through
the storm, and I'm so cold and tired! Oh, I _can't_ go back without
seeing her."

His high, piercing voice almost wailed out the words. Had he come so
far only to be disappointed at last?

"What is it, Alec?" he heard some one call gently.

He recognized the voice, and in his desperation darted past the man
into the wide reception hall.

He saw the sweet face of the lady, who came quickly forward, and heard
her say, "Why, what is the matter, my child?"

Then, overcome by the sudden change from the cold storm to the
tropical warmth of the room, he dropped on the floor, exhausted and
unconscious.

It was a long time before Mrs. Estel succeeded in thoroughly reviving
him. Then he lay on a wide divan with his head on her lap, and talked
quietly of his trouble.

He was too worn out to cry, even when he took the soft curls from his
pocket to show her. But her own recent loss had made her vision keen,
and she saw the depth of suffering in the boy's white face. As she
twisted the curls around her finger and thought of her own fair-haired
little one, with the deep snow drifting over its grave, her tears fell
fast.

She made a sudden resolution. "You shall come here," she said. "I
thought when my little Dorothy died I could never bear to hear a
child's voice again, knowing that hers was still. But such grief is
selfish. We will help each other bear ours together. Would you like to
come, dear?"

Steven sat up, trembling in his great excitement.

"O Mrs. Estel!" he cried, "couldn't you take Robin instead? I could be
happy anywhere if I only knew he was taken care of. You are so
different from the Piersons. I wouldn't feel bad if he was with you,
and I could see him every week. He is so pretty and sweet you couldn't
help loving him!"

She stooped and kissed him. "You dear, unselfish child, you make me
want you more than ever."

Then she hesitated. She could not decide a matter involving so much in
a moment's time. Steven, she felt, would be a comfort to her, but
Robin could be only a care. Lately she had felt the mere effort of
living to be a burden, and she did not care to make any exertion for
any one else.

All the brightness and purpose seemed to drop out of her life the day
that little Dorothy was taken away. Her husband had tried everything
in his power to arouse her from her hopeless despondency, but she
refused to be comforted.

Steven's trouble had touched the first responsive chord. She looked
down into his expectant face, feeling that she could not bear to
disappoint him, yet unwilling to make a promise that involved personal
exertion.

Then she answered slowly, "I wish my husband were here. I cannot give
you an answer without consulting him. Then, you see the society that
sent you out here probably has some written agreement with these
people, and if they do not want to give him up we might find it a
difficult matter to get him. Mr. Estel will be home in a few days, and
he will see what can be done."

That morning when Steven had been seized with a sudden impulse to find
Mrs. Estel he had no definite idea of what she could do to help him.
It had never occurred to him for an instant that she would offer to
take either of them to live with her. He thought only of that
afternoon on the train, when her sympathy had comforted him so much,
and of her words at parting: "If you ever need a friend, dear, or are
in trouble of any kind, let me know and I will help you." It was that
promise that lured him on all that weary way through the cold
snow-storm.

With a child's implicit confidence he turned to her, feeling that in
some way or other she would make it all right. It was a great
disappointment when he found she could do nothing immediately, and
that it might be weeks before he could see Robin again.

Still, after seeing her and pouring out his troubles, he felt like a
different boy. Such a load seemed lifted from his shoulders. He
actually laughed while repeating some of Robin's queer little speeches
to her. Only that morning he had felt that he could not even smile
again.

Dinner cheered him up still more. When the storm had abated, Mrs.
Estel wrapped him up and sent him home in her sleigh, telling him that
she wanted him to spend Thanksgiving Day with her. She thought she
would know by that time whether she could take Robin or not. At any
rate, she wanted him to come, and if he would tell Mr. Dearborn to
bring her a turkey on his next market day, she would ask his
permission.

All the way home Steven wondered nervously what the old people would
say to him. He dreaded to see the familiar gate, and the ride came to
an end so very soon. To his great relief he found that they had
scarcely noticed his absence. Their only son and his family had come
unexpectedly from the next State to stay over Thanksgiving, and
everything else had been forgotten in their great surprise.

The days that followed were full of pleasant anticipations for the
family. Steven went in and out among them, helping busily with the
preparations, but strangely silent among all the merriment.

Mr. Dearborn took his son to town with him the next market day, and
Steven was left at home to wait and wonder what message Mrs. Estel
might send him.

He hung around until after his usual bedtime, on their return, but
could not muster up courage to ask. The hope that had sprung up
within him flickered a little fainter each new day, until it almost
died out.

It was a happy group that gathered around the breakfast table early on
Thanksgiving morning.

"All here but Rindy," said Mr. Dearborn, looking with smiling eyes
from his wife to his youngest grandchild. "It's too bad she couldn't
come, but Arad invited all his folks to spend the day there; so she
had to give up and stay at home. Well, we're all alive and well,
anyhow. That's my greatest cause for thankfulness. What's yours,
Jane?" he asked, nodding towards his wife.

As the question passed around the table, Steven's thoughts went back
to the year before, when their little family had all been together. He
remembered how pretty his mother had looked that morning in her
dark-blue dress. There was a bowl of yellow chrysanthemums blooming on
the table, and a streak of sunshine, falling across them and on
Robin's hair, seemed to turn them both to gold. Now he was all alone.
The contrast was too painful. He slipped from the table unobserved,
and stole noiselessly up the back stairs to his room. The little
checked apron was hanging on a chair by the window. He sat down and
laid his face against it, but his eyes were dry. He had not cried any
since that first dreadful night.

There was such a lively clatter of dishes downstairs and babel of
voices that he did not hear a sleigh drive up in the soft snow.

"Steven," called Mr. Dearborn from the foot of the stairs, "I promised
Mrs. Estel to let you spend the day with her, but there was so much
goin' on I plum forgot to tell you. You're to stay all night too, she
says."

The ride to town seemed endless to the impatient boy. He was burning
with a feverish anxiety to know about Robin, but the driver whom he
questioned could not tell.

"Mrs. Estel will be down presently," was the message with which he was
ushered into the long drawing-room. He sat down uncomfortably on the
edge of a chair to wait. He almost dreaded to hear her coming for fear
she might tell him that the Piersons would not give Robin up. Maybe
her husband had not come home when she expected him. Maybe he had been
too busy to attend to the matter. A dozen possible calamities
presented themselves.

Unconsciously he held himself so rigid in his expectancy that he
fairly ached. Ten minutes dragged by, with only the crackle of the
fire on the hearth to disturb the silence of the great room.

Then light feet pattered down the stairs and ran across the broad
hall. The _portiere_ was pushed aside and a bright little face looked
in. In another instant Robin's arms were around his neck, and he was
crying over and over in an ecstasy of delight, "Oh, it's Big Brother!
It's Big Brother!"

Not far away down the avenue a great church organ was rolling out its
accompaniment to a Thanksgiving anthem. Steven could not hear the
words the choir chanted, but the deep music of the organ seemed to him
to be but the echo of what was throbbing in his own heart.

There was no lack of childish voices and merry laughter in the great
house that afternoon. A spirit of thanksgiving was in the very
atmosphere. No one could see the overflowing happiness of the children
without sharing it in some degree.

More than once during dinner Mrs. Estel looked across the table at her
husband and smiled as she had not in months.

Along in the afternoon the winter sunshine tempted the children out of
doors, and they commenced to build a snow man. They tugged away at the
huge image, with red cheeks and sparkling eyes, so full of
out-breaking fun that the passers-by stopped to smile at the sight.

Mrs. Estel stood at the library window watching them. Once, when
Robin's fat little legs stumbled and sent him rolling over in the
snow, she could not help laughing at the comical sight.

It was a low, gentle laugh, but Mr. Estel heard, and, laying aside his
newspaper, joined her at the window. He had almost despaired of ever
seeing a return to the old sunny charm of face and manner.

[Illustration]

They stood there together in silence a few moments, watching the two
romping boys, who played on, unconscious of an audience.

"What a rare, unselfish disposition that little 'Big Brother' has!"
Mr. Estel said presently. "It shows itself even in their play." Then
he added warmly, turning to his wife, "Dora, it would be downright
cruel to send him away from that little chap."

He paused a moment. "We used to find our greatest pleasure in making
Dorothy happy. We lavished everything on her. Now we can never do
anything more for her."

There was another long pause, while he turned his head away and looked
out of the window.

"Think what a lifelong happiness it is in our power to give those
children! Dora, can't we make room for both of them for her sake?"

Mrs. Estel hesitated, then laid both her hands in his, bravely smiling
back her tears. "Yes, I'll try," she said, "for little Dorothy's
sake."

That night, as Steven undressed Robin and tucked him up snugly in the
little white bed, he felt that nothing could add to his great
happiness. He sat beside him humming an old tune their mother had
often sung to them, in the New Jersey home so far away.

The blue eyes closed, but still he kept on humming softly to himself,
"Oh, happy day! happy day!"

Presently Mrs. Estel came in and drew a low rocking-chair up to the
fire. Steven slipped from his place by Robin's pillow and sat down on
the rug beside her.

Sitting there in the fire-light, she told him all about her visit to
the Piersons. They had found Robin so unmanageable and so different
from what they expected that they were glad to get rid of him. Mr.
Estel had arranged matters satisfactorily with the Society, and they
had brought Robin home several days ago.

"I had a long talk with Mr. Dearborn the other day," she continued.
"He said his wife's health is failing, and their son is trying to
persuade them to break up housekeeping and live with them. If she is
no better in the spring, they will probably do so."

"Would they want me to go?" asked Steven anxiously.

"It may be so; I cannot tell."

Steven looked up timidly. "I've been wanting all day to say thank you,
the way I feel it; but somehow, the right words won't come. I can't
tell you how it is, but it seems 'most like sending Robin back home
for you and Mr. Estel to have him. Somehow, your ways and everything
seem so much like mamma's and papa's, and when I think about him
having such a lovely home, oh, it just seems like this is a
Thanksgiving Day that will last _always_!"

She drew his head against her knee and stroked it tenderly. "Then how
would you like to live here yourself, dear?" she asked. "Mr. Estel
thinks that we need two boys."

"Oh, does he really want me, too? It's too good to be true!" Steven
was kneeling beside her now, his eyes shining like stars.

"Yes, we both want you," answered Mrs. Estel. "You shall be our own
little sons."

Steven crept nearer. "Papa and mamma will be so glad," he said in a
tremulous whisper. Then a sudden thought illuminated his earnest face.

"O Mrs. Estel! Don't you suppose they have found little Dorothy in
that other country by this time, and are taking care of her there,
just like you are taking care of us here?"

She put her arm around him, and drew him nearer, saying: "My dear
little comfort, it may be so. If I could believe that, I could never
feel so unhappy again."

Robin and "ze black dancin' bear" were not the only ones tucked
tenderly away to sleep that night.

The sleigh bells jingled along the avenue. Again the great church
organ rolled out a mighty flood of melody, that ebbed and flowed on
the frosty night air.

And Big Brother, with his head pillowed once more beside Robin's, lay
with his eyes wide open, too happy to sleep--lay and dreamed of the
time when he should be a man, and could gather into the great house he
meant to own all the little homeless ones in the wide world; all the
sorry little waifs that strayed through the streets of great cities,
that crowded in miserable tenements, that lodged in asylums and
poorhouses.

Into his child's heart he gathered them all, with a sweet
unselfishness that would have gladly shared with every one of them his
new-found home and happiness.

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Big Brother, by Annie Fellows-Johnston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIG BROTHER ***

***** This file should be named 18496.txt or 18496.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/4/9/18496/

Produced by David Garcia, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Kentuckiana Digital Library)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
