The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Girl's Own Paper, Vol. VIII. No. 358,
November 6, 1886., by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Girl's Own Paper, Vol. VIII. No. 358, November 6, 1886.

Author: Various

Editor: Charles Peters

Release Date: August 3, 2006 [EBook #18980]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GIRL'S OWN PAPER ***




Produced by Susan Skinner and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







THE GIRL'S OWN PAPER

VOL. VIII.--NO. 358.

NOVEMBER 6, 1886.

PRICE ONE PENNY.




MERLE'S CRUSADE.

BY ROSA NOUCHETTE CAREY, Author of "Aunt Diana," "For Lilias," etc.


[Illustration: "I WAS UNDRESSING THE BOY BY THE BEDROOM FIRE."]


CHAPTER V.

MRS. GARNETT'S ROCKERS.

I had plenty of time for such introspective thoughts as these during my
brief railway journey, and before my luggage and I were safely deposited
at 35, Queen's Gate.

Again I rang the bell, and again the footman in plush and powder
answered the door, but this time there was no hesitation in his manner.

"Miss Fenton, I believe," he said, quite civilly. "If you step into the
waiting-room a moment I will find someone to show you the way to the
nursery," and in two or three minutes a tall, respectable young woman
came to me, and asked me, very pleasantly, to follow her upstairs.

On the way she mentioned two or three things; her mistress was out in
the carriage, and Miss Joyce was with her. The nurse had left the
previous night, and Master Reginald had been so fretful that the
housekeeper had been obliged to sleep with him, as Hannah had been no
manner of use--"girls never were," with a toss of her head, which showed
me the rosy-cheeked Hannah was somewhat in disfavour. Mrs. Garnett was
with him now, and had had a "great deal of trouble in lulling him off to
sleep, the pretty dear."

We had reached the children's corridor by this time, and I heard the
full, cosy tones of Mrs. Garnett's voice in "Hush a bye, baby," and the
sound of rockers on the floor. The sound made me indignant that my baby
should be soothed with that wooden tapping. No wonder so many children
suffered from irritability of the brain; for I was as full of theories
as a sucking politician.

"Ook, gurgle-da," exclaimed baby, and pointed a fat finger at me over
Mrs. Garnett's shoulder. Of course he was not asleep; it would have been
an insult to his infantine wisdom to suppose it.

"Oh, Master Baby," exclaimed Hannah, reproachfully. "I did think he had
gone off then, Mrs. Garnett; and you have been rocking him for the best
part of an hour."

"Ah, he misses his old nurse," returned Mrs. Garnett, placidly. She was
a pretty-looking woman, with flaxen hair, just becoming streaked with
grey. Perhaps she was a widow, for she wore a black gown, and a cap with
soft floating ends, and had a plaintive look in her eyes. "I hope he
will take to you, my dear, for he nearly fretted his little heart out
last night, bless him; and Mrs. Morton crept up at two o'clock in the
morning, when Mr. Morton was asleep, but nothing would do but his old
nurse; he pushed her away, and it was 'Nur, nur,' and we could not
pacify him. Poor Mrs. Morton cried at last, and then he took to patting
her and laughing at her in the drollest way."

"I will just take off my bonnet and try and make friends with him," I
returned, and Hannah, who really seemed a good-natured creature, ushered
me into the night nursery--a large, cheerful room, with a bright fire,
and a comfortable-looking bed, with a brass crib on each side--and
pointed out to me the large chest of drawers and hanging wardrobe for my
own special use, and then went down on her knees to unstrap my box.

"Thank you, Hannah, I will not wait to unpack now, as I daresay Mrs.
Garnett is wanted downstairs," and as soon as she had left the room I
opened the box and took out the pretty cap and apron, and proceeded to
invest myself in my nurse's livery. I hope Aunt Agatha had not made me
vain by that injudicious praise, but I certainly thought they looked
very nice, and gave me a sense of importance.

The tall housemaid--Rhoda they called her--stared at me as I re-entered,
but Mrs Garnett gave me an approving glance; but it was baby who
afforded me most satisfaction, for he screwed up his little rosebud of a
mouth in the prettiest fashion and said, "Nur, nur," at the same time
holding out his arms for me to take him. I must confess I forgot Aunt
Agatha in that moment of triumph.

"He takes to you quite nicely, my dear," observed Mrs. Garnett, in her
cosy voice, as the little fellow nestled down contentedly in my arms.

"Yes, you may leave him to me I think now," I returned, quietly, for I
felt that I should be glad to be left to myself a little. I was very
thankful when my hint was taken, and Mrs. Garnett and Rhoda went
downstairs and Hannah disappeared into the next room. My charge was
becoming decidedly drowsy, and after a few turns up and down the room, I
could sit down in the low chair by the fire and hear the soft, regular
breathing against my shoulder, while my eyes travelled round the walls
of my new home.

Such a pleasant room it was, large and bright, and sunny, and furnished
so tastefully. The canaries were singing blithely; the Persian kitten
was rolled up into a furry ball on the rug; a small Skye terrier, who I
afterwards discovered went by the name of Snap, was keeping guard over
me from a nest of cushions on the big couch opposite. Now and then he
growled to himself softly, as though remonstrating against my intrusion,
but whenever I spoke to him gently, he sat up and begged, so I imagined
his animosity was not very bitter.

"My lines have fallen to me in pleasant places." I wonder why those
words came to my mind. I wished Aunt Agatha could see me now, sitting in
this lovely room, with this little cherub on my lap; she would not be so
despondent about the future. "I do believe it will answer; I mean to
make it answer," I said to myself, energetically. Indeed, I was so
absorbed in my reverie, that Mrs. Morton's soft footsteps on the thick
carpet never roused me until I looked up and saw her standing beside me,
smiling, with Joyce beside her.

I coloured with embarrassment, and would have risen, but she put her
hand on my shoulder, still smiling, to prevent me. She looked lovelier
than ever in her rich furs, and there was a happier look on her face
than I had seen before, as she stooped down and kissed her boy.

"He is sleeping so nicely, the darling. Mrs. Garnett tells me he has
taken to you wonderfully, and I hope my little girl will follow his
example; it is such a relief to me, for he nearly broke our hearts last
night with fretting after nurse. He looks a little pale, do you not
think so?" And then she stopped and looked in my face, with a puzzled
smile. "What am I to call you? I never thought of that; shall it be Miss
Fenton? but there are the children, they could not manage such a
difficult name."

The difficulty had never occurred to me, and for the moment I hesitated,
but only for a moment.

"The children will always call me nurse, and I suppose your household
will do the same, Mrs. Morton. I think for yourself, you will find Merle
the handiest name; it is short."

"It is very pretty and uncommon," she returned, musingly, "and it has
this one advantage, it hardly sounds like a Christian name; if you are
sure you do not object, perhaps I will use it, but," speaking a little
nervously, "you need not have worn this," pointing to my cap. "You
remember I said so to your aunt."

"I think it better to do so," I returned, in a decided voice; in fact, I
am afraid my voice was just a little too decided in speaking to my
mistress, but I was determined not to give way on this point. "I wish to
wear the badge of service, that I may never forget for one moment what I
owe to my employers, and--" here the proud colour suffused my face--"no
cap can make me forget what is due to myself."

I could see Mrs. Morton was amused, and yet she was touched too. She
told me afterwards that she thought me that moment the most original
young woman she had ever seen.

"You shall do as you like," she returned; but there was a little fun in
her eyes. "It certainly looks very nice, and I should be sorry if you
took it off. I only spoke for your aunt's sake and your own; for myself
I certainly prefer it."

"So do I," was my independent answer; "and now, if you please, I think I
will lay baby in his cot, as he will sleep more soundly there, and then
it will be time to get Joyce ready for her dinner," for, in spite of my
cap, I had already forgotten to say "Miss Joyce," or to call my mistress
"ma'am," though I have reason to know that Mrs. Morton was not at all
displeased with the omission.

"It might have been a princess in disguise waiting on my children,
Merle," she said to me, many months afterwards. But I knew nothing of
the secret amusement with which my mistress watched me as she stood by
the nursery fire in her furs, warming herself; I only knew that I loved
to see her there, for from the first moment my heart had gone out to
her. She was so beautiful and gentle; but it was not only that.

Baby woke just as I was putting him in his cot, and I had some little
trouble in lulling him to sleep again. Hannah was dressing Joyce, and as
soon as she had finished, I tried to make friends with the child. She
was very shy at first, but I called Snap, and made a great fuss over
him. I was just beginning to make way, when the gong summoned Mrs.
Morton to luncheon, and soon after that the nursery dinner was served.
Hannah waited upon us very nicely, and then took her place at the table.
She was a thoroughly respectable girl, and her presence was not in the
least irksome to me. I always thought it was a grand old feudal custom
when all the retainers dined at the baron's table, taking their place
below the salt. Surely there can be nothing derogatory to human dignity
in that, seeing that we shall one day eat bread together in the kingdom
of Heaven.

I wonder if half the governesses fared so luxuriously as I that day;
certainly the chicken and bread sauce was delicious. As soon as we had
finished, baby woke up, and I fed him, and then Joyce and he and I had a
fine game of romps together, in which Snap, and the kitten, and all
Joyce's dolls joined.

I had dressed the kitten up in doll's clothes, and the fun was at its
height, when the door opened, and Mr. Morton came in. I discovered
afterwards that it was his custom to make a brief visit to the nursery
once in the four and twenty hours, sometimes with his wife, but oftener
alone.

Joyce ran to him at once; she was devoted to her parents, especially to
her mother, but the boy refused to leave me, unless his father would
take the kitten too.

"I suppose I must humour you, my fine fellow," observed Mr. Morton,
pleasantly, as he kissed the little fellow with affection, and then he
turned to me.

"I hope you find yourself comfortable, nurse, and that my children are
good to you."

"They could not be better, sir, and I am quite comfortable, thank you,"
I returned, with unusual meekness. I was not a very meek person
generally, as Uncle Keith could testify, but there was a subduing
influence in Mr. Morton's look and voice. I must own I was rather afraid
of him, and I would not have omitted the "sir" for worlds, neither would
I have seated myself without his bidding; but he took it all quite
naturally.

"As my wife and I are dining out, Joyce will not come down in the
drawing-room as usual," he observed, in his business-like manner. "Do
you hear, my little girl? Mother and I are engaged this evening, and you
must stay upstairs with Reggie."

"Werry tiresome," I heard Joyce say under her breath, and then she
looked up pleadingly into her father's face. "Her is coming by-and-by,
fardie?"

"Oh, no doubt," stroking the dark hair; "but mother is driving at
present. Now, say good-bye to me, Joyce, and you must give me a kiss,
too, my boy. Good-evening, nurse." And that was all we saw of Joyce's
father that day; only an hour later, when the nursery tea was over, and
I was undressing the boy by the bedroom fire, while Joyce stood beside
me, removing the garments carefully from a favourite doll, and
chattering as fast as a purling brook, I saw Mrs. Morton standing in the
doorway, looking at us.

Joyce uttered a scream of delight, and threw herself upon her. "Mine
mother! mine mother!" she repeated over and over again.

Mrs. Morton had the old, tired look on her face as she came forward,
rather hurriedly. "I cannot stay; there are people downstairs, and when
they have gone I must dress for dinner." She gave a sort of harassed
sigh as she spoke.

"Could you not rest a little first?" I returned. "You have been out the
greater part of the day, and you do not seem fit for the evening's
fatigue," for there was quite a drawn look about the lovely mouth.

She shook her head, but, nevertheless, yielded when I gave her up my
chair and put the boy in her arms; in his little chemise, and with his
dimpled shoulders and bare legs, he was perfectly irresistible to his
mother, and I was not surprised to see her cover him with kisses. "My
bonnie boy, my precious little son," I could hear her whisper, in a sort
of ecstasy, as I picked up the little garments from the floor and folded
them. I seemed to know by instinct that it was only this that she needed
to rest her; the drawn, weary lines seemed to vanish like magic. What a
sweet picture it was! But her pleasure, poor soul, was short lived; the
next moment she had recollected herself.

"There are all those people in the drawing-room! What would my husband
say at my neglecting them? Good-night, my darling; be good; and
good-night, Merle." She smiled at me in quite a friendly fashion, and
hurried away without another look.

"I always do say master does make a slave of mistress," grumbled Hannah,
as she filled the bath; "she never has a moment to herself that I can
see. What is the use of having children if one never sees them." And
though I refrained from any comment, I quite endorsed Hannah's opinion.
As soon as Hannah had cleared the room, I shaded the light and began
quietly arranging my clothes in the wardrobe, and then I sat down in the
low chair beside the fire. Through the open door I could see Hannah's
bent head as she sat at her sewing. The nursery looked warm and cosy--a
very haven of comfort; but I wanted to be alone for a time to think over
the occurrences of the day. "To commune with one's own heart and to be
still." How good it is to do that sometimes. For a few moments my
thoughts lingered lovingly in the little cottage at Putney. Aunt Agatha
and Uncle Keith would be talking of me, I knew that. I could almost hear
the pitying tones of Aunt Agatha's voice, "Poor child! How lonely she
will feel without us to-night!" Did I feel lonely? I hardly think so; on
the contrary, I had the warm, satisfied conviction at my heart that I
was in my right place, the place for which I was most fitted. How
tenderly would I watch over these helpless little creatures committed to
my care! how sacred would be my charge! What a privilege to be allowed
to love them, to be able to win their affection in return!

I had such a craving in my heart to be loved, and hitherto I had had no
one but Aunt Agatha. It seemed to me, somehow, as though I must cry
aloud to my human brothers and sisters to let me love them and take
interest in their lives; to suffer me to glean beside them, like loving
Ruth in those Eastern harvest fields, following the reapers lest haply a
handful might fall to my share, for who would wish to go home at
eventide empty handed as well as weary?

(_To be continued._)




GIRLS' FRIENDSHIPS

By the Author of "Flowering Thorns."

CHAPTER II.

HOW THEY ARE MADE.


Perhaps the first, easiest, and on the whole, least durable of girls'
friendships is formed at school. Not such a school as we go to at
twelve, where we have class competitions, good-conduct marks, and fines
for talking, but such a school as we go to at sixteen, to "finish," when
individual emancipated life is so near that we begin to realise it, and
dimly feel that the friends we now make may form part of it.

Everything looks rather _couleur de rose_; one year, or at the very most
two, and we shall be free and at home, where the nicest girl we ever met
must come to visit us; then we shall return the visit, and together we
shall live in reality those charming times we romance over in low tones
after the lights are put out.

Very little will patch up a so-called friendship at school; a room mate,
especially if you have only one, who is not utterly uncongenial, is
almost sure to become a great friend--the girl who is equal with you in
your favourite lesson, the girl who comes from your county or town, or
whose "people" know your "people." Every schoolgirl must be able to
think of a dozen other reasons why such and such girls selected each
other as friends.

(And here I may remark in passing that you will find it extremely
interesting to try and find the beginnings, the first causes of the
friendships you have either experienced or witnessed. It will enable you
to form ideas as to the relative weight of circumstances and character,
and it is good to know the reason why things are even little things.)

Well, do these friendships last? In nine cases out of ten they do not,
though by means of fitful correspondence they may drag on a feeble
existence for years. The bond of union which school supplies being once
broken, Lucy and Kate find new interests quite unconnected with each
other, which may be difficult to explain on paper, and the opportunities
of meeting may be few.

Besides, Kate, who was "quite the nicest girl at school," does not seem
so exceptional when brought among Lucy's relations. They think her a
little free and easy, or too particular and strait-laced. She is poor,
and mamma is afraid of "the boys" falling in love with her; or rich, and
may stay "only one week," the seeming significance of which sets the
family back up, and she is not asked again.

There are a hundred trifles which part school friends, whose affection
has been of short, rapid growth, and which must therefore wither in a
new atmosphere, unless its roots have struck deep down into the hearts
of both.

So the letters become shorter and fewer, till there comes so long a
pause that neither can remember who wrote last, and each, of course,
feels that the other is to blame for the silence.

"If Kate really cares about me she will answer my last letter," says
Lucy.

"If Lucy wants to drop the correspondence, I'm sure I shan't force her
to keep it up," says Kate.

So the letter is never written, and the friends part; and though I am a
great admirer of the virtue of constancy, I still hold that there are
cases in which it is a mere mockery, the empty husk which we had much
better fling away when the kernel is gone.

But girls' friendships are often made by propinquity, neighbourhood,
adjacent homes, and constant meetings in the ordinary round of life.

The average girl, especially if living in the country, has not usually a
very large circle of acquaintances from which to choose her friends (and
notwithstanding what is said about the sufficiency of family affections,
I do think a "particular friend" is almost a necessity to girl nature,
and need not and ought not to interfere with home ties and interests).
Even if her mother's visiting list is long, each household will not
include a girl of her own age with whom she could be intimate, and many
will live at a distance to make frequent intercourse out of the
question.

Yes, your circle will narrow to some five or six, perhaps even three or
four, girls, and you will naturally see most of the one living nearest
to you.

You meet in your strolls, if you live in the country, you continually
"drop in" to tea and tennis at each other's houses. If you live in a
town, you drop in just before or just after your round of more formal
visits, and you get to know each others' daily lives, daily interests,
pleasures, and difficulties very thoroughly, and this interweaving of
the day-to-day existence forms many a friendship.

You get accustomed to each other; the trivial incidents of the hour,
perhaps its gossip, which have a transient interest for the one,
interests the other no less. Your friend knows just what work you are
doing, just what book you are reading. You have a great deal of time for
talking, and by degrees each knows almost everything about the life of
the other, for the lives are short, and at this period neither profound
nor intricate.

Now, if you are really fitted to be friends to one another, this
intimacy may be a very good beginning; you know each other thoroughly,
and the mutual affection, sympathy, and help I spoke of in a former
paper are much more possible when there is such perfect acquaintance. At
the same time there are features in such a friendship which tell very
much against the idea of its long continuance.

To begin with, such frequent meetings must often exhaust the materials
for conversation. Girls do not usually "take in" to such large extent
that they can be continually "giving out" with interest to their
hearers. Do you not sometimes find that you have nothing more to say to
your friend since you saw her yesterday? You have had one short, stupid
letter from a school companion, you have tried your hand at making
orange fritters and failed, and cook says you must try something easier;
you have read a little more of the book you discursed yesterday, and
done a little more of the painting, and when these subjects are disposed
of conversation flags.

You begin to find each other just a little, a very little dull, and it
is really a relief to meet a slighter acquaintance to whom you can tell
the whole history of the painting, or the last tennis party for the
first time.

I do not believe that "familiarity breeds contempt" between people who
are worth knowing and loving, but I do think that girls are all the
better for having certain chambers in their hearts, into which even the
special "intimate" may not enter; and for being by herself at times,
instead of continually hunting up a companion, for hours which would
otherwise be solitary. Girls don't think enough, and how can they if
they are constantly in the company of those who think no more, and so
seldom by themselves.

You would become closer friends if you took time apart to progress
individually, each in the direction her character or opportunities point
out.

There may be something, too, of undue influence of two opposite
characters or tastes when both are young and pliable, but of this I do
not now speak.

And what is the end of the ordinary friendship of neighbourhood? One of
the girls leaves the place and gets elsewhere a new set of the little
social interests that bound them together. They are not worth writing
about, though they might have taken hours to talk them over, and having
less and less in common, her friends drift apart through lack of a
strong tie to bind them together, though, perhaps, they never quite
drop.

A third and somewhat higher class of friendship is that formed over
association in work, or some deep common interest.

This will occur when girls meet to study some subject of real interest
to both, not for the mere sake of "doing something" after their school
life has closed, but for the earnest use to which they intend to put
their requirements.

It may be art in one of its branches, or music, which, indeed, is art,
too. One of the most delightful of friendships I ever heard of was
cemented over the task of acquiring the "accomplishment of verse."

Or two girls may throw themselves heart and soul into benevolent
Christian work, not, as I said before, for the mere sake of "doing
something," but because they really long to help their fellow-creatures
physically, morally, spiritually, for Christ's sake. Meeting in this
way, and fitted by natural character to be friends, they will probably
become so, and, unless some quarrel arise, caused by earnest difference
of opinion, will, I think, remain so longer than any I have mentioned
before.

And now I come to speak of what I must consider the most perfect method
on which a friendship can be formed. I mean the elective friendship
which depends on no accident of association or neighbourhood, and is, to
my mind, the most satisfying of all.

We cannot say what drew us to our friend. We met her for a few days at a
country house, or were introduced to her casually at a dinner-party.
Nothing in ordinary circumstances would have been more likely than to
part and meet no more. But we did not part; something had united us--we
felt we must see more of each other.

This attracting something lends a strange charm to friendship, and,
whether the two are alike or unlike, it matters little--they are sure to
be helpers and sympathisers, because, it seems to me, and I say it with
all reverence, this something which we cannot define is a God-given bond
of union. The two are meant to be friends--meant to act beneficially
upon each other; and, perhaps, because they cannot understand it or
reason over it, the tie proves stronger than they or anyone can break.

They may be thrown together in any of the ways I have suggested, but
with a difference; then neighbourhood, association, was the primary
element in the formation of the friendship; now it is secondary to the
elective attraction. Both feel that their souls would have come together
in whatever circumstances they had met.

I cannot think these elective friendships ever really cease, though a
quarrel, a misunderstanding may break them seemingly for ever. There is
a spiritual _oneness_ which refuses to divide.

In conclusion, let me add one word about the bond of union which the
love of Christ makes. If that is in any friendship you need not fear its
dissolution. If few girls begin their youthful friendships with such a
tie, can they not, will they not strengthen their union with it when
they see how it can bless and sanctify such union with friendship the
most perfect we can know on earth?

(_To be continued._)




THE SHEPHERD'S FAIRY.

A PASTORALE.

BY DARLEY DALE, Author of "Fair Katherine," etc.

CHAPTER VI.

JACK'S SMOCK FROCK.


Twelve years had elapsed since the shepherd first found the little baby
on his door-step when, one afternoon in July, Mrs. Shelley was sitting
working hard at some coarse-looking needlework, on a bench just outside
the house. By her side stood her two younger sons, Charlie and Willie,
both of them golden-haired, red-cheeked, chubby urchins, strikingly like
their father. Willie, who was now fifteen, was dressed as a sailor, for
he had already been three years in the navy, and was now at home for a
week's holiday, while Charlie, whom we last saw crying in his cradle,
was on his way to feed the pigs, and had just deposited his pail in
front of his mother to stop and look at her work.

"Is it nearly finished, mother?" asked Charlie.

The "it" was a smock made of very coarse linen, over which Mrs. Shelley
and another little pair of hands had been toiling hard every afternoon
for the last fortnight.

"Yes, if Fairy would only sit still and help me, we might finish it
before supper. Just call her, Willie, I can't think what the child is
doing; she is in her own room," replied Mrs. Shelley, who is now a
comely woman of six or seven and thirty, and has apparently had but few
sorrows, as not a wrinkle marks her smooth forehead, nor has a single
grey hair yet made its appearance among her bright brown locks.

"Well, whether it is finished or not, Jack will never wear it, I am
sure, so I hope I shall have it handed over to me," said Charlie.

"Nonsense, Charlie, pray don't say anything of the kind before Jack.
Your father will insist on his wearing it, and as Fairy has made a great
deal of it, I hope we shall persuade him to put it on to-morrow," said
Mrs. Shelley, rather anxiously, for she was by no means so sure as she
professed to be that Jack would condescend to wear a smock.

"I know he won't, mother; but what has Fairy got in her hand? Oh, my
goodness me, what is that fine thing, Fairy?" asked Charlie, as, in
answer to Willie's repeated shouts, Fairy made her appearance.

She was a tall, slight child, straight as a dart, still rather fragile
in appearance, but with a healthy pink in her cheeks that did credit to
Sussex air and living. Her hair was long, and floated about in the
summer breeze in great waves of gold, the long silky tresses reaching
below her waist. In striking contrast to this golden hair and fair pink
and white complexion were her great brown eyes, with their long, dark
lashes and delicately, though firmly, pencilled eyebrows. The rest of
her features were nothing out of the common way, but her fair hair and
dark eyes and brilliant complexion would at once have attracted
attention, if, young as she was, she had not already been one of those
people who can't come into a room without making their presence felt.
The name little Jack--no longer little, by the way--had chosen for her
years ago suited her exactly. Lightly as a fairy she tripped and flitted
about, bright as a sunbeam, as though no such thing as care or sorrow
existed in the world. Dainty in all her ways, neat and trim in her
dress, with tiny hands and feet, a better name than Fairy could not have
been given her. She was dressed in a pink print, simply yet well-made,
and altogether the child looked out of keeping with her surroundings,
particularly with her foster brother, Charlie, in his corduroys and his
swill-pail by his side.

"You dreadful boy, take that horrid pail away before I come a step
further," cried Fairy, pinching her little nose with her delicate white
taper fingers.

"All right, but do show us that fine thing you have in your hand first,"
said Charlie.

"No, no, no; go to your pigs first, you'll spoil my lovely present for
Jack if you come near me," said Fairy, hiding her hands behind her, and
running backwards to avoid any chance of a collision with Charlie and
his pail as he prepared to obey her commands.

"What is it, Fairy?" asked Mrs. Shelley, as Charlie moved off, looking
up with curiosity from her work.

"It is a shaving-case I have been making for Jack out of that quilt of
mine you said I might have, mother," replied Fairy, holding out an
elaborate shaving-case, beautifully quilted in blue satin.

"A shaving-case? But, my dear Fairy, Jack does not shave. How could you
cut that lovely thing up in this way?" said Mrs. Shelley.

"A shaving-case! What is the use of it if he did shave?" asked Willie,
who was of a practical turn of mind.

"The use of it! Why, to keep his shaving-cloths in, of course. Mr.
Leslie has one something like this, only not half so pretty," said
Fairy, eyeing her handiwork with admiration.

"It is much too good for Jack," said Charlie, who had come back from his
pigs.

"Nothing is too good for Jack, is it, mother?" asked Fairy, with an
imperceptible nod at Willie.

"It is very unsuitable, Fairy, and I think it is a pity you cut up that
quilt for it; but come and help me to finish this smock, you idle child,
do."

"That dreadful smock! and I know Jack will never, never, never put it
on, though we have pricked our fingers over it for weeks. And John will
be angry, and insist, and Jack will be in a passion, and refuse, and
instead of having a nice happy birthday, poor old Jack will be
miserable. Mother, let's give him the smock to-night, and have the row
over before to-morrow. Run and get me my thimble, Charlie, please, and
Willie, thread my needle for me, and I'll soon help mother to finish
this ugly smock," said Fairy, seating herself with a business-like air
as she folded up the shaving-case in some silk paper.

"Well, it is not a bad plan, Fairy; we will give Jack the smock when he
comes in this evening," said Mrs. Shelley.

"Yes; and I'll keep my present till to-morrow, and that will put him in
a good temper, before we start for our picnic," said Fairy, stitching
away with great energy. An hour later, just as the smock was finished
and the boys were gone to get tea ready, the shepherd entered at the
gate carrying a quantity of wheatears threaded on crow-quills. He looked
vexed, and Mrs. Shelley, who could read her husband's face like a book,
asked what was the matter.

"Why, again Jack has forgotten to attend to those traps for the
wheatears; when I did them myself I caught a hundred in one day; now I
leave them to him I get perhaps eighteen to twenty, because he is too
lazy to dig out the turf and make the traps properly; here are only ten
brace this evening, and they are as plentiful as sparrows just now."

"John, you are a greedy man, and Jack is not lazy; he does not approve
of killing birds; he thinks it is cruel, that is why he has not seen to
the traps, so you must not scold him about it, will you?" said Fairy,
looking up into the shepherd's grave face, as she stroked the white
breasts of the wheatears.

"You had better see to the traps yourself, John; there is always a fuss
about them every summer since you gave them to Jack to attend to. You
know, as Fairy says, he is so fond of birds, and he knows so much about
them too, that he can't bear snaring them."

"Knows so much about them! I should think he did. Why Mr. Leslie says if
Jack had only the means of getting himself some good books, he would be
a first-rate ornithologist, which means a man learned in birds, John,"
said Fairy.

She had always called the shepherd John since she could speak, and Mrs.
Shelley and John were quite content that she should do so, as he was not
her father, though Fairy persisted in calling his wife mother, to Mrs.
Shelley's secret joy. They were both greatly attached to their
foster-daughter; as for the shepherd, he never contradicted her in
anything, and though over-strict as his wife thought with his own boys,
he never seemed to think Fairy could do wrong, and had never been heard
even to rebuke her in the mildest way since he found her; and when Mrs.
Shelley remonstrated with him, as she sometimes did, he excused himself
by saying she was not his own child, so he did not feel the same
responsibility about her.

Luckily for Fairy, Mrs. Shelley did not humour her and look upon her
with the same excessive admiration the shepherd and the boys did; they
regarded her as a superior being, and thought her way of queening it
over them perfectly right and natural. Mrs. Shelley loved the child she
had been a mother to tenderly, and was proud of her beauty and
cleverness, and yet, while she constantly impressed on her boys that
Fairy was a lady by birth and therefore in a very different position to
any of them, and, moreover, might any day be claimed by her own parents
and taken into her own sphere, she insisted on the same obedience from
her as she expected from her own children.

"Jack had far better become a man learned in sheep than in birds, seeing
he is to be a shepherd. I can't see the use of all the learning Jack
gets hold of; it can't do him any good," said the shepherd.

"Oh! you dear, good old shepherd, I believe you think the world was made
for sheep, and shepherds the only useful people in it," exclaimed Fairy.

"I think if Jack learns his business and his Bible and Prayer-book, he
will do very well without any other learning. It is quite right and
proper that my little Fairy should learn to play the spinnet and to
speak French, which nobody here understands, and many other things of
which I don't even know the names, but I don't think that kind of
knowledge will make Jack a good shepherd or a good Christian, and that
is all he is required to be," said John Shelley, stroking Fairy's
golden head fondly as he spoke.

"But if he could be a very clever man some day and perhaps learn a
profession, you would think that better than being a good shepherd,
would you not?" said Fairy, who was in Jack's confidence, and knew that
as he watched the sheep on the downs he dreamt dreams of this kind.

"No, Fairy, no; if God had meant Jack to be a gentleman he would not
have given him a shepherd for his father. His duty is to labour hard to
get his own living in that state of life in which it has pleased God to
call him, as the Catechism says."

"But, John, why did God let me be brought up by a shepherd, then?" asked
Fairy. "You see He does not always mean people to remain what they are
born or I should not be here, should I?"

This was an argument to which John's slow mind could not supply an
answer. Conservative to the backbone in all his notions, like most
Sussex people, be their politics what they may, the law of progress was
no law to him, but rather rebellion to the divine appointments, and that
Jack should wish to be anything else but a shepherd like his ancestors
was to him as inexplicable and incomprehensible as it was profane and
wicked.

Fairy's presence among them had often been an enigma to him. Accustomed
to work in a groove himself, his mind never travelling beyond the downs
on which his life was spent, he could not fathom the divine purpose in
placing her under his care, but yet being quite clear in his own mind it
was God's will for her at present, he did his duty towards her without
questioning; but the idea of Jack rising out of his own sphere of life
into a higher was another matter altogether.

"I don't know," said John, at last, as Fairy repeated her question.

"By the bye, how long have I been here exactly?" asked Fairy.

"Let me see; twelve years last shearing-time," said the shepherd, whose
dates were few and simple, sheep-washing, shearing, lambing, and next
and last sheepfair being the principal.

"But I want to know the day of the month; and I'll tell you why. You all
have birthdays except me, and no one knows when mine was, so I am going
to keep mine for the future on the day I was brought here, so I shall
be like the sheep; you count their age from their first shearing, not
from the day they are born, and I am going to count mine from the day I
was found. Now try and remember when it was, will you?"

"Twelve years ago last shearing; it was on a Friday, the day before the
shearing ended, somewhere about this time, for we finished shearing last
Saturday week," said John.

"It was earlier, John; it was the twenty-sixth of June; I wrote it down
in my Bible the night you found her; but come into supper; the smock is
finished at last," said Mrs. Shelley, folding up the ugly garment with a
sigh.

"Jack's smock? I am glad of that, he must put it on to-morrow; he will
look every inch a shepherd then," said John.

"Indeed, he won't wear it to-morrow; we are all going to have a holiday,
and going to the seaside for the day; but where is Jack? I wish he would
come into tea. I want him to help me with my lessons; I shall be much
too tired to do them to-morrow," said Fairy, as they went into the
kitchen.

(_To be continued._)




"SHE COULDN'T BOIL A POTATO;"

OR,

THE IGNORANT HOUSEKEEPER, AND HOW SHE ACQUIRED KNOWLEDGE.

BY DORA HOPE.

PART II.


The next morning Mr. Hastings had an interview with the doctor, who told
him that Mrs. Wilson's recovery depended to a great extent upon her
having absolute quiet, and freedom from all anxiety or annoyance. He
advised that the nurse, in whom he had perfect confidence, should have
the entire responsibility of the sick room, but as it was clear that she
could not be always on duty, he hoped it could be arranged for Ella to
remain and take the management of the house, and at the same time
relieve the nurse occasionally by taking her place in the sick room.

It was absolutely necessary, he said, for Mrs. Wilson's sake, that there
should be a mistress in the house, for already the nurse had complained
to him that her patient had been very much disturbed by the loud talking
and banging of doors; and that she herself had found considerable
difficulty in getting her wants attended to, and her meals provided with
comfort.

The doctor's opinion settled the matter; Ella must stay, and in order to
make everything as easy for her as possible, Mr. Hastings called in the
servants, and explained to them that he left his daughter in charge of
the house, and that until Mrs. Wilson was well enough to attend to
business herself, they were to take all orders from, and refer
everything to, Ella.

At first all went smoothly enough; the servants were frightened at Mrs.
Wilson's illness, and were ready to help and obey. Contrary to her
expectations, too, Ella found her time pass very quickly; instead of
days seeming dull, there was only too much to do and think of.

Directly after breakfast each morning, she had an interview with nurse
to get her report, and consult as to the invalid cookery for the day.
Then Bertha, the cook, had to be talked to, and arrangements made for
the day's meals; then there were the fowls and ducks to feed, the
one-eyed pony to visit, and talk to while he nibbled his daily apple,
and the peace to keep between the seagull and jackdaw, whose habitual
friendship could hardly stand the test of breakfast-time. And if she
lingered too long with these and the dogs, Sir Paul, the parrot, was
screaming loudly, threatening to "tell the missus," while the whole
cageful of little birds were twittering and scolding that they had not
been attended to first of all.

"The mistress always did them herself," the cook said; and Ella supposed
it was her duty to do the same. These various duties occupied most of
the morning, and the afternoon was spent in her aunt's room, while the
nurse rested, and prepared for the night's watch.

The arranging of meals was Ella's greatest difficulty at first, but she
managed it more easily than she expected, for Bertha generally had
something to suggest for her own and the kitchen meals, and the nurse
always knew what to advise for her patient. Some of the dishes she
ordered seemed to Ella anything but appetising; one especially, suet and
milk, she thought sounded absolutely nasty, though the nurse assured her
it was very light and wonderfully nourishing; and, indeed, when at last
Ella was persuaded to taste it, she had to acknowledge that if she had
not known what it was she really would not have disliked it. The nurse
generally prepared this herself, as she said all depended on the care in
making. She put a 1/4lb. of suet in a pint of milk, and simmered it
gently, stirring frequently, till the milk was as thick as good cream.
She then strained it carefully, and flavoured it with almond or lemon,
which so effectually disguised the taste of the suet in it, that it
became a favourite dish with Mrs. Wilson.

Coffee jelly was another dish which nurse introduced to vary the too
constant beef-tea, and which had the advantage of being very quickly and
easily prepared. She made a cup full of strong coffee, strained out the
grounds very carefully, and added as much sugar and milk as though for
drinking hot, and enough isinglass to stiffen it, and either left it in
the cup or poured it into a mould, and when cold it was ready to turn
out and serve as a jelly. This was only given occasionally, as it was
not considered very strengthening; but nurse found it useful to make a
variety.

Ella expected a great quantity of arrowroot would be used; indeed, that
was her one idea in regard to invalid diet, but the doctor did not care
for it, and never ordered it.

"It is no use," he said, when she once suggested it, "unless you add
nourishing things to it; it is nearly all starch, and there is nothing
in it that could sustain life by itself. Common wheaten flour is far
more valuable, and either that or corn flour should always be used in
preference to arrowroot when it is important to get as much nourishment
as possible."

The nurse was a kind-hearted woman, as well as an efficient attendant,
and was as ready to teach the duties of a sick room as Ella was to learn
them.

"It is a cold day, Miss Ella, you must keep the fire up," she said one
day before retiring for her afternoon rest. "Do not wait till the fire
has gone down, but put more coal on when this seems nearly burnt
through. Many nurses will tell you that you should have some coal
wrapped in paper, ready to lift on to the fire without making any noise,
but I do not like that way myself, the paper makes such a dirty fire. So
look here, miss, I take care to have plenty of pieces of coal of a nice
size in the scuttle, and then I keep this old pair of gloves by the side
of the fire (I will leave them there for you to use), and I slip them on
and lift the pieces of coal up with my fingers; I don't make noise
enough to wake a baby that way, and can lay each piece just where I want
it too."

Ella felt very nervous at first, when she was left alone in charge of
the sick room, but gradually she became accustomed to the darksome
silent room, and rejoiced in finding herself less awkward and stupid
than she had imagined herself to be. At home it was Kate who was always
at hand when anyone was ill, Kate who entertained callers, and Kate who
always knew the right thing to do or say; while Ella believed herself to
be by nature awkward and devoid of tact. She was finding out now,
however, that it was only the opportunity to make herself useful, not
the ability, that had been lacking, and though her want of experience
caused her some difficulties which might have been avoided, she soon
found that prayerful patience and careful thought enabled her to
undertake duties which astonished herself.

The first disturbance of the general peace was occasioned after she had
been only a few days at Hapsleigh, by the nurse's objection to take her
meals in the kitchen with the servants. She had never been expected to
do so before, she said, and she really must ask to have her meals
prepared comfortably. The servants were offended at this slight upon
their kitchen and their company, and retorted that "they had had enough
of her stuck-up ways," that "they were every bit as good as she was,
only they did not give themselves such airs," and so on; all of which
greatly dismayed poor Ella, when the disturbance reached her ears. She
thought the matter over, and had decided that nurse should have her
meals in the dining-room, so that the servants could not complain of
extra trouble, as they would only have to lay another place at the
table; but Mrs. Mobberly, who came in very opportunely in the midst of
her deliberations, dissuaded her from it.

"It is all very well now," she said, "while your aunt is so very ill
that you must of necessity be in her room whenever the nurse is away
having her meals, but we hope she will soon be so much better that there
will be no need for that, and you will sometimes find it awkward then to
keep nurse waiting till you have finished. No, you had much better
insist at once upon her meals being comfortably prepared for her
upstairs."

"But where can she have them? There is not even the tiniest sitting-room
upstairs, only the small bedroom which nurse uses for herself, and the
large one where I sleep."

"Then I think, if I were you, as yours is such a large, airy room, I
would have one of these small tables moved into it, and let nurse have
all her meals there. You will find she will prefer it to coming
downstairs, as it is near enough to the sick room to hear every sound,
and if you make a rule that your bedroom shall be put straight directly
you leave it in the morning, and the windows thrown wide open, it will
be quite fresh by the time she wants it."

Ella thanked Mrs. Mobberly warmly for her advice, which she promised to
follow, and as she walked down the garden with her to the gate, she told
her of her mother's parting advice, that when it was necessary to speak
to the servants, she should first of all make quite sure she was in the
right herself, and then assert her authority decisively, so that there
might be no doubt about her intention of being obeyed.

In spite of her brave words, however, Ella felt her courage ebbing away
as Mrs. Mobberly disappeared in the distance, and she had to summon up
all her resolution and give her orders at once, before it all
evaporated.

The servants listened to what she had to say in perfect silence, and
after waiting in vain for a reply, she had to leave them, feeling very
much discomfited, but no sooner was she safely within the shelter of the
breakfast-room than their tongues were loosed, and she heard their loud,
rude voices angrily discussing what she had said, and declaring they
would not put up with such interference, and adding, to Ella's dismay,
in almost the very words she herself had used before leaving home, that
"she was a fine one to come ordering them about, for they did not
believe she even knew how to boil a potato." Poor Ella felt very much
hurt, for she had tried to speak kindly though firmly, and she had
flattered herself that they had not discovered her ignorance. That
evening's entry in her diary was--

"My first attempt at asserting myself a failure. Decided that managing a
house is not my vocation."

In spite of all these difficulties, however, the time passed very
quickly, and Ella had the happiness of feeling that she was really
useful. As Christmastide approached, a fierce struggle went on in her
mind; she had never thought of being away from home on Christmas Day,
and it would be very lonely and dull at Hapsleigh, so different from the
merry party who always met at home on that day; but her mother had
written that she must judge for herself if it would be right to leave,
and when she thought of her aunt, who was beginning to look to her for
entertainment and company, and of the quarrels certain to arise between
the other members of the household, her mind was soon made up, and,
although with a very heavy heart, she wrote that she thought she must
stay.

The answer came promptly, and was full of praise and warm encouragement,
which comforted and helped her.

"If your happiness cannot be with us, my child," her mother wrote,
"remember that we celebrate the season when our Lord left His Father and
His home to bring happiness to mankind, and you are treading closely in
His footsteps just now. Let your Christmas joy this year be in making
joy for others, and you will find a depth of happiness you never
imagined before."

A short time before Christmas Ella was sitting in her aunt's room,
putting the finishing touches to sundry little presents she was making
to send home, when her aunt interrupted her: "I shall want you to go
into town for me to-morrow, Ella," she said; "you had better write the
things down as I tell you them. You will find a pencil and half sheets
of paper in that little drawer in the table."

Mrs. Wilson loved to make unexpected presents, and her circle of
charities was wider than anyone guessed. She had that spirit of
thoughtful generosity which is as rare as it is valuable, and she was
never tired of finding out and relieving those who, from poverty or
friendlessness, were likely to be overlooked in the general rejoicings
at Christmas. This year her illness made her private gifts difficult to
manage, and Ella had to be taken into a good many secrets which
surprised and touched her.

"Well, first I want you to buy an interesting book, the sort that a boy
would like, to cost about six or seven shillings, and have it sent to
this address; you can put in my card and say I hope the boy will like
it. Are they poor, did you say? No, not very, but this boy is the 'ugly
duckling' of the family, and everybody snubs him, they say he is so dull
and stupid, and I think a little kindness will help him to assert
himself. Then go to the poulterer's, and have a turkey or goose sent to
these addresses."

"Oh, Aunt Mary," exclaimed Ella, aghast, "I daren't choose turkeys, I
don't know anything about them."

"Stuff and nonsense, my dear!" replied her aunt, who had little pity on
ignorance; "it is high time you learnt, then. You had better get a
basket of nice hothouse fruit for the Miss Duquenes; they are as proud
as princesses and as poor as church mice. I don't believe they get half
enough to eat; you must manage to give them some money, somehow."

"Would postal orders do? I could post them in the town, and there is no
need to put any name on them."

"Very well; they are nasty new-fangled things, but I suppose you must
use them; there were no such things when I was young. And do not forget
to go to Miss Alexander's as soon as you can. Dear me! I had no idea
Christmas was so near; she ought to have had her order long ago."

"Is that the queer-looking little lady with blue spectacles?"

"Yes; she used to be a governess, but people think no one can teach
children unless they have certificates and degrees now-a-days, and her
eyesight failed too, so she has to live on a small annuity, but she can
see to knit, and she likes to make a few things to sell when she can.
You had better ask her to make a nice warm shawl for your mamma, and one
of those nice little garments, boot-socks and overalls in one, for the
Jenkins' baby; ten to one its mother is sending it out with hardly
anything on its poor little legs, and its head and shoulders wrapped up
like an Eskimo. You can look round and see if she seems to have anything
else made ready, and buy a few little things."

Ella did not much like these vague and general orders; she would much
rather have been told exactly how much to pay for each article, but she
promised to do her best.

Mrs. Wilson's last commission was to call on an old gentleman, in feeble
health, who had lost his money through the failure of a bank, and was
now unable to procure any of the comforts which his failing health
required; his only son had lately died, and the old man was now alone.
The one relic of his past wealth was a store of beautiful old china,
which it had been the happiness of his life to collect.

"You must go and call on him, Ella, and say that I want a piece of fine
old china for a present, but I cannot go out myself to buy it, and
cannot trust you, and I thought he might know of some one who is
breaking up a collection. If so, will he kindly choose a piece and send
me? Then you see, my dear, if he needs the money he can send me some of
his own china."

Ella did not know old Mr. Dudley, and felt rather shy and embarrassed
when she went to pay this call, and afraid of betraying her aunt's real
intention; but he put her so much at her ease at once, that instead of
running away directly she had delivered her message, she spent a long
time with him admiring his treasures. His old-fashioned courtesy pleased
Ella, and she readily promised to come again and tell him if her aunt
was satisfied with his choice of china, for he had undertaken the
commission, and Ella felt sure, from his manner, that he had understood
Mrs. Wilson's real intention, and intended to avail himself of it.

Ella had to pay several visits to the town before all her shopping was
finished; for there were presents to buy for the servants and nurse, and
decorations for the kitchen, and the parcel of gifts for her own family
to pack and send home; and all these matters took up so much time that
Christmas Day dawned before she had time for any regrets.

(_To be continued._)

[Illustration: THE OLD BRIDGE, LUCERNE.]




OUR TOUR IN NORTH ITALY.

BY TWO LONDON BACHELORS.


We are only a couple of young bachelors--almost "green"--but we enjoy
life greatly and appreciate art when we see it, so on our savings we
decided to see a bit of Italy, and the glorious paintings, buildings,
and picturesque street-corners for which that country is so justly
renowned.

We borrowed books from all our friends, and sought second-hand
bookstalls for every conceivable authority, and a month before our day
for starting we were so brimful of knowledge, that we decided to acquire
no more, but to depend on what we had already achieved.

How tedious the days before the one memorable day which should see us
off to Bale, and how alarming a cold in the head, caught by one of us
two days before the date! Would it develop into something too serious to
travel upon? Surely, never did so simple an ailment command so careful a
treatment or portend so formidable, or possibly formidable, a
catastrophe! Breakfast in bed was the order of the last two mornings,
and two visits from a doctor, who won golden opinions from the two jolly
bachelors for prescribing change as the best medicine. He is a wise
doctor, that Scotchman, and we will seek his counsel on other
occasions--though not just at present, we trust.

We left Victoria Station on an April morning, being "seen off" by three
kind friends, one of whom nearly lost his life by foolishly standing on
the carriage step while the train steamed to the full extent of the
platform. The risk our friend underwent only made us love him the more
for his devotion to his chums; and, really, we would prefer to see no
possible danger in such a friendly desire to prolong the last glimpse of
such interesting worthies as ourselves.

We found the sea at Dover very blue, as usual, and very smooth, so that
it was a very short passage to Calais, and we found considerable
pleasure in re-reading Ruskin's reference to the fine old church tower.
He says:--

"I cannot find words to express the intense pleasure I have always in
first finding myself, after some prolonged stay in England, at the foot
of the old tower of Calais church. The large neglect, the noble
unsightliness of it; the record of its years written so visibly, yet
without sign of weakness or decay; its stern wasteness and gloom, eaten
away by the Channel winds, and overgrown with the bitter sea grasses;
its slates and tiles all shaken and rent, and yet not falling; its
desert of brickwork, full of bolts, and holes, and ugly fissures, and
yet strong, like a bare brown rock; its carelessness of what any one
thinks or feels about it, putting forth no claim, having no beauty, nor
desirableness, pride, nor grace; yet neither asking for pity; not, as
ruins are, useless and piteous, feebly or fondly garrulous of better
days; but, useful still, going through its own daily work--as some old
fisherman, beaten grey by storm, yet drawing his daily nets, so it
stands, with no complaint about its past youth, in blanched and meagre
massiveness and serviceableness, gathering human souls together
underneath it; the sound of its bells for prayer still roiling through
its rents; and the grey peak of it seen far across the sea, principal of
the three that rise above the waste of surfy sand and hillocked
shore--the lighthouse for life, and the belfry for labour, and this--for
patience and praise.

"I cannot tell the half of the strange pleasures and thoughts that come
about me at the sight of that old tower; for, in some sort, it is the
epitome of all that makes the continent of Europe interesting, as
opposed to new countries; and, above all, it completely expresses that
agedness in the midst of active life which binds the old and the new
into harmony. We in England have our new streets, our new inn, our green
shaven lawn, and our piece of ruin emergent from it--a mere specimen of
the middle ages put on a bit of velvet carpet to be shown; and which,
but for its size, might as well be on a museum shelf at once, under
cover:--but, on the Continent, the links are unbroken between the past
and present; and, in such use as they can serve for, the grey-headed
wrecks are suffered to stay with men; while, in unbroken line, the
generations of spared buildings are seen succeeding, each in its place.
And thus, in its largeness, in its permitted evidence of slow decline,
in its poverty, in its absence of all pretence, of all show and care for
outside aspect, that Calais tower has an infinite of symbolism in it,
all the more striking because usually seen in contrast with English
scenes expressive of feelings the exact reverse of these."

At Tergnier we alighted for dinner, being allowed twenty minutes for
five courses and dessert. But hunger of a violent kind prevented any
unreasonable grumbling, and we fortified ourselves for a long night's
journey. Of course, when our dinner had digested, we thought of all the
horrors of midnight railway journeys, and remembered seeing the poor
Curate of St. Pancras after the same journey into Switzerland a year or
two ago. His head was plastered and bandaged, and he, poor fellow,
looked a sorry pickle after the burglary and attempted murder, but was
it not a splendid subject for a sermon when he found himself at
Chamounix and able to preach! And did he not profit by the unusual
opportunity! In thinking of this we each said our prayers quietly, when
we fancied the other was not looking, and towards midnight we wound up
our watches, which we understand are seldom remembered by travellers on
night journeys.

At this stage of the narrative it seems highly desirable to describe
ourselves, and we hasten to prove a total absence of any reluctance:

No. 1 is a slim youth just over twenty, with a delicate complexion and
curly hair, but whose digestion is atrocious, frequently causing his
normally amiable character to be tinged with viciousness, and

No. 2 is ten years older and the reverse of No. 1 in feature and figure,
and also (alas!) in disposition, being crotchety and irritable whenever
events turn out uncomfortably, as frequently happens when there are no
members of the fair sex near to make the passage through life's waters
smooth. He remembers, though would fain forget, some trifling
difficulties in the matter of mending, button sewings, &c., which caused
him to prove a less desirable companion than might otherwise have been
expected.

[Illustration: FLUeELEN.]

However, the two arrived safely at Bale, and, after a matutinal bath in
a slop basin at the station, and a very hot breakfast in two minutes in
the refreshment room, proceeded direct to Lucerne, where they put up at
the Swanen.

Old Haefeli always pretends the keenest interest in the latest arrival,
so we were not surprised on the following day that our hotel bill was
not less than usual. Of course, before leaving that lovely town we did
the "lion" and the "lions" of the place, including the picturesque old
bridge, with its numerous paintings of horrible subjects connected with
the eventful lives of SS. Leodegar and Maurice, the patrons of Lucerne.
But, although there seems to be no way of getting at the details of the
story, thus primitively depicted, which evidently embraces old priests
without heads and warriors worshipping the phenomenon, we admired the
colouring and quaint drawings of the pictures.

The Rigi was partly covered with snow, so that it was impossible to get
either on foot or by train higher than Kaltbad--and when once an
official saw us attempting to walk through a likely field for a better
view, warned us sternly against any such foolhardy attempt.

This was amusing, after the information contained in the Hotel Guide
Book, which runs thus:--"Some daring ascensionists up the Rigi, only
obstinate themselves to disdain the railway, and so _walk_ up the
mountain _on foot_."

Our run down to Weggis was exhausting from the speed with which it was
done, but we soon found ourselves safely and comfortably ensconced at
the hotel at Brunnen, where we intended to spend the night previous to
proceeding by the St. Gothard into Italy.

_En passant_ we might remark on the pleasure of the Lucerne Lake, "out
of season." We were the only visitors in the hotel, and were treated
with liberality in the matter of fare, and with unbounded courtesy and
attention. Our walk through the village at night was grand from its
loneliness and mystery. We have since been there in August, but, O! how
different! We do not like brass bands and noisy German tourists.

Early next morning we went by steamer over the Lake of Flueelen, and were
much struck with the view of this place from the distance--the quaint
red steeple, and the little Swiss chalets looking so pretty against the
huge mountains, which are here more striking than anywhere on the banks
of the lake.

At Flueelen we continued our journey by the St. Gothard Railway, but by
an unlucky chance we got into a compartment with an Italian professor of
languages--a terrible nuisance--who was delighted at having an
opportunity of improving his English pronunciation at our expense.

The older and wiser bachelor, realising that it was impossible to
prevent our companion from chattering, determined to turn him to
account, and commenced to ask questions in Italian, adding to his small
store of knowledge of that language. But the younger bachelor, to whom
the magnificent scenery was entirely new, would stand the worry no
longer, and got into another compartment.

The scenery of the St. Gothard Pass, at once after leaving Flueelen, is
magnificent to a degree. At every turn of the railway is presented a
scene of snow mountains, of roaring torrents, and of towering
precipices, which are so characteristic of this superb country.

At Geschenen the train stopped for about half-an-hour, so we got out and
looked about us, and found, to our delight, the whole of this superb
gorge enveloped in snow. The novelty of the sight proved so tempting
that we resolved to see more of it, and ascend to Andermatt, some miles
from Geschenen, thus sacrificing our railway tickets to Lugano.

We ordered a carriage at the station, and wrapping ourselves up
well--for it was very cold--commenced our drive in right good spirits.
Before starting we were joined by a tall, handsome Englishman, who, like
ourselves, had not been able to resist the temptation of breaking his
journey at Geschenen.

Shortly after leaving the station we entered the dreary Schoellenen
defile, certainly one of the finest in all Switzerland. The road here is
cut in the sides of huge granite rocks. At the base of the gorge rushes
the foaming Reuss, tearing madly against the rocks, which try in vain to
arrest its course. All the way from Geschenen to Andermatt the ascent is
very steep--the road in some places being almost suspended over the
Reuss. Of course, our progress was slow, as, in addition to the
steepness of the road, we had to pass by (and sometimes through) huge
snow drifts from twelve to twenty feet high. When we crossed the famous
Devil's bridge it was covered with mist, produced by the spray from the
neighbouring cataracts. The _old_ Devil's bridge, a few feet below the
new one, has been disused for many years, and is now covered with moss
and lichens. After leaving these the road passes through a long tunnel
(covered with icicles in the early spring) into the valley of Unseren,
which No. 2 said was fertile in summer--but how different when we saw
it! The pastures were covered with snow and ice, and so altered was the
scene, that the younger bachelor (No. 1) thought he was beholding a huge
lake snowed over.

Andermatt looked very pretty with its ancient Romanesque church and
funny little white-washed chalets, and how glad we were to get there!
famished with hunger, and fearfully cold, notwithstanding all our
wrapping up! We drove to a smart-looking hotel, where we were received
pleasantly.

After dinner the younger bachelor, who is of rather a foolhardy
temperament, and is, or rather was, very green, was seized with a desire
to immortalise himself by climbing a mountain unattended, by sleeping
out in the snow, or doing something perfectly ridiculous. So, promising
his friend he would be back again in a couple of hours (a compact which
he never intended to keep, by the way), he marched out of the hotel
already thinking himself a kind of hero. Coming back again in about
three hours and a half, he related that he had gone past Hospenthal to
some place on the old St. Gothard road, where he was suddenly stopped by
the path being so covered with snow that farther progress was absolutely
impossible. So, humbled and disappointed, he came quickly home to find
his friend in a terrible state of mind at his lengthened absence. In the
evening we had some music--for both bachelors are musical--the older
having a baritone voice, and the younger playing the piano. How cold
that night was! and how welcome was the great eider-down pillow, which
is generally such a nuisance in continental hotels.

The next morning, after a hearty breakfast, we commenced our return
journey to Geschenen; the driver, after leaving the tunnel and the
snowdrifts, tearing down the defile at a most dangerous pace. At the
station we took fresh tickets to Lugano, travelling third-class to make
up for the extravagance of abandoning our former tickets, and then
waited for the train which was to take us to Italy. Yes, to Italy, that
wonderful country of which we had read so much, about which we had
acquired so much information, and had been so longing to see for the
last six months! The train, with its huge powerful engine, came slowly
into the station, looking very important, as if it knew that it was
conveying its passengers to the most famous country the world has ever
seen.

The entrance to the great tunnel is within a few yards of Geschenen
Station. When we consider that this is the longest tunnel in the world
(from Geschenen to Airolo, nearly nine and a half miles), and that the
rock which is pierced consists of such hard material as quartz and
granitic gneiss, the work may well claim to be one of the great
engineering feats of the century. The difficulty of supplying the
workmen engaged on the boring of the tunnel with air, necessitated the
building of huge air reservoirs (just outside Geschenen Station), which,
in addition, were used for setting the boring machines into motion. The
air was forced into these reservoirs by water supplied from the Reuss.
The operations were commenced at both ends in 1872, under the auspices
of M. Louis Favre. This great contractor, to whose industry and genius
so much of the final success of the scheme was due, died of apoplexy
whilst inspecting the tunnel, after seven years of unremitting labour
and anxiety. The difficulties which poor Favre had to contend against
were terrible, not the least of which were the crushing of the masonry,
the striking of springs, and a riot among the workmen, which took place
in 1875.

We were a little disappointed with the length of the tunnel, especially
as we had heard that the boring alone had taken nearly eight years to
accomplish. But travelling through a tunnel is not a very agreeable
sensation, as passengers by the Underground Railway will know, so we
were glad when the train emerged from the darkness and slowly wended its
way past Airolo, the first Italian village on the south side of the St.
Gothard. The scenery changes its character almost immediately on leaving
the tunnel; for though it is still, of course, mountainous, with a
roaring torrent, the Ticino, almost equal to the Reuss in its
impetuousness, yet it is much more luxuriant than the Swiss side.
Mulberry trees and vines gradually begin to appear, and the little
church towers (called in Italian, Campanili) becoming more frequent as
one goes south, greatly add to the picturesqueness of the landscape.

Here it may be as well to remind our girls that the Canton Ticino,
though Italian in language, in scenery, in architecture, and, in fact,
in all its characteristics, yet politically belongs to Switzerland.

After passing Faido the scenery becomes, if possible, more beautiful,
and at Bellinzona, the capital of the Canton, we saw our _beau-ideal_ of
Italian landscape. From a distance especially Bellinzona is very
striking, with its three castles and fine 16th century Abbey church;
though when one approaches it more closely, like so many Italian towns,
it is slightly disappointing.

As we approach Lugano, the mountains become less elevated, but the soil
far more rich and fertile, and the olive and aloe, so characteristic of
Italian landscape, are to be seen.

About an hour before reaching Lugano both of us began to feel unwell and
very irritable from the continual travelling; the younger of us
especially so, as he was rapidly developing an attack of his horrible
complaint--indigestion.

On arriving at Lugano we drove in the Hotel Omnibus to the Hotel du Parc
and ordered tea to be brought up into our room, after partaking of which
we went to sleep until table d'hote time. The dinner was, of course, the
first we had tasted in Italy, and we cannot say that it impressed us
favourably with Italian cooking. Everything was oily and rich, and
suggested indigestion and biliousness. After dinner we strolled out of
the hotel to get our impressions of the town of Lugano. The first thing
we noticed was the beautiful Monte S. Salvatore, covered with verdure
from base to summit; and then we admired the charming position and
great picturesqueness of Lugano. Viewed from near the lake, and looking
back on to the town, the number and variety of the Campanili, the
flat-roofed houses scattered near the lake, and the hills covered with
foliage, presented a most delightful scene. With the lake itself we were
disappointed, the mountains struck us as being rather uniform and
uninteresting; the shape of the lake also is not so beautiful as that of
either Como or Maggiore, as we afterwards ascertained.

The interior of the town, with its arcades and quaint shops, so
thoroughly Italian, pleased us very much, and we experienced to the full
that delightful sensation of wandering about in a foreign town on a fine
evening just after sunset.

The Hotel du Parc, at which we stayed, was formerly a monastery, and
contains some rather interesting rooms and corridors. Near to this hotel
is a small church thoroughly unnoticeable from the outside; but which
contains three frescoes by Luini, one of which, the Passion, is not only
the masterpiece of the painter, but one of the finest and best preserved
frescoes in existence. And here we may say a few words about fresco
painting, which is such a marked feature in the Italian churches and
buildings. We do so, because some people, even those who ought to know
better, are in the habit of describing any wall-painting as a fresco;
whereas so many of the wall-paintings, especially in Italy, are not
frescoes at all, but distemper paintings on a dry surface. The real
fresco consists of painting upon plaster, while it is wet. The piece of
plaster which is to be painted upon must be only sufficient for a single
day's work--any that is left over must be cut away, and a fresh piece
added for the next day's work. This accounts for the strongly indented
lines which are really the joins in the plaster work.

The fresco of the Passion before alluded to covers the chancel arch of
the little church, and is divided into two complete sections,
representing various scenes from the Passion. This arrangement, by the
way, is not at all uncommon in early Italian frescoes, and, although it
has been severely criticised, there is no doubt that it often lends
great richness to the composition, though occasionally, from the number
of subjects depicted, and the absence of sky and foreground, it makes
the painting appear confused and over-crowded. The first thing that
strikes one in the work, is three crosses in the largest scale of the
picture, which stand out apart from the rest. On the lower section are
seen the holy women mourning for our Lord, and Roman soldiers on
horseback, the former painted with great beauty and pathos--on this row
also are St. John and a very vigorous group representing the
executioners casting lots for the garments. Above are depicted various
stages of the Passion, and the unbelief of Thomas--this last containing
a most beautiful and dignified representation of Christ. Above both
rows, on either side of the fresco, are two scenes; one being the agony
in the garden, and the other the Ascension. Beneath, between the arches
supporting the fresco, are SS. Sebastian and Roch, the former as fine as
anything in the picture.

As Luini's great work is the most northern fresco of any importance, and
is generally the first seen by the visitor to Italy, it serves as a kind
of introduction to the art which distinguishes that glorious land.

(_To be continued._)




CHILD ISLAND.

A FAIRY TALE FOR YOUNGER GIRLS.

CHAPTER II.


Just then the little hunting party came in sight, and some half dozen of
them, seeing the queen crying, ran forward to learn what had happened.

"What is the matter?" cried Alphonse, running up breathless.

"What's the matter?" repeated the king, petulantly; "I daresay you care
very much what's the matter; a pretty fellow you are to run off in that
style. Here's Pepitia--the queen, I mean--fallen down and hurt herself."

"Oh, poor thing!" said Amanda to Sophia; "she has hurt her nose, I
think."

"No, she hasn't hurt her nose, miss," said the queen, looking up from
her velvet train, for she had lost her handkerchief, and was wiping her
eyes on its satin lining; "and don't you call me 'thing' again, you
saucy puss."

"Lor, you needn't be so cross, Missis Queen," rejoined Amanda, making a
mock curtsey.

This retort produced a sharp altercation, in which several others
readily joined, and a dozen young voices were to be heard all speaking
at once. Their dispute, however, was not a very serious one, nor very
difficult to arrange; so when they had all become good friends, and when
the queen had left off crying, which she did on finding that her wounds
extended no further than a grazed elbow, the king inquired what sport
his companions had had.

"Oh, capital; look here!" replied Alphonse, showing a small ivory cage
containing about a score of butterflies. "Aren't they beauties?"

The butterflies were unanimously pronounced to be fine ones, and the
queen was expressing her admiration of them by a variety of
exclamations, when a little boy pushed his way into the crowd, and said,
"Oh! please queen, here's your crown; I found it among the bramble
bushes."

"Dear me," said Pepitia, "I quite forgot my crown!"

"Why, I've lost mine too!" cried the king, clapping his hand to his head
to feel for the crown, which ought to have been there but was not.

"I've got the king's crown! I've got the king's crown!" cried another
little fellow, running up from the other side of the dell.

"What a bother the crowns are," said Philip.

"Well, suppose we don't wear them any more to-day," suggested the queen.

"No more we will," replied he; "and we had better take off our trains,
for there is no running or doing anything in them, and then you won't go
tumbling over yours, Pepitia; we will lay them down here, and we can put
them on again when we are going home."

So the trains, crowns, ball, and sceptre were put together in the corner
of the dell, and then the king and the queen were ready for a good game
of play with the rest of the troop.

"Well, now, what shall we play at next? I'm tired of hunting
butterflies," said Alphonse.

A little voice suggested "Hunt the slipper."

"Oh, yes! that's right; let's play at hunt the slipper," cried all the
youngest, clapping their hands and jumping up and down.

"I don't care for hunt the slipper," objected Amanda.

"Besides, we have not got a slipper," said the queen, "and I'm sure none
of you shall take your shoes off, or you will catch cold."

"I wish we had a slipper," whimpered a little voice.

At that moment there popped down amongst them, as if it had been thrown
from some high tree, a high-heeled silver slipper, studded with rubies
and emeralds.

"Oh!" screamed all of them, starting back and forming a circle around
it, "where did that come from?"

"Isn't it a beauty!" said one.

"How it sparkles!" said another.

"Why don't you pick it up?" said Edmund, nudging the little Teresa, who
stood next to him.

"I'm afraid," said she. "It's alive, isn't it?"

"No; it won't hurt you," replied he. "Pick it up."

Half afraid, Teresa crept cautiously forward, and, stooping down,
reached out her hand to take up the treasure; but before she could touch
it, it bounded up with such a spring as caused her to scream and run
hastily back.

Then it jumped over Amanda's head, just tapped her on the shoulder, as
much as to say, "Come, catch me," and was lying some dozen yards off on
the other side of the group before any of them could have said "Peter
Piper."

"I know what it is," cried Alphonse; "it's a fairy slipper. The fairy
has sent it for us to play with."

"It's a fairy slipper! It's a fairy slipper!" they all cried. "Let's
hunt the fairy slipper!"

Off they started, the king and queen joining in the chase this time, and
enjoying it, being without their crowns and trains. Master Edmund was
foremost, but he overbalanced himself and lay sprawling on the ground,
whilst the slipper jumped up into a tree. Philip and Alphonse, being the
biggest boys, began immediately to climb up after it. But no sooner had
Alphonse reached the bough where it was perched than it sprang off,
rapped him on the nose, and slid down the opposite side of the tree,
giving the king's leg a sharp kick as it passed by.

"Where has it gone?" cried the two, rapidly descending the tree.

"I don't know," was the general rejoinder, uttered in chorus.

"There it is!" cried Ernest, "hopping across the meadow."

[Illustration: LUGANO. (_See page 90._)]

The whole troop raised a loud shout, and scampered off after it, the
biggest first, and the little ones running in the rear as fast as their
short legs would carry them, and hallooing with the loudest. The slipper
stood still till the foremost was within grasping, length of it, when it
gave a spring and got some yards in advance of the party, and then kept
on hop, hop, hopping before them; yet, although it did not seem to hop
very quickly, and although the young folks ran at the top of their
speed, it always managed to keep at a tantalising distance, so that
none of them could catch it, leading them a fine dance, up hill and down
dale, through hedges and across the stepping-stones of a little brook,
where many a wet shoe and sock were the result of its pranks. At last,
just as Edmund was about to lay hold of it--as he made sure to do--it
bounded to the top of a high, steep bank, and commenced doing the toe
and heel shuffle.

Well, it was a droll sight, certainly, to see that fairy slipper, with
all its sparkling jewels, dancing such a merry jig. I suppose because it
was so droll was the reason why the little folks laughed so loud, and
clapped their hands and jumped about as if they were mad.

Some of the bigger boys began to climb the bank in pursuit of the shoe,
whilst the little ones fancied they did a vast deal towards capturing it
by shouting with all their might; the louder they shouted the quicker
the shoe danced, and the quicker the shoe danced the more they clapped
their hands and laughed.

Alphonse climbed up a break in the bank, and so got to the top of it, a
little to one side of where the shoe was cutting its merry capers. He
crept softly along until he got within arm's length of it, then he made
a bold grasp and seized it by the heel; but he soon let it go again, for
a sharp, tingling pain ran up his arm to his shoulder, making him roar
out pretty loudly.

The slipper, as soon as it was released, spun round two or three times,
then, planting its heel on the ground and pointing its toe in the air,
it gave a spring and was out of sight in a moment.

"Where has it gone to?" was the cry of them all. They looked everywhere
for it, but did not find it. They shouted in chorus, "Come back, fairy
slipper, come back!" but no slipper came, and they were forced to go
home to their pretty houses without having found it, much to the regret
of little Teresa, who was near crying with vexation at having lost the
sparkling plaything.

They were all tired by when they reached their homes, and some of the
younger ones were very cross also, for their little legs were tired from
chasing the slipper, and they began crying for their mammas, so that the
poor Nomen had work enough to get them all to bed and soothe them to
sleep.

Now I cannot tell you whether these little folks would have continued
happy and contented on Child Island, and never have wished to leave it
for any other place, if they had had their mothers and fathers with
them. But not having them, there was something wanting, and by the end
of three weeks, or thereabouts, they were all heartily tired of being
away from home. Yet how to get back there was a difficulty that not even
wise Master Alphonse could solve. They had no boat to take them from the
island, and even if they had had one they would not have known how to
manage it, nor in which direction to guide it, as they were quite
ignorant of the whereabouts of Noviland.

So matters grew from worse to worse on the island, the elder children
getting more discontented and the younger ones more fretful, when one
day they were altogether on the lawn in front of the palace. The big
ones were moodily walking about, plucking the flowers and listlessly
pulling them to pieces, or throwing them away as soon as plucked; the
little ones, cross as two sticks, as nurses sometimes say, were getting
into all sorts of mischief. One had lost her shoe, and was whimpering
because she could not find it; a little boy had had his finger stung by
a bee, and was roaring lustily in consequence; Teresa had fallen full
length, with arms all bare, into a bramble bush, where she lay moaning
piteously.

"What are the children making that row for?" cried Philip, as cross as
the crossest himself; "for half a pin I'd box all their ears. Now then,
what's the matter with you, you little sniveller?" said he, catching
hold of a fair-haired little fellow, who was blubbering his loudest, and
who seemed bent on rubbing his eyes out by the way in which he was
screwing his little fists into them.

"I--I--want my--ma--a, let--me--go--o--to--my--ma," said he, with a sob
between each word.

"You can't go home to your ma, then," said Philip, sharply, giving the
child a shake; but this, instead of quieting, only made him roar louder,
and his example was soon followed by all the rest of his age, and then
there was a dismal chorus, the burden of which was, "Ma, ma, ma."

"Oh! dear, dear me," cried Pepitia, in real distress, "what shall we do
with these children? They'll drive me mad. I shall begin to cry myself
if they don't leave off. I wish the good fairy would come and take us
all home again!"

"Air balloon, air balloon!" shouted Alphonse, starting up from the
grass, where he had been lying on his back during all this confusion,
listlessly staring up to the sky.

This caused a sudden stop to the uproar, and the attention of all was
directed towards the sky. The bigger children waved their handkerchiefs
and shouted "Air balloon!" Some of the little ones joined in the cry,
and so forgot their sorrows, but others resumed their sobbing, and would
not care for balloons or anything else, but only wanted to go home to
their mothers.

The balloon came sailing onwards, seeming to grow larger and larger the
nearer it approached. Within its car sat the fairy Corianda. It slowly
descended in front of the palace, and whilst it rested on the ground
the fairy stepped out; then it re-ascended and floated about in the
air.

"Well, now! what is the matter with you all?" said the fairy, going
among the children and soothing the afflicted ones. "Why are you all so
sad and unhappy? Are you tired of being in this pretty island? and do
you really want to go back to Noviland?"

"Yes, yes; please take us home again," they all cried. "We have been
very happy here, but now we want to go home to our dear mammas and
papas. Please do take us home!"

"Very well," said the fairy; "as you wish it you shall all be back in
your own old homes to-morrow morning. So bid good-bye to Child Island,
and don't cry any more."

Then the fairy waved her hand, and immediately a silvery mist surrounded
them; the palace and the pretty houses became less and less distinct,
until there was only a faint and shadowy outline of them; then the mist
grew thicker, and each child became alarmed at finding itself separated
from all its companions, and on striving to call out it could not.
Thicker and thicker grew the mist until it was quite dark, and the
children, parted from each other, were bewildered and knew not where
they were.

Presently the mist gradually cleared away, and then, instead of Child
Island and the pretty houses, each child found itself in its own bed at
Noviland.

Eagerly that morning did they tell their fond parents of the good fairy
and Child Island, of the beautiful palace and pretty houses, of the tiny
musicians, the fairy slipper, and the strange Nomen. And as each little
tongue prattled its pretty tale, the parents smiled and said to each
other, "Truly our dear child has had a pleasant dream!"

But the children knew better; they knew there was a good fairy Corianda,
and that she had taken them to her magic isle, called Child Island.

E. HUNTER.

[Illustration: THE DEVIL'S BRIDGE. (_See page 90._)]




SCHOOL LUNCHEONS.

BY PHILLIS BROWNE, Author of "The Girl's Own Cookery Book."


The school arrangements of the present day are rather awkward for people
who are accustomed to take their meals at old-fashioned hours. When I
was a girl we used to be at school at nine in the morning, leave at
twelve-thirty, return at two-thirty, and leave again at four; and our
home lessons were a mere trifle. We went home to dinner in the middle of
the day, and there was no difficulty about "satisfying the keen demands
of appetite." But sometimes it rained unexpectedly, and on these
occasions fortune was kind to us. A few minutes before it was time to
start for home there would be a knock at the door, and a neat little
maid would appear bearing a basket, with a message from mother to the
schoolmistress, begging that we might be allowed to take dinner in the
schoolroom. Who can describe the delights of the feast? On the table
generally used for slates and copy-books the basket was solemnly opened.
We never knew what was coming, but it was certain to be good, and, best
of all, it was certain to be a surprise. First there was the snowy
napkin which was to serve as a table-cloth, then were the treasures
underneath. The glory of the experience came, however, when plates and
food were packed away, for then a "little recreation" was considered
necessary before lessons were resumed; and the "recreation," as a rule,
resolved itself into taking flying leaps over forms piled in
extraordinary positions one on the top of another, or alongside each
other. I am afraid it is not a very dignified confession for an elderly
matron to make, but those impromptu gymnastics on forms are amongst the
most delightful recollections of my childhood. The little girls of the
present day practise calisthenics, and perform wonderful feats with
ropes and giant strides; I hope they know something of the delight we
used to get out of our deftly-arranged forms.

As I have already said, however, afternoon school is a thing unknown to
the majority of the fortunate girls who attend our high schools and
collegiate establishments. According to present arrangements girls reach
school at half-past nine, and they remain till half-past one, having an
interval of half an hour between eleven and twelve for rest and
refreshment. Then the pupils separate, and the elder ones go home with
any amount of "home work" to prepare, while the younger ones remain at
school to learn their home lessons with the assistance of the teachers.
It is with the necessities of these young ones who remain that I am just
now concerned. Very often dinner is provided for them at the school, and
a few partake of it there under the superintendence of a teacher who is
told off for the duty. It is my experience, however, that only a small
proportion of the whole number of those who stay avail themselves of
this opportunity. Either the price charged is too high, or conversation
is too much restricted, or from some other reason girls for the most
part prefer to bring food with them "for luncheon," and postpone a
proper meal until they reach home.

Now it is a very bad thing for growing girls to go so long without a
proper meal. Supposing they have to be at school by half-past nine, it
is not unsafe to conclude that this means that breakfast is taken about
half-past eight, if not earlier. Leaving school at four or half-past, it
will not be likely that dinner, or the "meat tea," can be enjoyed before
half-past five. This long fast, broken only by eating an unsatisfactory
"snatch" of one sort or another, is likely to be very injurious to
health. Brain-workers need really to be better fed even than those who
work with their hands, because brain-work is exceedingly exhausting. If
it could be arranged that there should be half an hour's rest after
food, so that study should not interfere with the process of digestion,
why should not the "growing students" take a substantial luncheon with
them, and partake of it when the morning lessons are over? Really this
could be very easily managed. It only needs that there should be a
little forethought on the part of the home authorities; that sufficient
change of diet should be provided; that the luncheons should be freshly
prepared day by day; and that a convenient receptacle for conveying it
backwards and forwards should be procured; then every difficulty which
could be urged against the plan would be conquered. Added to this there
is the fact that children almost always enjoy food which is prepared for
them at home more than they enjoy food prepared by strangers; as a
regular thing, that is. There are to be bought now-a-days very handy
little tin sandwich cases with sides which fold down when empty, and so
occupy very little space. A good deal may be carried in one of these
tins, and it can be stowed away when done with in a corner of the book
bag, and the weight will scarcely be felt. Better still is one of the
small luncheon baskets which are to be seen in every fancy shop, and
which cost but a few pence. A basket three inches deep, three inches
wide, and six inches in length, could be made to hide away a most
diversified repast. A knife and fork, with a single plate could be
slipped into a strap in the lid, and there would be room also for a tiny
flask, whatever solid refreshment was decided on, and also one of those
dainty delicacies which serve to give piquancy and attractiveness to a
luncheon. There is no occasion to limit a meal of this sort to
sandwiches. Sandwiches are excellent when well made, and they can be
varied to any extent, but when indulged in day after day, and week after
week, they become monotonous.

If, however, sandwiches are to preserve their charm they ought not to
appear more than once a week, and they ought not to be made of similar
materials twice in two months. A sandwich is never so much appreciated
as when it is a surprise, and it certainly lends itself to surprises
more than any other preparation that can be named. There is no end to
the ingredients, the combinations, the appetising morsels which can be
introduced into a sandwich. Every sort of meat--tinned, potted, and
preserved, roast, boiled, and stewed; every kind of fish, flesh, and
fowl, can be used for it; while cheese, tomatoes, hard boiled eggs,
curries, and green stuff may be employed to lay between the thin slices
of bread and butter which form its distinguishing feature. To make
sandwiches good, all that is necessary is to bestow a little pains upon
them. Let the bread be only one day old, the butter sweet and
delicious, the meat cut up small, and the seasoning be judiciously and
intelligently introduced, and there is practically no limit to the
welcome changes of diet which may be presented under the general
term--sandwiches. Beef sandwiches, ham sandwiches, veal and ham
sandwiches, bacon, mutton, or game sandwiches, chicken sandwiches,
sandwiches made of anchovy and hard boiled eggs, of curried rabbit and
Parmesan, of curried shell-fish and Parmesan, of small salad, of sliced
tomatoes, of mushrooms, of roast fowl, lettuce and filleted anchovies,
of roast game, shred celery and Tartare sauce, of cooked fish, lettuce
leaves and Tartare sauce, of cold meat and thinly sliced cucumber or
gherkins, of roast game, tongue and aspic jelly, of the flesh of lobster
and mayonnaise, of hard boiled eggs and a very thin sprinkle of finely
shred tarragon, of potted hare, potted ham, or any potted meat, of
cheese, of devilled ham, of cold asparagus, with a suspicion of
mayonnaise, of brawn, of shrimps, of foie gras, of German sausage or
caviare and brown bread and butter, are a few varieties which may serve
to suggest others.

Tinned meats of all descriptions are much approved and largely
patronised by individuals who pride themselves on their capacity for
"putting up a bit of luncheon in half a minute." Tinned meats are all
very well for a change, no one values them in their proper place more
than I do, but it should be understood that they are abused when they
are employed constantly. For growing girls who are using their brains
fresh food is imperatively required, and one of the chief reasons why
these luncheons are to be recommended is that they afford a means of
furnishing wholesome and nourishing provision. Yet it must not be
forgotten that when fresh meat is not to be had, tinned provisions are
to be accepted with gratitude; and it is always wise, therefore, to keep
a supply on hand.

Trifles made of pastry are always acceptable for occasions of the kind
named. Small meat pies, if nicely made, are both appetising and
wholesome; the great point to be observed with regard to them is that
they should not be dry. Yet it is evident that if liquid gravy were put
into them, accidents might be expected, and therefore gravy which will
jelly when cold should always be provided, and poured in when hot
through a hole left in the pastry for the purpose. Small meat pies can
be made of every sort of meat, poultry, and game, the chief detail to be
looked after being the seasoning. In making trifles of this sort, girls
should not forget that nothing is more effectual in preventing
insipidity than a tiny scrap of onion. "Yet onion is objectionable to
many people." Of course it is when introduced in large quantities or in
large pieces, but if used in very small quantities, and chopped until it
is fine as dust, then sprinkled over the meat, it would dissolve
entirely, few would suspect that onion was present, and yet there would
be no danger that the pie would be tasteless. A little piece of onion
the size of a thumb-nail, chopped as small as possible, would be
sufficient to flavour two small meat pies four inches in diameter. And a
pie this size would be quite large enough for a purpose such as this.

Some time ago I gave a few hints as to the best method of making raised
pies, therefore I do not need to repeat them now. I may remind girls,
however, that one encouragement connected with the attempt is that small
pies are much more easy to make than large pies, and that there is
small fear of failure in connection with them. Equally acceptable will
be meat patties, Cornish pasties, mushroom pies, sausage rolls, &c. Hard
boiled eggs, too, are much liked by some people, and if fresh when
cooked, they make an agreeable change. It is scarcely necessary to say
that one or two slices from the breast of a chicken or duck will always
be welcome on an occasion of this sort, if pains be taken to keep these
meats from getting dry.

To an impromptu meal of this kind a simple "sweet" forms a most
agreeable conclusion, and really, when one comes to experiment in this
direction, it is astonishing what a variety of luxuries can be cooked
and conveyed in a cup or small basin, holding little more than half a
pint. Perhaps it may be helpful if I give recipes for a few of these
trifles. Before doing so I should like to suggest that in packing the
luncheon basket a little fruit, fresh or dried, should not be omitted.
Fruit is not only agreeable; it is, when taken in moderation, most
wholesome. It cannot be regarded as particularly nourishing, but it is
very cooling and refreshing, it assists digestion, and it possesses in a
high degree the power of counteracting any harm which may arise from the
use of preserved and tinned meats. It is almost inevitable that when
school luncheons are provided for any length of time, preserved
provisions will enter rather largely into their preparation. When
preserved provisions are taken there is always a little danger of skin
complications, and fresh fruit is the antidote for this condition.
Therefore fresh fruit should on no account be disregarded. When fresh
fruit cannot be had, dried fruits, such as raisins, figs, dates, and
French plums, are almost as valuable, and they are more nourishing.
Raisins, indeed, are most sustaining, and a celebrated physician said
recently that when he expected to have any specially exhausting work on
hand, he took a bunch of muscatels and found they did him more good than
a glass of wine. It is not at all an uncommon thing also for parents who
are anxious lest their daughters should become faint and weary, through
going too long without food, and who cannot arrange to provide them with
a well-packed luncheon basket, to make them form a habit of putting a
large bunch of table raisins into their pockets, with the intention that
these should be nibbled during what is called the interval, that is, the
short period of rest which is allowed at most schools during the
morning. The fruit thus enjoyed proves most invigorating. To gain the
full benefit which belongs to raisins it is necessary that the skin and
seeds should be rejected, because they are indigestible, and are apt to
produce disorders of the bowels, while the ripe luscious pulp is free
from these dangers. It would be well if parents could be convinced what
a valuable food the raisin is. As for dates, their nutritive value is
shown by the fact that they form the chief food of the Arabs; while
prunes and figs are used for their laxative tendency. Compotes of all
sorts of fruits and stewed Normandy pippins may be easily introduced
into the luncheon basket, if put into a wide-mouthed, well stoppered
bottle.

Now for two or three recipes:--

_Baked Custard Cup._--Boil the third of a pint of milk and pour it upon
a beaten egg. Add sugar and a little flavouring, turn the preparation
into a buttered cup, and set it in the oven in a shallow tin filled with
boiling water. Let it bake gently till firm; then take it out, and when
cold pack it in the basket. A couple of tablespoonfuls of stewed fruit
put into a small bottle is an excellent accompaniment to this cup.

_Cabinet Cup Pudding._--Soak a teaspoonful of gelatine in a dessert
spoonful of water. Make a little custard as above, with the third of a
pint of milk and one egg. Prepare a small mould by plunging it first
into hot water, afterwards into cold water. Take two savoy fingers and
four ratafias. Split the savoys in half and place them perpendicularly
round the mould to line it; break up the ratafias and put them also in
the mould. Dissolve the gelatine, stir it, when cool, into the sweetened
and flavoured custard, and pour this gently over the cakes. The mould
should be turned out for eating.

_Rice Cup._--Press warm rice, boiled with milk till well soaked and
stiff, into a buttered cup. Fruit syrup, stewed fruit, or sugar will be
suitable as an accompaniment. Ground rice, boiled in milk and mixed with
a teaspoonful of dissolved gelatine, makes a good rice cup.

_Apple Mould._--Soak a small teaspoonful of gelatine in a dessert
spoonful of water. Pare a couple of good sized baking apples; core them,
cut them into quarters, and put them, with a small strip of thin
lemon-rind, into a gallipot. Set this (covered) in a small stew-pan,
with boiling water to come half-way up the jar, and let the apples steam
until they fall. Lift out the lemon-rind and sweeten the apples.
Dissolve the gelatine, beat it up with the fruit, add a lump of sugar
and one or two drops of cochineal, and turn the preparation into a damp
cup. When cold and stiff it is ready.

_Coffee Mould._--Soak a teaspoonful of gelatine. Dissolve this and stir
it into a third of a pint of very strong, clear coffee. Boil for a
minute or two; add sugar, and, when cool, a little cream. Put the
preparation into a damp cup. One or two drops of vanilla may be added if
approved.

_Apricot Mould._--Soak a teaspoonful of gelatine. Take two halves of
apricot out of a tin of the preserved fruit. Crush them to pulp with the
back of a spoon, and mix with them three-quarters of a cupful of cream
or milk. Add sugar to taste. Dissolve the gelatine, mix it, when cool,
with the apricot, and mould when cold.

_Apple Custard._--Bake a large apple, remove the skin and core, and beat
the pulp with sugar and a squeeze of lemon-juice. Pour the third of a
pint of boiling milk upon one egg, add one lump of sugar. Put the apple
into a cup, pour the custard over, and set in a small baking-tin half
full of boiling water, to bake till the custard is firm in the centre.

_Bread Cup Puddings._--Soak one or two scraps of stale bread in milk to
soften them entirely. Beat them with a fork to a smooth, soft pulp, add
a slice of butter, a spoonful of moist sugar, a little vanilla essence,
a few currants, and one beaten egg. Three parts fill a buttered cup with
the mixture, and bake till firm.

A little well-flavoured jelly, broken up and put into a cup, will always
be a welcome addition to a repast of this description. The same may be
said of tartlets, turnovers, cakes of all descriptions, lemon
cheesecakes, &c. Fruit juice, sweetened agreeably and firmed with a
spoonful of dissolved gelatine, supplies a very delicious sweet. When a
pudding, cream, or tart is being made for the family, it is very easy to
take out a portion and cook it separately in a small glass or jar, to be
used for the school luncheon next day. Some girls would enjoy a morsel
of cheese and a sea-foam biscuit as a relish. A little trouble spent is
well worth while. We should not hear half so many complaints about
over-study and over-pressure, if girls attending school had a good
luncheon in the middle of the day; and before mothers and elder sisters
make up their minds that a girl is doing too many lessons, and that the
teacher must be asked to excuse a portion thereof, they ought to
consider whether they are doing all that is possible to furnish the
young student with food which will give her strength to make the most of
the precious opportunities for improvement which will be gone all too
soon.

One important detail connected with school luncheons must not be
forgotten. It is that the luncheon-basket or sandwich-tin must be kept
sweet and pure. It ought to be scrubbed out frequently, and every day as
soon as it is brought home it should be emptied, cleansed, and put, wide
open, in an airy place, to prevent its becoming close and musty. If
crumbs or little pieces of fat are allowed to work their way into the
crevices, they will surely impart an unpleasant, stuffy odour to the
food which is put into the basket afterwards, and the annoyance will not
easily be got rid of. Unless scrupulous cleanliness be observed in
everything connected with the preparation of food, delicacy and
refinement must be regarded as entirely out of the question.




ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.


MISCELLANEOUS.

PINEAPPLE.--An ordinary afternoon garden and tennis party might be held
in September if the weather were fine.

GILLESPIE.--Most stationers keep very pretty _menu_ cards now, which can
be filled in by hand with the names of the guests and the dishes.

X. Y. Z.--Press the flowers in blotting-paper, which should be
frequently changed.

REXIE.--We are much obliged for your impromptu verses on the G. O. P.,
and for your good wishes also.

RAY MAJENDIE.--The warts may be touched with a stick of lunar caustic.
You had better get a doctor to do it if they be very bad. The 8th July,
1867, was a Monday.

K. T. S.--The digestion is weak and the circulation is affected. You
should consult a doctor about it.

POMPS AND VANITIES.--The maidenhair fern was probably chilled in some
way; it needs warmth and dampness. Your education should be quite
completed before you think of society and its distractions. When you are
twenty (about) will be time enough. Do not write to us again on blue
paper with blue ink, please.

ASPHODEL.--We sympathise much with you, but we cannot advise you to have
anything done to your face. The result is generally a bad scar. Use a
little harmless powder (magnesia), and try to forget it as much as
possible, and fix your thoughts on better things.

A. WALTERS.--The passion-flower bears that name on account of its
several characteristics, which, combined together, seem to symbolise the
following appliances and circumstances connected with our Lord's death
and passion. The leaves, the spear; the tendrils, the cords with which
He was scourged and bound; the ten petals, the ten apostles who deserted
Him; the central pillar, the cross; the stamens, the hammers, the
styles, the nails; the inner circle round the central pillar, the crown
of thorns; the radius round it, the nimbus of glory; the white in the
flower, an emblem of innocence and purity; the blue, a type of heaven.
The fact that it remains open three days and then dies, denotes the
death, burial, and resurrection of the Lord. We partly copy from the
_Watchword_.

LILIAN VAUGHAN.--The Editor of the G. O. P. has nothing to do with the
publishing department of the Religious Tract Society. Write to Mr. Tarn.

EBNOCNUB.--The term "bumpkin" is of Dutch origin, taken from the word
_boomken_, meaning "a sprout," "a fool." It signifies a loutish person,
and is applied to a country clown, not a woman.

CHERRY PIE.--A good run over the downs, or a canter on a donkey, not
only circulates the blood, but make the lungs work well. But you should
beware of cooling quickly afterwards, and of sitting in a draughty or
windy place.

FLORENCE.--As the swelling in your hands is constitutional, your general
health needs very strict attention, as there must be a good deal amiss.
You should live generously, eat heat-making food, take a tonic of a
preparation of iron, and wear woollen under-garments next the skin.

MRS. SWEET tells us she has "asked most important things," which, alas!
we seem to have overlooked, and certainly have forgotten. We are very
sorry, dear little Mrs. Sweet-tooth, and are glad that your kind pa and
ma "like your writing and think it has improved." Try to remember that
you must not steal an "e" from the poor little word "please." We shall
be glad to hear from our small friend again, and hope that her next
letter will not be so long in turning up to the top of our great
mountain of letters.

LOCHABER.--Dante was unquestionably greater as a poet and man of genius
than Goethe; but we could not draw such a comparison between the lady
novelists you name; their styles were very different and equally
meritorious.

FELIX.--You had better apply to the editor of _Parodies_, care of
Messrs. Reeves and Turner, Strand, London, W.C., as we have not leisure
to make the search for you.

S. F. S. T. C.--It is quite natural and harmless to appreciate the
regard and love of those around you. If kind and true and helpful to
them, and you maintain your own self-respect in all your words and
actions, they must value and respect you. Your writing is good. It is
inexpedient to repeat the impertinent assertions of those who have not
sufficient powers of discernment between the painstaking replies to our
thousands of correspondents and what they are pleased to designate "a
hoax."

DAISY LAYLOR.--Lettuce leaves can only serve as a _pis aller_, or
"makeshift" as food for caterpillars before the mulberry leaves come
out, just to save them from starvation; but the latter is their natural
and proper food, and yours are probably dying from want of them.

G. D. C.--You should write to some of the great shipping firms owning
passenger vessels for all such particulars. Rules and terms vary a good
deal, and to give those of one firm would not enlighten you in reference
to others. You ought to understand the duties of a lady's-maid, and be a
good sailor.

NAUGHTY ONE should ask her music teacher whether she should continue her
practising during the visit or whether she would prefer her to desist
for a time. Give her the option; politeness demands it.

BRIGTON.--Your verses show a good deal of poetic feeling, although
without any special indication of originality of thought. The verses
entitled "Morning" ought to have rhymes, as it is not blank verse. You
ought to study the rules of metrical composition before putting your
thoughts into metre. This is as essential to the construction of verse,
as to be acquainted with those of harmony or counterpoint, before
attempting to compose music.

NELLIE P.--We do not know of any hospital specially instituted for the
cure of chronic indigestion. Probably the best cure for you would be
found in treatment at certain mineral baths. On this point you should
obtain medical advice. Those of Vichy (France) or Carlsbad (Bohemia),
Aix-la-Chapelle, or some of our own, might be suitable for you. But we
could not venture to prescribe, neither knowing you nor being doctors.

MARY KINGSLEY.--1. The people of God in all ages, before and after the
commencement of the Christian Era, form one great brotherhood, sharing
the same interests, fighting the same "fight of faith," one in hope, in
aim, and in spiritual sympathy, as children of the same Divine Father.
Thus, they are in communion one with another, and there is really an
unbroken bond of union between those who have gone before, and those
still waiting here. 2. Persons who tell characters from handwriting
advertise.

INQUISITIVE ONE.--1. Soap spoils sponges. Even clean water should be
well squeezed out of them, and then they can be cleaned with sponge
powder, obtained from a chemist. Dry toothbrushes thoroughly, and place
them in the tray made for them. A little soda or bran in the water will
soften it. 2. Your writing is good, but you should learn to write in
straight lines.

SISSIE B.--It is your duty to speak to your father about your brother of
twelve, who runs away for whole days up till past midnight, smokes, and
gets into bad company. He ought to be sent to a boarding school, or else
apprenticed at once, or he will go to ruin. His example is ruining his
brothers. Tell your father that if you could manage them you would
neither complain of chance acts of insubordination nor of the trouble
you willingly take with them; but, as you find you have no control over
them, you must tell him so before they are ruined.

INQUISITIVE.--The average duration of human life is increasing to the
extent of five per cent., or more than two years, since the computation
made in Dr. Farr's life tables. The duration of life amongst women has
increased to a greater degree than that of men, and this may be
attributed to the greater attention paid to hygienic principles and the
new discoveries made in this direction.

LILY OF THE VALLEY.--Surround the plants with a circle of lime, and
water them with tobacco-juice. The latter must, of course, be well
washed before use. Handwriting not formed.

SUNDAY-SCHOOL TEACHER.--No, Robert Raikes was the originator of the
present organised system which obtains in England, and the idea
originated in his work amongst the criminals in prison, their early
religious instruction appearing to him the best preventive measure
towards ensuring their never becoming so fallen. But the Sunday
instruction of children dates back to about the year 1580, Cardinal St.
Charles Borromeo having introduced it at Milan, and in the following
century (1693) his example was followed by the Rev. Joseph Alleine; by
the Rev. David Blair, at Brechin, in about the year 1760. Then followed
the Rev. Theodore Lindsey, at Catterick, Yorkshire, about three years
later; and, lastly, and with a more perfect organisation, Robert Raikes,
the printer of Gloucester, with the co-operation of the Rev. Thomas
Stock, some seventeen years later. The Sunday School Union was founded
nine years before his death, in 1802.

SUNSHADE.--To work a flower upon a sunshade, you must unpick the
material from the frame sufficiently to iron the embroidery on the wrong
side when finished, otherwise the work will look pulled. We should
recommend white flowers, such as large daisies and Japanese anemones.
The sun fades coloured silks when worked in exposed places, and white
will always combine well with any other part of the dress.

MARGUERITA.--As you have left home to support yourself, you are no
longer chaperoned by your mother, and your position is quite changed.
You must now have a card to yourself, and if the persons on whom you
call be out, you may leave one or more as needed; but if your friends be
at home, do not on any account leave cards, but, if at home to you, go
in and see them.

[Illustration: ENGROSSED.]

MACRAME.--1. The rose-leaves designed for drying must be gathered on a
dry hot day and laid in the sun until they have shrivelled. They should
be placed in jars with dried lavender, cloves, woodruff leaves,
orris-root, musk, pimento, and gums; a little salt must be added, and
the ingredients stirred. 2. To prevent gnats from biting, bathe the
face, neck, and hands with vinegar and water before going into the
garden or under trees, or near water, and before going to bed. Shut the
windows early, and destroy all that settle upon them. Put your candle
outside the door, which should be left partially open, while undressing,
and shut the door quickly when you take in the candle. Ammonia cures the
irritation of gnat and mosquito bites.

ALTOUR.--A man has the power of leaving all his property, that is not
settled on his children nor entailed, to his wife, and may likewise give
her the power of appointment, which means that she may give or leave it
to the children in unequal proportion--a shilling to one and all the
rest of the property to another--just as they may deserve to be treated.
When any of the children are undutiful and likely to give the widow
trouble, this placing her in his own position gives her the needed power
over the unruly. Should a man die intestate, the widow is entitled to a
third of his property, and the remainder goes to the children in equal
shares.

LOUISE.--Moths usually come from damp. Keep woollen materials and furs
in a dry place (in a cedar trunk, if you have one), and lay camphor
between the folds of the former. Take the woollen cloths out
occasionally and shake them well.

FORGET-ME-NOT should remain at school till eighteen, if her parents can
afford it. In any case, she has much to learn at home before her
education will be completed--household economy, nursing, cookery, and
every branch comprised in perfecting herself as a mother's help at home,
the sweetest occupation in life!

COMME TOUJOURS.--1. The books of Esdras are apocryphal; the books of
Ezra and Nehemiah are inspired, and are included in the canonical
Scriptures. 2. Under Edward VI., a confession of faith was drawn up by
Cranmer and Ridley, 1551, approved by the king and a commission of
divines, which was published in forty-two articles, but was not approved
by convocation, and a new confession was drawn up by Archbishop Parker,
under Elizabeth, when some articles were rejected, and the whole was
composed of thirty-nine.

COLLEEN.--Your verses show some promise; but we do not see why the
supposed kiss of the "Christ Child" should have proved death to the
baby. If one publisher declines taking your book, try another.
Literature is a trying profession, full of disappointments; yet first
books are not always failures. Write what is useful, and on ground
little occupied by others.

JACKY and CHARLEY.--Have you no feeling of self-respect and maidenly
reserve? or is your letter a feeble attempt at a dull joke? The first
question you ask is very silly indeed. What makes anyone's hair curl?
Either nature in flattened formation of each tube, or the use of
curling-paper or hot irons.

M. F. F.--Use tweezers, and accept our good wishes for your success.

GRATEFUL ALICE.--Anyone on a visit only, or in the employment of the
proprietor of a house in which he or she resides, should have their
letters addressed first to themselves, and underneath their own name
should be that of the owner of the house--their host or hostess, master
or mistress. Under a guest's name you should write "care of So-and-so,"
and under a servant's name "At John Robinson's Esq.," or "At Mrs. John
Robinson's." You write a pretty hand, and your letter does you credit.

F. H. EDWARDS.--1. Our Blessed Lord was about thirty years of age when
His ministry began. See St. Luke iii. 23. The general opinion as to the
duration of that ministry has undergone some change. It was supposed to
have been about three years, but we believe that the learned are now
inclined to think that it was somewhat longer. It would be more reverent
to say "the Lord Jesus." 2. We advise you to place your steel engraving
in the hands of a skilful picture-restorer.

FLORENCE.--Your first business should be to complete your English
education. Learn geography, and study maps thoroughly; study English
grammar, and learn the first three rules in arithmetic; also read some
good English history; over and above, any study of harmony or mere
accomplishments. Our girls do not seem to reflect on the labour entailed
on the Editor, and the time he has to give up in judging between, as
well as reading, some four or five thousand competition papers.

CECMAC should consult a dentist, and avoid wet feet, as the least
dampness of the feet affects the teeth.

MARY KENDAL should read Bishop Mant's "Happiness of the Blest," and
should also consult some clergyman for advice. Her questions are not
suitable to our columns, which are not intended for controversy.

APPLE BLOSSOM.--If you be a steady quiet girl, we should advise you to
choose the Civil Service.

HERALDRY.--The crest is a dragon's or wyvern's head, erased. The dragon
is very common in heraldry. It is supposed to have been brought into
England by the Teutonic knights, who have migrated here. It did not
originate in England.

BESSIE.--St. Hilda founded her double house for nuns and monks at
Streoneshalk in 657 A.D. In 867 the Danes burnt her abbey, and changed
the name to Whitby, or Priest-by (white, or priest's house). The abbey
was refounded, for monks only, under the Benedictine rule, in 1073, by
William de Percy. The nuns in Scott's "Marmion" are mythical ones. The
Ammonites of the Scar are said to be headless snakes turned into a coat
of stone by St. Hilda's prayers.

IVY.--The Lord Chancellor's office is at the House of Lords. There is a
private secretary, a permanent secretary, and a secretary of commissions
and of presentations. Letters should be addressed as above.

MARGUERITE.--1. The name "Epipsychidion," given by Shelley to a poem, is
a diminutive for "Epipsyche," "on the soul." If so, it means "a little
thing" (whether poem or essay) "on the soul." Your second question has
been many times answered. 2. Read "Dinners in Society," page 314, vol.
ii., and "The Habits of Polite Society," page 162, vol. iii. Never,
under any pretext, put a knife to your mouth. Cut a small piece of bread
and place the cheese on it, and convey it thus.

ROSE WALNUT.--In addressing an archdeacon, you should say Mr.
Archdeacon ----; that is his proper title and style. You say, "which is
the most fashionable hand-writing," etc., but do not name those to which
you refer. It should be small, roundish (without angles), without
spidery tails and flourishes; and it should slope from right to left.

READER OF THE G.O.P.--We regret we cannot help you. We suppose you must
apprentice your daughter in the usual way.

PORTIA.--The use of curling-irons is likely to dry and wither the hair.
Many burn the hair in using them. The "oe" in Goethe should be
pronounced as the French word, _moeurs_. Our English letters would not
produce the sound.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Girl's Own Paper, Vol. VIII. No.
358, November 6, 1886., by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GIRL'S OWN PAPER ***

***** This file should be named 18980.txt or 18980.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/9/8/18980/

Produced by Susan Skinner and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
