The Project Gutenberg EBook of Messages to Canada by Shoghi Effendi



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license

This is a _copyrighted_ Project Gutenberg eBook, details below. Please
follow the copyright guidelines in this file.



Title: Messages to Canada

Author: Shoghi Effendi

Release Date: September 2006 [Ebook #19278]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MESSAGES TO CANADA***





Messages to Canada


by Shoghi Effendi




Edition 1, (September 2006)





                           BAHA'I TERMS OF USE


You have permission to freely make and use copies of the text and any
other information ("Content") available on this Site including printing,
emailing, posting, distributing, copying, downloading, uploading,
transmitting, displaying the Content in whole or in part subject to the
following:

1. Our copyright notice and the source reference must be attached to the
Content;

2. The Content may not be modified or altered in any way except to change
the font or appearance;

3. The Content must be used solely for a non-commercial purpose.

Although this blanket permission to reproduce the Content is given freely
such that no special permission is required, the Baha'i International
Community retains full copyright protection for all Content included at
this Site under all applicable national and international laws.

For permission to publish, transmit, display or otherwise use the Content
for any commercial purpose, please contact us
(http://reference.bahai.org/en/contact.html).





                                 CONTENTS


Baha'i Terms of Use
THE GUARDIAN'S FIRST LETTER TO CANADA. 1923
   THE GUARDIAN'S FIRST LETTER TO CANADA. 1923
THE BIRTH OF THE INDEPENDENT CANADIAN BAHA'I COMMUNITY AND THE FIVE YEAR
PLAN. 1948-53
   THE BIRTH OF THE INDEPENDENT CANADIAN BAHA'I COMMUNITY AND THE FIVE
   YEAR PLAN. 1948-53
      Letter of April 14, 1948
         ELECTION OF FIRST NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND ANNOUNCEMENT OF FIVE YEAR
         PLAN
      Letter of November 4, 1948
         AVOID BLANKET RULINGS
         IMPLICATIONS OF PLAN TREMENDOUSLY VAST
         EXECUTION OF THE PLAN
      (Cablegram) May 1949
         INCORPORATION OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY BY PARLIAMENT ACCLAIMED
      Letter of June 19, 1949
         FIRST GOVERNMENT TO RECOGNIZE OFFICIAL STATUS
         OPERATION OF THE PLAN GATHERS MOMENTUM
      Letter of June 23, 1950
         SETTLEMENT OF PIONEERS IN NEWFOUNDLAND
         TEACHING THE CANADIAN INDIANS
         A GREATER UNANIMITY IN SACRIFICE REQUIRED
      Letter of January, 1951
         SHRINE OF THE BAB
      Letter of March 1, 1951
         CONTACT WITH ARCTIC ESKIMOS
            STIRRING EXAMPLE OF BRITISH PIONEERS
            FUTURE OF CANADA VERY GREAT
            IMPERISHABLE RECORD OF INTERNATIONAL SERVICE
            CO-HEIR OF THE TABLETS OF THE DIVINE PLAN
         Letter of October 30, 1951
            PIONEER TO GREENLAND
            CRITICAL FINAL PHASE OF FIVE YEAR PLAN
            UNUTTERABLY PRECIOUS OPPORTUNITY
         Letter of June 8, 1952
            CHARLOTTETOWN MUST BE MAINTAINED
            LAURENTIAN BAHA'I SCHOOL
            HAZIRATU'L-QUDS TO BE ESTABLISHED
            HAND OF THE CAUSE SUTHERLAND MAXWELL
         Letter of September 19, 1952
   CANADA'S PART IN THE TEN YEAR WORLD SPIRITUAL CRUSADE. 1953-57
      CANADA'S PART IN THE TEN YEAR WORLD SPIRITUAL CRUSADE. 1953-57
         (Cablegrams) April 22, 1953
            ANNOUNCEMENT OF GOALS OF TEN YEAR CRUSADE
         Letter of May 1, 1953
         Letter of June 20, 1953
            ACQUISITION OF NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS AND SHRINE
            INITIAL STAGE OF GLORIOUS MISSION
            TWO PARAMOUNT OBJECTIVES
            FUTURE ROLE CONTINGENT ON ACHIEVEMENTS IN THIS PLAN
         Letter of May 6, 1954
            NO PIONEER SHOULD LEAVE HIS POST
            CENTRE ATTENTION ON OBLIGATIONS OF CRUSADE
         Letter of June 15, 1954
            HAND OF THE CAUSE SIEGFRIED SCHOPFLOCHER
            JURISDICTION OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
            CRITERIA FOR TEMPLE SITE
            CONSOLIDATION OF THE HOMEFRONT
            THE TEN YEAR CRUSADE: RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT
            NEWLY-ESTABLISHED ISRAEL BRANCH OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
         Letter of September 5, 1954
            VIRGIN TERRITORIES ADMINISTRATIVELY SEPARATE
         Letter of December 4, 1954
            LAND TITLE TRANSFERRED TO ISRAEL BRANCH
         Letter of March 3, 1955
            DEPRIVATION OF VOTING RIGHTS
         Letter of July 16, 1955
            DIFFICULTIES IN PURCHASE OF TEMPLE SITE
            TASKS STILL UNACCOMPLISHED
            IRANIAN PERSECUTIONS MUST ACT AS STIMULUS
         Letter of January 13, 1956
         Letter of March 10, 1956
         Letter of June 26, 1956
            PIONEER REACHES ANTICOSTI
            GRAVE OF MARION JACK
            BAHA'I MARRIAGE LAW
            VASTNESS OF NEW FIELD PRESENTS CONTRAST WITH PAST
            DEEPENING OF NEWLY-ENROLLED BELIEVERS
         Letter of December 14, 1956
            TEACHING FRENCH CANADIAN CATHOLICS
         Letter of December 22, 1956
            DEAL WITH EACH CASE INDIVIDUALLY
            TEACHING MINORITIES
         Letter of March 30, 1957
            DEFINITION OF COVENANT-BREAKING
         Letter of October 19, 1957
            IMPORTANCE OF TEACHING THE INDIANS
         Letter of July 18, 1957
            MOST URGENT TASKS
            DEADLY INFLUENCE OF MATERIALISTIC CIVILIZATION
            INFERTILE FIELDS EQUALLY VITAL
            VINDICATE INDEPENDENT CHARACTER OF THE FAITH
            THIS COMMUNITY MUST FORGE AHEAD






THE GUARDIAN'S FIRST LETTER TO CANADA. 1923




THE GUARDIAN'S FIRST LETTER TO CANADA. 1923


The beloved of the Lord and the handmaids of the Merciful throughout
Canada.

Care of the members of the Spiritual Assembly in Montreal

Dear Friends,

It is a great pleasure and privilege to me to enter into direct, and I
trust, permanent correspondence with those faithful friends of
'Abdu'l-Baha, who though few in number and scattered over that vast and
flourishing country, will I trust act as a powerful leaven to the mass of
that spiritually-minded people.

Though its people be firmly entrenched in their religious sectarianism and
strongly attached to their religious doctrines and traditions, yet who can
doubt that with courage and persistence, kindliness and wisdom, the
all-conquering words of Baha'u'llah can fail to break down all these
barriers of prejudice and religious exclusiveness and conquer this
longstanding stronghold of sectarian belief!

Surely the efficacy of the universal Teachings of Baha'u'llah as applied
to the cherished and time-honoured religious traditions of the East, has
been sufficiently demonstrated to justify at present our confident hopes
for the future and speedy re-awakening of that land.

May the small company of the steadfast followers of 'Abdu'l-Baha in Canada
be filled with the outpourings of the Divine Grace that are being showered
so mightily in these days upon the friends of God the world over, and may
they arise with undiminished fervour to carry out to their fullest measure
the last wishes and instructions of our departed Master for that great and
flourishing Dominion!

With all good wishes,

Your brother and co-worker,
SHOGHI.

Haifa, Palestine.
January 2, 1923.





THE BIRTH OF THE INDEPENDENT CANADIAN BAHA'I COMMUNITY AND THE FIVE YEAR
PLAN. 1948-53




THE BIRTH OF THE INDEPENDENT CANADIAN BAHA'I COMMUNITY AND THE FIVE YEAR
PLAN. 1948-53



Letter of April 14, 1948


April 14, 1948.


ELECTION OF FIRST NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND ANNOUNCEMENT OF FIVE YEAR PLAN


To the First Canadian National Convention.

Hearts uplifted in thanksgiving to Baha'u'llah for the epoch-making event
of the coming of age of the dearly beloved Canadian Baha'i Community, the
formation of the first National Convention in the City of Montreal and the
forthcoming election of Canada's National Assembly constituting the ninth
pillar of the institution of the Universal House of Justice. I acknowledge
with reverent gratitude and deepest joy the marvellous influence of the
operation of the initial stage in 'Abdu'l-Baha's Divine Plan enabling the
northernmost community of the followers of the Faith on the American
continent to pass the stage of infancy and attain the status, and to
assume the functions of, an independent existence within the World Baha'i
Community. I recall on this auspicious occasion with profound emotion the
heroic services to the mother community of May Maxwell(1) whose life and
death forged unbreakable links binding the body of the Canadian believers
to the sister communities of the United States and Latin America. I am
moved to appeal to assembled delegates to arise in conjunction with the
first Canadian National Assembly, as a token of gratitude for the manifold
blessings of Divine Providence, to initiate in the hour of the birth of
their national activities a Five Year Plan designed to associate them,
formally and systematically and independently, with their sister community
of the United States, in the common task of the prosecution of their
world-encompassing mission. The fulfillment of this collective task
confronting the rapidly maturing community necessitates the incorporation
of the Canadian National Assembly, the establishment of National Baha'i
Endowments, doubling the number of Local Assemblies throughout the
Dominion and raising to one hundred the total number of localities where
Baha'is reside throughout the Provinces, the constitution of a group in
Newfoundland and the formation of a nucleus of the Faith in the Territory
of Greenland, singled out for special mention by the Author of the Divine
Plan, and the participation of Eskimos and Red Indians in membership to
share administrative privileges in local institutions of the Faith in
Canada. I fondly hope and ardently pray that the celebration of the first
centenary of the Birth of Baha'u'llah's prophetic mission will witness the
triumphant consummation of the first historic Plan launched by the
Canadian Baha'i Community in a land whose future greatness and glory, both
materially and spiritually, the Centre of Baha'u'llah's Covenant twice
emphatically proclaimed in His immortal Tablets.(2)

SHOGHI.



Letter of November 4, 1948


November 4, 1948.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Your letter to our beloved Guardian, dated October 6th, has been received,
and he has instructed me to answer you on his behalf.


AVOID BLANKET RULINGS


Our teachings, as outlined in the Advent of Divine Justice, on the subject
of living a chaste life, should be emphasized, but certainly no ruling
what-so-ever should be laid down in this matter. The Baha'is have
certainly not yet reached that stage of moral perfection where they are in
a position to too harshly scrutinize the private lives of other souls, and
each individual should be accepted on the basis of his faith, and sincere
willingness to try to live up to the Divine Standards; further than this
we cannot go at present.

Now that your Assembly is formed, and is embarking on its independent
existence as a National Body, he wishes to emphasize a point which he is
constantly stressing to other National Bodies: you must avoid issuing
rules and regulations. The fundamentals laid down in the Baha'i
Administration must, of course, be adhered to, but there is a tendency for
Assemblies to constantly issue detailed procedures and rules to the
friends, and he considers this hampers the work of the Cause, and is
entirely premature. As far as is possible cases which come up should be
dealt with and settled as they arise, and not a blanket ruling be laid
down to cover all possible similar cases. This preserves the elasticity of
the Administrative Order and prevents red tape from developing and
hampering the work of the Cause. You must likewise bear in mind that you
are now a wholly independent National Body, and must consider the
administration of the affairs of the Faith within your jurisdiction as
your separate problem. There is no more need for you to follow every
single rule laid down by the American N.S.A., than there is for the
British or the Australian and New Zealand N.S.A.s to do this. Uniformity
in fundamentals is essential, but not in every detail. On the contrary,
diversity, the solving of the local situation in the right way, is
important.

He will be very happy to receive reports of the measures you are taking to
carry out your important Five Year Plan. You have the unique distinction
of being the first National Body, yet formed, to be born with a Plan in
its mouth! and you may be sure your fellow Baha'is, East and West, are
watching your progress with keen interest, not unmixed with curiosity, to
see how well you fare in your historic work and your newly created
independence.

The Guardian has high hopes for the achievements of the Canadian Baha'is.
Their national character, which so fortuitously combines the
progressiveness and initiative of the Americans, and the stability and
tenacity of the British, fits them to make great contributions to the
progress of the Faith, both in Canada and throughout the world.

He urges you to keep in close touch with him, and assures you that you,
and your labours, are very dear to his heart, and he is ardently praying
for your success in every field of your manifold activities.

With warm Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.

Dear and Valued Co-workers:

I hail with a joyous heart and confident spirit the truly compelling and
almost simultaneous evidences of the creative, the irresistible power of
the Faith of Baha'u'llah as witnessed by the formation of the first
Canadian National Baha'i Assembly and the inauguration of the Five Year
Plan, designed to orient its members toward and canalize the energies of
the entire Canadian Baha'i Community in support of the immediate tasks
lying before them. So auspicious a beginning, in the life of a community
attaining adulthood under the influence of the processes set in motion as
the result of the progressive unfoldment of the Divine Plan, in a
territory of such vast dimensions, blessed through both the mighty
utterances, and the personal visit of the One Who fostered it from the
hour of its birth, and Whose Plan enabled it to reach maturity, may well
be regarded as one of the most momentous happenings immortalizing the
opening years of the second Baha'i century.


IMPLICATIONS OF PLAN TREMENDOUSLY VAST


The responsibility shouldered by an institution ranking as one of the
sustaining pillars of the future Universal House of Justice is indeed
staggering. The Plan entrusted to its infant hands is, in both its
magnitude and implications tremendously vast. The anxieties, the strenuous
exertions attendant upon the proper guidance, the effectual development
and the sound consolidation of a community emerging into independent
national existence, are inevitably trying. The numerical strength of that
community, the immensity of the area serving as the field for the
operation of its Plan, the meagerness of the resources now at its
disposal, the relative inexperience of its newly-recruited members, the
perils overhanging the territory in which they reside in the event of a
future global conflict, the intensity of opposition which the unfoldment
of its mission may provoke in the strongholds of religious orthodoxy
inimical to the liberalizing influences of the Faith it represents--all
these offer a challenge at once severe, inescapable and soul uplifting.

The eyes of its twin-sister community in the North American continent,
which assisted it in achieving its independence, are fixed upon it, eager
to behold, and ready to aid it in its march to glory. Its sister
communities in Latin America, whose coming of age is as yet unattained,
watch with mingled curiosity and envy, its first strides along the steep
path which they themselves are soon to tread. Other sister communities in
the European, African, Asiatic and Australian continents, some of
venerable age, others rich in experience, and resources, still others
tried and tested, by the fires of persecution, observe with keen
anticipation in their hearts and benediction on their lips, the manner in
which this youngest recruit to their ranks will launch upon its career,
the resolution with which it will face its problems, the spirit which will
animate it in its battles and the stupendousness of the efforts required
to win its victories. Above and beyond them the Spirit of a Master Who
nursed it in its infancy and to Whose Plan it now has consecrated its
mature energies, overshadows it with that self-same solicitude that called
it into existence, that stimulated His tender care in its infancy, that
inspired His written promises, that prompted His lavish praise, that
impelled Him to cast the radiance of His person, in the evening of His
life, on its mother city(3), and induced Him, ere His passing, to bequeath
to it so rich a legacy in what may be regarded as one of the mightiest
repositories of His last wishes. No one, of the galaxy of immortal heroes,
now gathered to the glory of Baha'u'llah, can contemplate with greater
delight the advances, which this community has made, or intercede with
greater efficacy on its behalf, than she(4) who has won the peerless title
of the Mother of that community, the initial phase of whose career was
signalized by the founding of the mother community in the European
continent, and the conclusion of which was crowned by a death cementing
the spiritual bonds now indissolubly uniting the North and South American
continents.


EXECUTION OF THE PLAN


The Five Year Plan, now set in motion, must under no circumstances be
allowed to lag behind its schedule. A befitting start should be made in
the execution of the Plan in all its aspects. The initial steps should be
relentlessly followed by additional measures designed to hasten the
incorporation of your Assembly, to accelerate the multiplication of Local
Assemblies, groups and isolated centres, throughout the Provinces of the
Dominion, to insure the stability of the outpost of the Faith which must
be established in Newfoundland, and to incorporate a steadily growing
element, representative of both the Indian and Eskimo races, into the life
of the community.

Obstacles, however formidable, will have to be determinedly surmounted.
Any reverses that sooner or later may be suffered should be met with stoic
fortitude, and speedily offset by victories in other fields. The glorious
vision now unveiled to your eyes must never be dimmed. The illuminating
promises enshrined in 'Abdu'l-Baha's Tablets should not be forgotten for a
moment. The quality of the success already achieved by so small a number,
over so extensive a field, in so brief a period, at so precarious an hour
in the destinies of mankind, should spur on the elected representatives of
this now fully-fledged community to achieve in as short a period, over
still more extensive an area, and despite a severer crisis than any as yet
encountered, victories more abiding in their merit and more conspicuous in
their brilliance than any as yet won in the service and for the glory of
the Faith of Baha'u'llah.

Your true brother,
SHOGHI.



(Cablegram) May 1949


(Cablegram) May 1949.


INCORPORATION OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY BY PARLIAMENT ACCLAIMED


Acclaim magnificent victory(5) unique (in the) annals (of) East (and)
West. Glorious events foreshadowed by 'Abdu'l-Baha Tablets (of) Divine
Plan (at) long last unfolding. National elected representatives newly
fledged highly promising richly blessed community deserve heartiest
congratulations. Appeal its members arise token gratitude outpouring
divine grace bestowed initial stage its independent development vigorously
prosecute plan attain all objectives set imperishable example sister
communities Baha'i world. Ardently praying still greater victories.

SHOGHI.



Letter of June 19, 1949


June 19, 1949.

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada

Your letters to our beloved Guardian ... have been received, with their
enclosures, as well as the material you sent under separate cover.


FIRST GOVERNMENT TO RECOGNIZE OFFICIAL STATUS


Your Assembly has much to be congratulated upon for your victories during
the past Baha'i Year have been memorable. The passing, in both Houses, of
the Bill(6) relating to the official status of your Assembly was a cause
for great rejoicing, as this is the first time in Baha'i history that any
government has taken such action in relation to our Faith's status. He
would like, if possible, to receive duplicates of the official Gazette and
all publicity given this matter, as the copies you sent were placed in the
Mansion at Bahji, but he wishes to have these documents at hand in his
personal files as well.

The increase in membership in the Canadian Baha'i Community this past year
was also most encouraging. It shows that there is, primarily, unity among
the believers, for where this fundamental quality is lacking in a Baha'i
community any real growth is impossible. That is why the beloved Master so
constantly admonished the friends to be as one soul in different bodies,
for this love and unity constitutes their spiritual health and gives them
the strength to overcome all obstacles in their path.

He fully realizes how great are the tasks facing your Assembly, but feels
confident that the Canadian Baha'is will be able to accomplish them and
will, indeed, set an example to their sister communities in different
parts of the world. The people of that country, the national character,
are such as to hold high promise for the future of the Cause there, and
the great range covered by your Plan is stimulating in the extreme. To be
the Trustees of such a Faith, in such a place, at such a time is a
marvellous privilege, and he is looking forward to your next achievements
with confidence and keen interest.

You may be sure his loving prayers are with you in all you do for the
beloved Faith.

With warmest greetings,
R. RABBANI.

Dear and Valued Co-workers:

The progress achieved in the course of the opening year of the Five Year
Plan, to which the newly emerged independent Canadian Baha'i Community is
solemnly committed, is such as to excite the admiration, and merit the
gratitude, of the entire Baha'i World. A community, so small in numbers,
so restricted in resources, labouring over so extensive a field,
shouldering such weighty responsibilities, has passed through the initial
stage of its task and discharged its duties with such distinction as to be
worthy of the glowing promises and weighty utterances recorded in
'Abdu'l-Baha's Tablets regarding the material as well as the spiritual
potentialities with which that great and promising Dominion has been
endowed.


OPERATION OF THE PLAN GATHERS MOMENTUM


Through the swift and marvellous increase in its membership, through its
faithful and uncompromising adherence to both the spiritual and
administrative principles of the Faith it so nobly serves; through the
multiplication of its administrative centres from the Atlantic to the
Pacific sea-board; through the steady consolidation of its local and
national Funds, designed to sustain its ever-unfolding activities, through
the spirit consistently manifested by the small yet eager and valiant band
of its pioneers and administrators, and more recently through the official
recognition providentially accorded the body of its national elected
representatives by both chambers of the Legislature in that Dominion--an
act wholly unprecedented in the annals of the Faith in any country, in
either East or West--this vigorous, divinely sustained, resistlessly
advancing community, has not only fulfilled the expectations and hopes
that greeted its birth, but set a brilliant example to its sister
communities in both the Eastern and Western Hemispheres.

The task which it has so splendidly inaugurated and which is being now
prosecuted with such vigour, devotion, single-mindedness, harmony and
determination, is still in the initial stage of its development. The
process that has stimulated the growth and increased the number of its
administrative centres must be accelerated no matter how great the
sacrifice involved. The development of the local and national Funds must
be continuously maintained as a prelude to the establishment of local and
national endowments and the ultimate erection of a House of Worship that
will incarnate the soul of a flourishing nation-wide community. The
initiation of a systematic and sustained campaign beyond the frontiers of
that Dominion, and in obedience to the Mandate of the Author of the Divine
Plan, to which it stands inescapably pledged, and aiming at the
introduction of the Faith in Greenland and the conversion of the Eskimos
still remains to be undertaken. The consolidation of the summer school,
the gradual incorporation of firmly established, properly functioning
Assemblies are, moreover, objectives that must under no circumstances be
overlooked or neglected.

As the operation of the Plan gathers momentum the members of this
community must evince a still greater measure of solidarity, rise to
higher levels of heroism, demonstrate a greater capacity for collective
achievement, and attract still more abundant blessings on the varied
enterprises on which they have embarked.

I am following the unfoldment of their Plan with eager and sustained
interest. My ardent prayers will surround and accompany its prosecutors at
every stage of their historic undertaking. My confidence in their ultimate
success is not only unshaken, but has been immensely reinforced. May He
Who watches over them guide every step they take, bless every measure they
adopt, remove every obstacle that impedes their onward march and fulfil
every desire they cherish for the future glory, honour and greatness of
their beloved Faith in that vast and richly blessed Dominion.

SHOGHI.



Letter of June 23, 1950


June 23, 1950.

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada

Your letters ... have been received by our beloved Guardian, and he has
instructed me to answer you on his behalf.

He feels sure you will understand the reason for the delay in answering
your letters--and, indeed, all the other N.S.A.s' letters--when he explains
that not only has this been a terrific winter of work in connection with
the construction of the Shrine, but since the beginning of April my dear
father, Mr. Maxwell(7), has been dangerously and desperately ill. The
anxiety this caused us all, and the constant coming and going of doctors,
nurses, and two periods in hospital, has necessitated putting aside all
correspondence for months. Now, however, thank God, Mr. Maxwell is slowly
improving, and the threads of normal existence can be taken up again by us
all.

The Guardian was very happy to note the community increased this year by
66. He was also delighted to see your Assembly arranged for all delegates
to be present. This is very important, especially during this period when
full consultation and cooperation is necessary amongst all the far-flung
Canadian Assemblies and groups, as well as isolated believers, in order to
ensure the success of your first and so important Plan.

He approves of the measures you have inaugurated for intensive teaching
during the coming year, and trusts they will meet with great success.

The British victories, in the face of great obstacles, and the consistent
success across the border in the U.S.A., must be at once an inspiration
and a challenge to the Canadian friends. There is no doubt they can
succeed if the entire community applies itself eagerly and confidently to
its task.


SETTLEMENT OF PIONEERS IN NEWFOUNDLAND


The Guardian is immensely pleased over the settlement of pioneers(8) in
Newfoundland; this has accomplished one of the specific desires of the
beloved Master, and will redound to the glory of the Canadian Baha'is.

The next, most important task is to get Miss Gates(9) into Greenland. This
is fraught with many difficulties, but he urges your Assembly to persevere
and exert its utmost to remove every obstacle. He will specially pray that
a way may open for her to enter that country.

Regarding your question about contributions: it is up to the individual to
decide; if he wishes to denote a sum to a specific purpose, he is free to
do so; but the friends should recognize the fact that too much labelling
of contributions will tie the hands of the Assembly and prevent it from
meeting its many obligations in various fields of Baha'i activity.

Concerning the points your Assembly raised in the letter of December 20,
1949:

The Guardian is very anxious that no new rules and regulations should be
introduced. As far as possible each N.S.A. should decide secondary matters
for itself, and not try to lay down a rule general in application.

Baha'u'llah gives no right of appeal to the law that both parents must
give permission to the marriage, if they are living--Baha'i marriages
should be referred to assemblies to officiate; where there is no Assembly
to officiate your body is free to decide what procedure should be
followed. Whether it is the chairman or secretary or some other person who
actually conducts the marriage is, likewise, a matter for your body to
decide.

The Guardian has not found it desirable, for various reasons, to send a
recorded message to any Convention.


TEACHING THE CANADIAN INDIANS


The work being done by various Baha'is, including our dear Indian
believer(10) who returned from the United States in order to pioneer
amongst his own people, in teaching the Canadian Indians, is one of the
most important fields of activity under your jurisdiction. The Guardian
hopes that ere long many of these original Canadians will take an active
part in Baha'i affairs and arise to redeem their brethren from the
obscurity and despondency into which they have fallen.

The desire of your Assembly to remain in the closest touch with the
Guardian pleases him very much--he assures you that the desire is mutual!

With the assurance of his loving prayers for you all.

Yours in His service,
R. RABBANI.

P.S. The maps you forwarded were of great interest, and he thanks you for
them. He intends to have one of them published in the next edition of
"Baha'i World."

Dear and Valued Co-workers:

The progress achieved in various fields by the members of the Canadian
Baha'i Community under the direction of its national elected
representatives, since the inception of the Five Year Plan, merits the
highest praise, and augurs well for its success in the years that lie
immediately ahead. The spontaneity with which the members of this
community, on the morrow of its having attained an independent, national
existence, have arisen to execute the Plan designed for the furtherance of
its interests and the consolidation of its newly-born institutions, the
zeal and resolution which have characterized the prosecution of the task
entrusted to their care, the notable success they have already achieved in
the initial stages of their enterprise, have served to heighten my
feelings of admiration for those who have directed its course and
participated in its unfoldment, and to evoke the unstinted praise of all
sister communities in both the East and the West.


A GREATER UNANIMITY IN SACRIFICE REQUIRED


Though much has been achieved in the course of the two years that have
elapsed since the formulation of the Plan, the objectives that the members
of this struggling, youthful and valiant community have set themselves to
attain are still far from being fulfilled. Though the process of the
multiplication of Baha'i centres, over the length and breadth of so vast a
territory, has been, steadily and speedily, gathering momentum, the number
of groups that have achieved Assembly status is still relatively
insignificant, while the pioneer activity designed to awaken and stimulate
the interest of the Eskimos in the Faith and enlist their support may
hardly be said to have been vigorously and adequately launched. The call
to which this newly-fledged community has been summoned is admittedly
urgent and challenging. The character of the tasks alloted to it is, in
many respects, unique. The resources at its disposal for the discharge of
its peculiar responsibilities are no doubt as yet inadequate. The
obstacles that stand in its way and obstruct its path seem almost
insurmountable. Its membership, when viewed in relation to the range over
which it operates, is no doubt wholly inadequate yet the spirit which has
consistently animated the members of the entire community, and the energy
and determination which have distinguished their elected representatives
in the discharge of their sacred duties, are such as to fortify the hopes
which I, as well as their fellow-workers in both hemispheres, have
cherished in our hearts, since the inauguration of their first collective
enterprise in a land so rich in promise, so vast in its potentialities,
and so honoured by the visit of the Centre of the Covenant Himself as well
as by the glowing references made to it by Him in His immortal Tablets.

As the centenary of the birth of Baha'u'llah's prophetic Mission
approaches, as the first historic Plan, signalizing the birth and rise of
a highly privileged community, the sole partner of its great sister
community in the South in the prosecution of 'Abdu'l-Baha's Divine Plan,
gathers momentum and enters the concluding stages in its evolution, a
dedication even more conspicuous than that already manifested in the hour
of the launching of the Plan must needs be displayed by all those who are
called upon to participate in its prosecution. A sterner resolve, a nobler
heroism, a greater unanimity in sacrifice, a further intensification of
effort must be manifested, as the first stage in the evolution of the
mission of the Canadian Baha'i Community draws to a close, and paves the
way for the inauguration of still more splendid enterprises along the path
laid down for them by the unerring hand of the Author of the Divine Plan.

That this community will never relax in its high endeavours, that the
vision of its glorious mission will not be suffered to be dimmed, that
obstacles, however formidable, will neither dampen its zeal or deflect it
from its purpose, is my confident hope and earnest prayer. He Who watches
over its destinies, from Whose pen testimonies so significant and soul
thrilling have flowed, will no doubt continue to direct its steps, to
shower upon it His loving bounties, to surround it with His constant care,
and to enable it to scale loftier heights on its ascent towards the summit
of its destiny.

With a heart brimful with gratitude for all that this community has so far
achieved, and throbbing with hope for the future exploits that will
distinguish its record of stewardship to the Faith of Baha'u'llah, I pray
that by its acts, this community will prove itself worthy of the trust
confided to its care, and the station to which it has been called.

Your true and grateful brother,
SHOGHI.



Letter of January, 1951


January, 1951.


SHRINE OF THE BAB


To the Treasurer of the National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of
Canada.

Your letter of September 13 has reached the beloved Guardian, as well as
the contribution made by the N.S.A. of Canada and some of the friends
towards the construction of the Bab's Shrine, a receipt for which I am
enclosing.

He is pleased to accept this loving donation for an enterprise so dear to
all our hearts--and one which is fulfilling one of the Master's cherished
plans.

There are so many obstacles to be overcome and so much red tape to be
waded through, but he feels no time must be lost, and has just had the
contract signed in Italy for the stone work for the octagon. God has
opened all doors so far--he feels sure He will continue to do so.

With warmest loving greetings to you.
RUHIYYIH.

May the Almighty bless you and your dear and devoted co-workers, whose
labours I deeply appreciate, whose contributions I greatly value, and
whose spirit I truly admire. I will supplicate ardently on your behalf,
that the Beloved may reward you abundantly, and enable you to win great
and memorable victories in His service.

Your true brother,
SHOGHI.



Letter of March 1, 1951


Haifa, Israel,
March 1, 1951.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Your letters ... with enclosures, have been received; and our beloved
Guardian has instructed me to answer you on his behalf...

Although he is finding it so difficult to keep up with his correspondence,
owing to the increase of work here at the International Centre, he follows
with interest the progress being made by the believers in Canada; and is
delighted to see how your Assembly is growing in maturity and capacity to
handle the problems which invariably arise in connection with
administering the affairs of the Faith in such a vast area as the Dominion
of Canada.

He was very happy to know that the work in connection with the Indians and
the Eskimos is receiving special attention; and he would like your
Assembly to please express to Miss Nan Brandle(11) his deep appreciation
of the unique service she is rendering the Cause, and of the exemplary
spirit which is animating her. He hopes other believers will follow in her
footsteps, and arise to do work in this very important field of Baha'i
activity.

He was also pleased to see that your Assembly had increased the annual
budget, as this expresses the determination of the Canadian believers to
expand their activities and carry on their work on a larger scale than
ever before.


CONTACT WITH ARCTIC ESKIMOS


He was also very pleased to see that Mr. Bond(12) had gone north and had
been able to contact the Arctic Eskimos. He hopes that the way will open
for this devoted believer to establish a more permanent contact in that
area in some field of government work.

He considers the policy of your Assembly of helping delegates from distant
points to attend the Convention, an excellent one, as the attendance of
these delegates enables them to carry back a very real awareness of the
work in hand and the needs of the hour, to their local communities.


STIRRING EXAMPLE OF BRITISH PIONEERS


The Guardian feels that, although the Canadian Baha'is are making
excellent progress in consolidating their National Assembly and its
subsidiary committees, in holding Conferences and Summer Schools, in
sending forth travelling teachers, and in contacting the important
minority groups, the Eskimos and Indians, that they are not making
sufficient progress in the all-important field of pioneer activity. If
they are to succeed in accomplishing their plan, a far greater number of
Canadian Baha'is will have to arise and go into the pioneer field. He
feels sure that they can do this, as they have already had the stirring
example of how much was done in the British Isles by a community of about
their size. In comparing the problem which faced the British Baha'is under
their Six Year Plan, and that which faces the Canadian Baha'is under their
Five Year Plan, the friends should bear in mind that they were spared the
severest ordeals of the war, the extreme restrictions and rationing which
the British believers had to put up with. If the British Baha'is, with all
their handicaps and suffering real physical and nervous exhaustion from
the long war years, could accomplish so much, then surely the Canadian
Baha'is, who were spared these conditions, are in a much better state to
carry on and prosecute their tasks. What was done at the very breaking
point in England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales could be done--must be
done--by the Canadian believers, with much less effort. Although sacrifice
is required, he feels sure that the friends are ready and willing to make
the necessary sacrifice, and arise to insure that the very first Plan, the
very first organized work undertaken by them as an independent National
Baha'i Community, will be carried forward and victory insured by the
appointed time.

He assures all the members of your Assembly, and through you, the
community that you serve and represent, that your work is very dear to his
heart, and that you are often remembered in his prayers. He is waiting to
receive the good news that many more objectives have been achieved during
this coming Baha'i year.

With warmest Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.

Dear and Valued Co-workers:

The energy, fidelity and courage, with which the Canadian Baha'i Community
has, in the course of this past year, faced its problems, discharged its
duties and expanded the scope of its teaching and administrative
activities merit the highest praise, and have greatly raised my hopes for
the eventual consummation of the Plan which its members are so steadfastly
prosecuting. Though unable, owing to a chain of circumstances beyond my
control, to address them more frequently and convey to them my feelings of
gratitude and admiration for their recent achievements, I have followed
closely the course of their manifold activities, perused, with care and
interest, the various publications which testify to their unremitting
labours, and remembered them in my prayers in the holy Shrines.


FUTURE OF CANADA VERY GREAT


This community though still in its infancy, is manifesting, in the course
of the first years of its existence as an independent administrative
entity, a virility, a steadfastness of purpose, a dedication to the Cause
it serves, an organizing ability in the administration of its affairs that
augur well for the glorious destiny disclosed by the Pen of the Author of
the Divine Plan in His epoch-making Tablets. Already in the early stages
of its life, when its administrative machinery was still merged with the
institutions evolved by the followers of the Faith residing in the great
Republic of the West, its fame, through a series of memorable events and
noble exploits that have greatly enriched the annals of the Cause of God,
had spread far and wide and the shadow of its future glory had run before
it to the remotest corners of the Baha'i World. For was it not
'Abdu'l-Baha's own pen which, as far back as the dark years of the First
World War, had forecast the splendor of the memorable achievements which,
spiritually and materially, would distinguish and illuminate its annals in
the years to come? "The future of the Dominion of Canada ... is very great
and the events connected with it infinitely glorious... Again I repeat
that the future of Canada is very great, whether from a material or a
spiritual standpoint."(13)


IMPERISHABLE RECORD OF INTERNATIONAL SERVICE


It was a Canadian(14), of French extraction, who through his vision and
skill was instrumental in conceiving the design, and delineating the
features, of the first Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar of the West, marking the
first attempt, however rudimentary, to express the beauty which Baha'i art
will, in its plenitude, unfold to the eyes of the world. It was a Canadian
woman(15), one of the noblest in the ranks of Baha'i pioneers, who alone
and single-handed, forsook her home, settled among an alien people, braved
with a leonine spirit the risks and dangers of the world conflict that
raged around her, and who now, at an advanced age and suffering from
infirmities, is still holding the Fort and is setting an example, worthy
of emulation by all her fellow pioneers of both the East and the West. It
was a member(16) of that same community who won the immortal distinction
of being called upon to be my helpmate, my shield in warding off the darts
of Covenant-breakers and my tireless collaborator in the arduous tasks I
shoulder. It was a Canadian subject(17), the spiritual mother of that same
community, who, though fully aware of the risks of the voyage she was
undertaking, journeyed as far as the capital of Argentina to serve a Cause
that had honoured her so uniquely, and there laid down her life and won
the everlasting crown of martyrdom. It was, moreover, a Canadian(18) who
more recently achieved the immortal renown of designing the exquisite
shell destined to envelop, preserve and embellish the holy and priceless
structure enshrining the dust of the Beloved Founder of our Faith.

A community which, in the course of less than fifty years, has to its
credit such an imperishable record of international service, and standing
now on the threshold of a new epoch in its evolution, recognized as a
self-governing member of the family of Baha'i national communities,
functioning according to a Plan of its own conceived for its orderly and
efficient development, must, if it is to maintain the standard of
excellence it has already attained, display on a still wider front, and
continue to demonstrate, a no less profound spirit of dedication, as it
forges ahead, in the years to come, along the road laid down for it by the
Centre of the Covenant Himself in His historic Tablets.


CO-HEIR OF THE TABLETS OF THE DIVINE PLAN


As co-partner with the American Baha'i Community in the execution of the
Divine Plan, it must evince in both the administrative and pioneer fields,
a heroism that may be truly worthy of its high calling. In the remote and
inhospitable regions of the North, amidst the Eskimos of Greenland and the
Indians of the Dominion of Canada; throughout the Provinces of a far flung
territory where newly fledged assemblies, and nuclei of future Baha'i
institutions in the form of groups and isolated centres, lie scattered; in
its relationships and negotiations with the local, provincial and national
representatives of civil authority in issues affecting matters of personal
status and the independence of the Faith and the establishment of its
endowments; in its contact with the masses and in its effort to publicize
the Faith, enhance its prestige and disseminate its literature, this
community, so young, so vibrant with life, so laden with blessings, so
rich in promise, must rise to such heights, achieve such fame as shall
eclipse the radiance of its past administrative and pioneer achievements.

Then and only then, will this community acquire the spiritual
potentialities that will enable it to discharge, as befits a co-heir of
the Tablets of the Divine Plan, the tremendous responsibilities, and
fulfil the functions, devolving upon it beyond the oceans, and in all the
continents of the globe.

May this community, the leaven placed by the hands of Providence in the
midst of a people belonging to a nation, likewise young, dynamic, richly
endowed with material resources, and assured of a great material
prosperity by 'Abdu'l-Baha, play its part not only in lending a notable
impetus to the world-wide propagation of the Faith it has espoused, but
contribute, as its resources multiply and as it gains in stature, to the
spiritualization and material progress of the nation of which it forms so
vital a part.

SHOGHI.


Letter of October 30, 1951


October 30, 1951.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Your letters ... have been received, with enclosures, and the beloved
Guardian has instructed me to answer you on his behalf.

The Administrative Order is not a governmental or civic body, it is to
regulate and guide the internal affairs of the Baha'i community;
consequently it works, according to its own procedure, best suited to its
needs. A Baha'i who does more than visit temporarily a community is
considered for our administrative purposes as a resident and can vote and
serve accordingly. Students in foreign lands, most obviously not
residents, are registered as local Baha'is, and therefore entitled to do
their share of work and play their part in the local community life. This
should be pointed out to ... who seem to be confusing our internal
administration with external practices which have no relation to it. As
regards their personal attitudes the Guardian, remembering what a devoted
worker ... has been in the past, is very sorry to see she is no longer
active. He does not feel this will lead to either her happiness or that of
...; for, whenever we compromise with what is noblest and best in
ourselves, we are the losers invariably.

The Guardian was delighted to hear the friends are at last responding to
the urgent needs of the Plan and going forth as pioneers. Plans are
concrete things, and not mere honors, and victories--like all other
achievements in life--must be purchased at the cost of persistent efforts!
He feels sure the Canadian Baha'is, perhaps slow to get under way, will
display the counterpart of this British characteristic, and cling like
bull dogs to their tasks, once they do get under way.


PIONEER TO GREENLAND


The departure of Mr. Bond(19) for the Arctic made the Guardian very happy;
this, as well as the sailing of Mr. Bischoff(20) for Greenland, mark the
opening stage of the campaign to carry the Faith to the Eskimos, a plan
set forth by 'Abdu'l-Baha and very dear to His heart.

Encouraging as these steps are, they do not take care of the main body of
the work--the establishment of new Assemblies and groups. In order to
accomplish this the entire Canadian Community will have to rise to a new
level of activity, consciousness, and sacrifice, just as did the British
Baha'i Community during their Six Year Plan. Their success is perhaps one
of the most remarkable ever achieved in the Baha'i World because they were
few in number, run down in health from the long years of suffering during
the war, and poor in financial resources. Their determination, dedication
and moral stamina, however, carried them through, and Baha'u'llah gave
them the victory. He will give the same victory to everyone who shows the
same characteristics. Success breeds success, and this same Community, now
rightfully proud and conscious of its importance, is carrying on its
African work in a brilliant manner. The Canadian Baha'is, more prosperous,
less restricted, and equally capable, can accomplish just as much if they
unitedly determine to do so.

The response made by the Canadian friends to the Guardian's appeal for
support of the Shrine work has touched him very much. He wishes to thank
all those who contributed for their loving generosity, and to assure them
that their cooperation in this wonderful task has added to the spiritual
beauty of an Edifice already so Holy and so beloved by all the believers
the world over.

He wishes you all every success in the discharge of your arduous duties,
and is praying for a marked quickening in the pace of the Five Year Plan.

With Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.


CRITICAL FINAL PHASE OF FIVE YEAR PLAN


Dear and Valued Co-workers:

The Plan on which the attention of the Canadian Baha'i Community is
focused and upon the success of which must depend its immediate destinies,
is now entering a critical stage, demanding increasing vigilance on the
part of all of its members, utter consecration to the Plan's objectives,
and a determined, inflexible resolve to carry it to a successful
conclusion.

Little over a year separates this valiant community, still in the earliest
stage of its independent existence, from the fateful hour that will mark
the termination of the first collective enterprise undertaken in its
history. The vastness of the field in which its infant strength is being
tested is indeed staggering. The resources it can command are severely
limited. The number of active participators, whether as pioneers or
administrators, is admittedly small. The experience of the vast majority
of its supporters is inadequate to the tremendous obligations it has
assumed. The obstacles confronting it whether in Greenland, or among the
Indians and the Eskimos of the extreme North, are truly formidable. Yet
the potency infused into this community, through the Revelation of
'Abdu'l-Baha's Divine Plan, and the spiritual capacity engendered in its
earliest members through His visit to their native land--distinctions which
it fully shares with its sister community in the Great Republic of the
West--empower it to discharge--if it but rise to the occasion--all the
responsibilities it has undertaken and consummate the task to which it
stands pledged.

The eyes of the Baha'i World are expectantly turned towards this newly
erected pillar, designed to sustain in conjunction with other National
Assemblies the weight of the Supreme Legislative Body of the World Order
of Baha'u'llah. Sister communities in both the East and the West, less
privileged than it and deprived of the primacy with which the twin Baha'i
national communities labouring in the North American continent have been
invested by the unerring Pen of the Centre of Baha'u'llah's Covenant, yet
able to achieve, under circumstances no less challenging, a success wholly
out of proportion to their numbers, are eagerly awaiting the outcome of
this initial crusade embarked upon by this blessed, this envied community
in conformity with the Mandate issued by 'Abdu'l-Baha in His immortal
Tablets(21). He Himself Who nourished and watched over it with such loving
care from the earliest days of its inception, Who, in unmistakable
language and on more than one occasion, foreshadowed its glorious future,
both materially and spiritually, is from His station on high, gazing down
upon the youthful efforts exerted by a community so dear to His heart, so
newly launched upon a course which He Himself has charted.

This final phase of the first Plan, undertaken by a newly fledged,
repeatedly blessed community, as it speeds to a close, must witness an
upsurge of spirit, of courage and determination, a display of activity, a
demonstration of self-sacrifice, and of solidarity such as to eclipse its
brightest achievements in the past. The highly meritorious tasks initiated
in both Greenland and Newfoundland need not be enlarged at the present
hour, but should, under no circumstances, be allowed to suffer any
setback. The work started among the Eskimos and Indians should be
maintained at its present level, and should not be permitted to decline.
An extraordinary concentration of effort, systematic, determined and
sustained, is however required throughout all the nine Provinces of the
Dominion, aiming at an unprecedented flow of contributions by the entire
body of the believers, each according to his or her means, into the
National Treasury; a marked increase in the number of pioneers; a much
greater dispersion; a higher degree of austerity; a still nobler display
of consecration--all of which must result in a speedy multiplication of
Assemblies and groups, which constitutes the core of the Plan, and on
which hinges its fortunes.


UNUTTERABLY PRECIOUS OPPORTUNITY


The fleeting months ahead will be truly decisive. Upon the success of the
present Plan must depend, not only the joint tribute to be paid by the
Canadian Baha'i Community to the memory of the Founder of the Faith on the
occasion of the centenary of the Birth of His Revelation, but also the
rapid unfoldment of subsequent stages of the Mission which the Tablets of
'Abdu'l-Baha so clearly, and emphatically entitle it to fulfil.

The opportunity given to this community is precious, unutterably precious.
The fate of this first historic Plan now hangs in the balance. The present
chance, if lost, cannot be retrieved. The issues on which hinge the
successful prosecution of the Plan are so weighty that none can assess
them at present. The needs of a sorely-stricken society, groping in its
distress for God's redemptive Message, are growing more acute with every
passing hour. The Canadian Baha'i Community, newly emerged as an
independent member of the Baha'i World Community, so richly blessed
through its elevation to the rank of a chosen prosecutor of a Divine Plan,
unique, in many respects, among its sister communities in both Hemispheres
in the manifold blessings bestowed upon it, can neither afford to flinch
for a moment or hesitate in the discharge of its sacred duty. Every effort
exerted by this community, during these fate-laden months, every sacrifice
willingly endured by its members, will, if they but persevere, be richly
blessed by Him Who brought it into being, Who nursed it through His love,
Who conferred upon it so distinguished a Mission, Who made such
magnificent promises regarding its future, and Who will continue to
sustain it through His unfailing, His abounding grace and favour.

May this community, ever aware of the position it occupies, and of the
bright prospects unfolding before it, brace itself for one last, supreme
effort, and ensure, while there is yet time, the complete and total
success of the enterprise to which it stands committed.

SHOGHI.


Letter of June 8, 1952


Haifa, Israel,
June 8, 1952.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Your letters ... with their various enclosures, have been received, and
the beloved Guardian has requested me to answer you on his behalf.

He was very happy to hear that the Convention had been such a success, and
above all, that the delegates had realized how urgent are the teaching
tasks still facing the Canadian Community. He hopes that they will carry
back to their local communities a sense of this urgency, and stimulate the
friends to make a heroic last effort and succeed. They say success breeds
success; and there can be no doubt that, upon the accomplishment of the
present goals, must depend the work in the immediate future--both the
degree of spiritual help that will be vouchsafed by God, and the number of
tasks that will be entrusted to the Canadian Baha'is. He feels sure that
if the believers become sufficiently aroused to an awareness of the
critical nature of the coming months, they will take the necessary action,
however great the sacrifice involved.


CHARLOTTETOWN MUST BE MAINTAINED


As he cabled you, he feels that Charlottetown(22), representing as it
does, one of the Canadian Provinces, must be maintained at any cost.

In regard to the question you asked about the holding of the Canadian
Convention in Wilmette, this would not be possible, as the National Body
must hold its Convention in its own country. He suggests, however, that
you make an effort to coordinate the dates in such a way that the friends
can later proceed to Wilmette for the Intercontinental Teaching Conference
and the dedication of the Temple. As long as it is held within the Ridvan
period, the dates can be arranged any way that suits your convenience, and
of course the Convention can be convened in any place in Canada your
Assembly decides upon, even on the American frontier at a point en route
to Chicago.

The Guardian was most happy to hear of the excellent work some of the
Baha'is are doing with the Eskimos and the Indians, and considers their
spirit most exemplary. They are rendering a far greater service than they,
themselves, are aware of, the fruits of which will be seen, not only in
Canada, but because of their repercussions, in other countries where
primitive populations must be taught.

He feels that the opening for a Canadian believer to visit the Governor of
Greenland and his wife is extremely important.

The personality of the Baha'i who accepts this invitation should be
carefully considered, because to be a guest of people in a different
climate and environment, of a different nationality and speaking a
different language, so far away, might be a little trying, and of course
the impression that this Baha'i creates will be of infinite importance to
the Faith in its future development in Greenland. Whether ... makes the
sacrifice and goes, or some other individual is chosen, he urges your
Assembly to above all consider this matter tactfully and from the human
standpoint, rather than the religious one, if one can put it that way.


LAURENTIAN BAHA'I SCHOOL


Your Assembly must decide, as the Guardian already told dear Mr.
Schopflocher(23) when he was here, upon the advisability of maintaining
the Laurentian School(24), in an objective spirit. The Guardian can only
outline to you the principle, which is that Baha'i funds should not be
invested in building up a place that has dear associations for a number of
the friends, but is not going to really serve a large group of the
believers.

The Guardian's point is that National Bodies when creating national
institutions, should use sound judgment, because of the financial
investment involved. This is only reasonable.

Your Assembly must therefore decide what to do about the Laurentian
School, and you are free to make your own decisions.

He would be very happy to have the National Assembly maintain the grave of
dear Sutherland Maxwell(25). His association, not only with Canada and the
inception of the Faith there, but with the World Centre and the Shrine of
the Bab, naturally endears him to all the friends, and his grave should be
a national memorial. When the time comes to erect the tombstone, the
question of receiving contributions from your Body can be considered.

He feels that the Canadian Community, old in the Northern Hemisphere, but
young in its independence, is showing great promise, and he is proud of it
and of the spirit that animates both its National Assembly and its
members. He also feels confident it will distinguish itself, not only
during the coming year, but during the next 10 years before our Most Great
Jubilee falls due in 1963.

With warm Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.

P.S.--Regarding your question concerning St. John's, Newfoundland, and the
believers living outside the town limits: no exception to the general rule
can be made in this case.

Dear and Valued Co-Workers:

The Plan, with which the immediate destinies of the valiant, newly emerged
independent, highly promising Canadian Baha'i Community are linked is, as
it approaches its closing stage, passing through a very critical period in
its unfoldment. Proclaiming as it does the formal association of the
second Baha'i community to attain an independent status in the Western
Hemisphere with its sister communities who, in various parts of the Baha'i
World, are prosecuting specific Plans designed to foster their organic
development, signalizing the alignment of this community as the sole ally
of the chief Executors of 'Abdu'l-Baha's Master Plan, this collective
fate-laden enterprise upon which this youthful and virile member of the
World Baha'i Family has so whole-heartedly and enthusiastically
launched--an enterprise on the successful consummation of which the
effective initiation of its glorious mission, far beyond the borders of
the Dominion of Canada, must ultimately depend--such an enterprise, however
vast the field in which it operates, and no matter how circumscribed the
resources of the small band of stalwart pioneers engaged in its
prosecution--must, under no circumstances be allowed to register a failure.

In Newfoundland, in Greenland, among the Eskimos and Indians, through the
incorporation of its National Assembly, the immediate objectives have been
practically attained. The attention of the entire community must, in the
remaining months ahead, be focused on the dire necessity of multiplying,
at whatever cost, the number of pioneers, the rapid formation of groups,
and the conversion of groups into Assemblies, so that the complete and
total success of the Plan may be assured, and a triumphant community may
step forward, confident and unencumbered by any liabilities, into a vast
arena of service, prosecute a still more glorious mission, and win still
mightier victories.


HAZIRATU'L-QUDS TO BE ESTABLISHED


While the energy of this community is being expended on the conduct of
this fateful undertaking, marking the baptism of this community, a
collateral effort must, owing to unforeseen circumstances, be exerted for
the establishment of an institution which, though not an integral part of
the Plan formulated for that community, is none the less regarded as
indispensable owing to its emergence into an independent existence, and
the necessity of its following the lead of its sister communities in East
and West, which have, at various stages in their development, adopted this
vital measure for the consolidation of their national institutions and the
raising of the prestige of the Faith in their respective countries. The
selection of the city to serve as the seat of the national Haziratu'l-Quds
in the Dominion of Canada; the purchase of either a plot to serve as a
site for the construction of this Edifice, or, preferably, of a building
to serve as a provisional national administrative headquarters for a
rising, steadily expanding community; the association of all other
National Assemblies throughout the Baha'i World in contributing towards
this highly meritorious enterprise; my own association with the Baha'is
the world over in providing for the early emergence of such a Centre
towards which the manifold activities initiated throughout the length and
breadth of a vast Dominion must converge, and from which the impulses
generated by a rapidly evolving, divinely appointed Administrative Order
must radiate--these constitute the imperative needs of the present hour.
The consummation of this added undertaking, the prompt discharge of this
additional responsibility will, no doubt, constitute a befitting
contribution by one of the youngest national communities in the Baha'i
World to the world-wide celebrations that are to commemorate the centenary
of the Birth of Baha'u'llah's Mission, and which will parallel the
termination of the fifty-year old enterprise of the first
Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar of the West, and its official opening for public
Baha'i worship.

In conjunction with the various National Administrative Headquarters
purchased or constructed, in the course of the last three decades, in five
continents of the globe, and for the most part in the capital cities of
several countries in the Eastern Hemisphere, this latest Edifice in the
chain of Baha'i national institutions linking five continents will, no
doubt, serve to enhance the growing prestige of a world-wide Faith and
consolidate the foundations of its administrative structure. From far-off
Sydney, on the shores of the South Pacific Ocean, and successively through
New Delhi in the heart of the Indian sub-continent, Tihran, the capital of
Baha'u'llah's native land, Ba_gh_dad, the Iraqi capital enshrining His
most holy House, Cairo, the Egyptian capital the admitted centre of both
the Arab and Muslim worlds, the city of Frankfurt in the heart of both
Germany and of the European continent, and as far as the heart of the
North American continent and in the neighbourhood of the first Baha'i
Centre established in the Western Hemisphere, this chain of Baha'i
bastions of a world-encircling Order, must be further extended through an
additional link to be forged in the northern part of the Western
Hemisphere, and its subsequent prolongation into Latin America as far as
the Republics of South America.


HAND OF THE CAUSE SUTHERLAND MAXWELL


One more word in conclusion. The passing, at this juncture, of one(26)
who, through a long career of distinguished service to the Cause of
Baha'u'llah, not only since the birth of this community but in more recent
years in the heart and centre of the Baha'i World, has left an indelible
mark on the annals of the Faith, has evoked not only the deepest sorrow
but the utmost regret at a time when this community is beginning to reap
at long last the first fruits of its stewardship to the Cause of God, and
the whole Baha'i World is on the eve of celebrating one of its greatest
Jubilees. By reason of his own saintly life, his self-effacement,
gentleness, loving kindness and nobility of soul; by virtue of his
remarkable endowments which he so devotedly consecrated to both the
embellishment of the slopes of God's holy mountain and the creation of a
befitting design for the second most holy Baha'i Edifice embosomed in its
very heart; and because of his kinship, on the one hand, with a wife(27)
whom posterity will regard, not only as the mother of both the Canadian
Baha'i Community and of the first Baha'i centre established on the
European continent but also as one of the foremost pioneers and martyrs of
the Faith and, on the other with a daughter(28), whose unfailing support
to me as my helpmate, in the darkest days of my life, has earned her the
title already conferred on her father--Sutherland Maxwell has left a
legacy, and achieved a position excelled by only a few among the
supporters of the Faith of Baha'u'llah throughout the eleven decades of
its existence.

Inspired by the example and the accomplishments of those of its members
who have distinguished themselves in the Holy Land, on the European
continent and in both the northern and southern continents of the Western
Hemisphere this community must forge on, with thanksgiving and redoubled
zeal, on the road leading it to a still more glorious destiny in the years
immediately ahead. That it may press forward, conquer still greater
heights, plumb greater depths of consecration, spread wider and wider the
fame of the Cause of God is the cherished desire of my heart and the
object of my constant supplication.

SHOGHI.


Letter of September 19, 1952


Haifa, Israel,
September 19, 1952.

To the Baha'i's who were gathered at the Ontario Summer School Conference.

The beloved Guardian has received your loving letter of August 9th, and
has instructed me to write you on his behalf.

He was most happy to learn that it was possible for so large a number of
the friends to attend, and that such a spirit of love and unity was
present amongst them; also that a number of the attracted friends have
been so touched by the spirit of the Conference, that they have declared
their intention of enlisting their services in the Pathway of Baha'u'llah.

The Guardian was made happy also to learn that several of the believers
have responded to the call for pioneers. A great bounty and a great
responsibility will be given the Canadian believers within the coming few
months, with the launching of the Ten Year Plan, and a firm foundation in
the teaching field must be laid now, so that the friends will be fully
equipped to shoulder their tasks, both at home and abroad, during the
coming World Crusade.

The Guardian will pray for each one of you.

With loving Baha'i greetings,
R. RABBANI.

May the Almighty guide your steps, remove all obstacles from your path,
and enable you to win great and memorable victories in the service of His
glorious Faith.

Your true brother,
SHOGHI.




CANADA'S PART IN THE TEN YEAR WORLD SPIRITUAL CRUSADE. 1953-57



CANADA'S PART IN THE TEN YEAR WORLD SPIRITUAL CRUSADE. 1953-57


(Cablegrams) April 22, 1953


To the Sixth Canadian National Convention.

(Cablegrams) April 22, 1953.

Profoundly impressed magnificent victories. Love. SHOGHI.


ANNOUNCEMENT OF GOALS OF TEN YEAR CRUSADE


Overjoyed grateful triumphant conclusion Five Year Plan most momentous
enterprise launched Canadian Baha'i history initiated morrow emergence
independent existence Canadian Baha'i Community culminating centenary
birth Baha'u'llah's Mission constituting prelude mightier undertaking
designed consolidate magnificent victories achieved homefront inaugurate
community's historic mission beyond confines Dominion. Ten Year Plan its
valiant members now embarking upon enabling them push outposts faith
northernmost territories Western Hemisphere associating them members seven
other sister communities raising aloft banner Faith Pacific Islands
involves:

FIRST opening following virgin territories eleven North America: Anticosti
Island, Baranof Island, Cape Breton Island, Franklin, Grand Manan Island,
Keewatin, Labrador, Magdalen Islands, Miquelon Island and St. Pierre
Island, Queen Charlotte Islands, Yukon; Two Asias--Marquesas Islands, Samoa
Islands.

SECOND consolidation Faith Iceland, Greenland, Mackenzie, Newfoundland.

THIRD purchase land Toronto anticipation construction first
Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar Canada.

FOURTH establishment national Baha'i endowments.

FIFTH doubling number Local Spiritual Assemblies.

SIXTH raising number incorporated Assemblies nineteen.

SEVENTH formation Israel Branch Canadian National Spiritual Assembly.

EIGHTH establishment American Asian teaching committees entrusted task
stimulate coordinate teaching activities initiated Plan. Appeal members
entire community worthy allies chief executors 'Abdu'l-Baha's Divine Plan
dedicate themselves immediate requirements steadily unfolding mission
discharge nobly sacred strenuous tasks ahead contribute memorable share
prosecution decade long World Spiritual Crusade pay befitting tribute
through future accomplishments memory Founder Faith occasion most great
Jubilee commemorating centenary declaration His Mission city Ba_gh_dad.

SHOGHI.


Letter of May 1, 1953


May 1, 1953.

Deeply touched message fervently supplicating signal victories loving
remembrance shrines.

SHOGHI.


Letter of June 20, 1953


Haifa, Israel,
June 20, 1953.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Your letters ... have been received by the beloved Guardian, and he has
instructed me to answer you on his behalf.

He regrets very much the delay in answering your letters. Unfortunately he
has had to delay in replying to all national bodies during the last year,
because of the pressure of work here, which has steadily increased during
this Holy Year.


ACQUISITION OF NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS AND SHRINE


The purchase of your national headquarters, he feels, was an important
milestone in the history of the Faith in Canada, and he hopes that it will
be put to good use, during the coming years, by your Assembly. To this
institution you will soon be adding the Maxwell Home(29) in Montreal,
which should be viewed in the nature of a national shrine, because of its
association with the beloved Master, during His visit to Montreal. He sees
no objection to having one room in the house being used as a little museum
associated with Mr. and Mrs. Maxwell.

He was most happy to hear that all of your goals were achieved. This
augurs well for the future of your activities, especially during the Ten
Year Plan just launched. He wishes through your body to thank all the
pioneers, teachers and Baha'is who helped achieve this great victory. They
have every reason to feel proud of themselves, and grateful to
Baha'u'llah. Undoubtedly His divine assistance, combined with their
determination and faith, enabled them to fulfill their objectives.

He was very happy to know that Charlottetown not only achieved Assembly
status, but that the believers there are mostly self-supporting, as this
is a sound basis for the expansion of the work in any place, especially in
such a difficult one.

The Baha'i Exhibit held at the Canadian National Exhibition was an
excellent means of obtaining publicity. He hopes that advantage will be
taken of similar opportunities in the future.

He urges your assembly to press for recognition of the Baha'i marriage in
Ontario, and, gradually, where the Cause is strong enough, in other
Provinces.

Regarding the question you asked him about one of the believers who seems
to be flagrantly a homosexual--although to a certain extent we must be
forbearing in the matter of people's moral conduct because of the terrible
deterioration in society in general, this does not mean that we can put up
indefinitely with conduct which is disgracing the Cause. This person
should have it brought to his attention that such acts are condemned by
Baha'u'llah, and that he must mend his ways, if necessary consult doctors,
and make efforts to overcome this affliction, which is corruptive for him
and bad for the Cause. If after a period of probation you do not see an
improvement, he should have his voting rights taken away. The Guardian
does not think, however, that a Baha'i body should take it upon itself to
denounce him to the Authorities unless his conduct borders on insanity.

The Guardian attaches the greatest importance, during this opening year of
the Ten Year Campaign, to settling the virgin areas with pioneers. He has
informed, or is informing, the other National Assemblies that there is no
reason why believers from one country should not fill the goals in other
countries. In other words, Canada should receive foreign pioneers for her
goals, who would operate under her jurisdiction; likewise, Canadians could
go forth and pioneer in other countries' goal territories if the way
opened for them to do so. Naturally, they must feel their first
responsibility should be toward the Canadian part of the Plan, as they are
Canadians, but sometimes health, business openings or family connections
might take people into other goal countries.

He realizes that the objectives in the far north are perhaps the hardest.
On the other hand, the harder the task, the more glorious the victory.

You may be sure that he is praying for your success, and, what is more, he
is confident that this young, virile Canadian Community can and will
succeed in carrying out its share of the World Spiritual Crusade, so vast
and challenging, upon which we are now launched.

With warmest Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.


INITIAL STAGE OF GLORIOUS MISSION


Dear and Valued Co-workers:

The brilliant success achieved by the Canadian Baha'i Community, marking
the triumphant conclusion of the Plan formulated on the morrow of the
emergence of the community as an independent member of the International
Baha'i Family, is to be regarded as a milestone of far-reaching importance
in the evolution of the Faith not only in the Dominion of Canada but
throughout the entire Western Hemisphere. The vitality displayed so
strikingly by this youthful community, the exemplary fidelity demonstrated
by its members to the spiritual as well as administrative principles of
the Faith in the conduct of their manifold activities; the splendid
cooperation with their national and local elected representatives which
they have invariably shown, at every stage in the development of the Plan;
the sacrifices they have repeatedly made; the vigilance and care which
they have exercised while discharging their sacred and weighty
responsibilities; the soundness of judgement, the enthusiasm and
perseverance that have distinguished them in the pursuance of their
tasks--all these have, in recent years, contributed, in no small measure,
to the raising of the prestige of this community in the eyes of its sister
communities in both the East and West, and in evoking feelings of profound
admiration in the hearts of the followers of the Faith in every continent
of the globe.

I myself am deeply touched, and feel a profound gratitude for the superb
contribution made by this community, still in the early years of its
development, to the world-wide progress of the Faith achieved since the
inception of the successive Plans undertaken by various National
Assemblies for the systematic propagation of the Faith throughout the
world.

The great strides which this virile and highly promising community has
made in so short a period, over so vast a continent, despite such
formidable obstacles, and in the service of so glorious a Cause, fill my
heart with confidence that the tasks it has now assumed, on the morrow of
the successful termination of the first collective enterprise undertaken
in Canadian Baha'i history, will be consummated in a manner that will
redound to the glory of the Faith to which its members are so wholly
dedicated.

The Ten Year Plan which your Assembly has now launched, in its capacity as
the elected representatives of the Canadian Baha'i Community--the
recognized allies of the chief executors of 'Abdu'l-Baha's Divine Plan--and
which constitutes so important a phase of the global Spiritual Crusade on
which the followers of the Faith have embarked, marks the inauguration of
the initial stage in the unfoldment of the glorious Mission of this
community, a Mission which will enable it to implant, in collaboration
with its sister community in the Great Republic of the West, and with the
support of the Latin American Baha'i communities associated in the
execution of the Divine Plan, the standard of the Faith in all continents
of the Globe.


TWO PARAMOUNT OBJECTIVES


Of all the objectives of this momentous Ten Year Plan, with which the
immediate destinies of this firmly-grounded, fully consecrated,
high-minded, spiritually quickened community are so closely linked, the
purchase of the site of the Mother Temple of the Dominion of Canada and
the settlement of pioneers in the thirteen virgin territories and islands,
eleven of which are situated in North America and two in the South Pacific
Ocean, may be regarded as the most important.

Prompt and effective measures must, no matter how great the sacrifice
involved, be taken to ensure that, ere the termination of the first two
years of the Plan, these two paramount objectives, which constitute the
opening phase of the Plan, will have been fully attained. The entire
community must arise, as it has never risen before, to meet the challenge
of the present hour. The time fixed for the achievement of the initial
victories of the Plan is admittedly brief. The prizes to be won in distant
fields, under the most trying circumstances, by the members of a community
so youthful, so circumscribed in number and resources, are so precious
that none of them can as yet even dimly imagine their transcendent glory.
On the homefront, as well as in the far-off islands of the Pacific Ocean,
in both the teaching and administrative fields, the Canadian Baha'i
Community must labour incessantly in anticipation of the fulfilment of the
inspiring prophecies made by the Centre of the Covenant Who, repeatedly
and in unmistakable language, promised to this community a glorious
future, and predicted both the material and spiritual advancement of the
nation of which it forms a part.


FUTURE ROLE CONTINGENT ON ACHIEVEMENTS IN THIS PLAN


On the success of this initial stage in the unfoldment of its Mission in
foreign fields--a stage which will witness the departure of the Canadian
pioneers from their homeland, in the northern regions of the Western
Hemisphere, to the South Sea Islands--must depend the degree to which they
will be active in days to come in other continents of the globe and their
neighbouring islands. As the chosen allies of the chief executors of the
Master's Divine Plan, they shoulder a responsibility which is at once
staggering, sacred and inescapable. The greater their exertions, the more
abundant will be the outpouring of celestial grace vouchsafed to them by
the Author of the Plan Himself, Who in His immortal Tablets has more than
once assured of His unfailing aid all who arise to serve His Father's
Cause.

Now is the hour to demonstrate to the entire Baha'i World those qualities
which the heroes of God, unfurling in the Western Hemisphere the banners
of a world Crusade destined to be carried over the entire surface of the
globe, must possess in order to accomplish their exalted Mission. The
Canadian Baha'i Community must stand in the vanguard of this conquering
army of Baha'u'llah. They must prove themselves increasingly worthy of
their high calling as this momentous Crusade steadily unfolds. They must
put their entire trust in Him Who guides its destinies from His Station on
high. They must dedicate themselves heart and soul to the fulfilment of
all its objectives without delay, without any exception.

That they may acquit themselves of their task, as befits their high
station in this great spiritual adventure, that they may enrich their
heritage, and noise abroad the fame of the Cause of Baha'u'llah through a
whole-hearted and valiant participation in this world-girdling Spiritual
Crusade, is the object of my constant prayer and one of my most cherished
hopes.

SHOGHI.


Letter of May 6, 1954


Haifa, Israel,
May 6, 1954.

The beloved Guardian has been very happy indeed over the results of the
teaching work in the virgin areas, in the first year of the Ten Year
Crusade. He is very hopeful that all of the virgin areas outside of the
Iron Curtain countries will soon be settled. He urges that your Assemblies
keep after this very important matter, so that the settlements can be
accomplished at the earliest possible date.


NO PIONEER SHOULD LEAVE HIS POST


The Guardian feels that you should write to all of the pioneers, informing
them that he attaches the utmost importance to the services which they are
rendering; in fact, he feels there is no service in the entire Baha'i
World as important as their pioneering work in the virgin areas. They have
achieved a great station of service. They are the representatives of the
Faith in these virgin areas. They have the inestimable privilege of
bringing the light of Baha'u'llah to those hitherto deprived of Divine
Guidance for this day. The Guardian has repeatedly pointed out that they
can and should become the spiritual conquerors of these new lands.

No pioneer should leave his post unless there is some very urgent reason
and then only after consultation with the appropriate committee or
National Assembly. If it is found someone must leave their post because of
very urgent matters, then the National Assembly should arrange to replace
the pioneer before the pioneer leaves. The Guardian urges that you pay the
very closest attention possible to this important matter, so that the
development of the Faith in these virgin areas may move along in an
orderly manner, and produce great results.

As the Guardian cabled the entire Baha'i World at the time of the
Conventions, he hopes that the dynamic spirit which was generated during
the first year of the Plan will be augmented during the second year of the
Plan, and all the Baha'is arise everywhere with renewed effort in order to
spread the Glad-Tidings. This year must mark a very substantial increase
in the number of Baha'is throughout the world--on the home fronts, in the
consolidation areas, and in the virgin areas. Particular attention should
be paid to the home fronts and the consolidation areas. As the Guardian
indicates, he is expecting "an upsurge of activity which, in its range and
intensity, will excel the exploits which have so greatly enlarged the
limits, and noised abroad the fame, of the Cause of God."


CENTRE ATTENTION ON OBLIGATIONS OF CRUSADE


The Guardian urges that all the Baha'is centre their complete attention on
the obligations of the Ten Year Crusade. He feels that no new activities
should be undertaken of any type, whether of a local or a national nature.
The friends must concentrate on the goals of the Ten Year Crusade, which
are principally national and universal. For instance, no local Haziras
should be considered during the Ten Year Crusade, no projects on a
national scale should be considered which do not definitely relate
themselves to the prosecution of the Ten Year Crusade. Funds should not be
used for any purpose except the objects of the Ten Year Crusade.

We are embarked upon the greatest spiritual drama the world has ever
witnessed; and it is going to require the sacrifice of every individual,
every community and every Assembly, whether local or national, in order to
reach the goals. The Guardian feels they can be reached if we will
concentrate, and not allow our attention to be diverted for a moment for
any purpose whatsoever.

The Guardian sends you his loving greetings.

Faithfully yours,
LEROY IOAS,
Assistant Secretary.


Letter of June 15, 1954


Haifa, Israel,
June 15, 1954.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

The letters of your Assembly ... with enclosures, have all been safely
received, and the beloved Guardian has instructed me to answer you on his
behalf.

Although a number of the matters raised in your various letters have been
attended to by cable, he is sorry that he has not been able to answer the
letters of your Assembly sooner. It is becoming increasingly difficult for
him to get around to National Assembly letters at all.

During the past year, the Canadian Baha'i Community has gone through a
great many experiences of both a sad nature and a pleasant one.


HAND OF THE CAUSE SIEGFRIED SCHOPFLOCHER


The loss of the dear Hand of the Cause, Freddie Schopflocher(30), is going
to be much felt. He was so intensely loyal, so vigilant in watching over
the interests of the Faith, so steadfast and tenacious in serving it, that
he will be much missed in the national work. For over thirty years, he
promoted, not only the interests of the Faith, but those of the Canadian
Baha'i Community, and rendered on a national and an international scale,
through contributions and many teaching trips, valuable services to the
Cause of God.

The Guardian was very happy that dear Fred could be buried so close to
Sutherland Maxwell(31). Montreal has indeed been blessed in more ways than
one; and, as the Mother Community of Canada, should become increasingly
active and united, and live up to the high expectations the Master
cherished for her future, and prove herself worthy of the many blessings
she has already received.

Another thing which your community has had to pass through this year--both
a blessing and a calamity--is the departure of so many active members(32)
of your National Body for the pioneer fields abroad. It should be a source
of great pride that one-third of the membership of your Body set sail for
such distant goals, and will render services during the Ten Year Crusade,
of such a nature, he feels sure, as to bestow honour upon the entire
Canadian Community.

He likewise feels that you have every reason to be satisfied over the
progress which has been made during the first year of the Plan in settling
the goals entrusted to your care. It is very unfortunate that Anticosti
should prove such a hard nut to crack. He appreciates very much the
determined efforts which your Body, and particularly Mr. Rakovsky(33),
made to get a pioneer into it before last Ridvan. No doubt eventually your
efforts will be crowned with success; but you will have to be very tactful
and careful in order not to arouse a permanently resistant attitude on the
part of the Company that owns the Island.


JURISDICTION OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


In regard to the question you asked about jurisdiction, the area of
jurisdiction is related to the National Spiritual Assembly responsible for
the teaching work in the goal country in question, and has nothing to do
with what nation the territory belongs to. All Canadian goals are
therefore under the jurisdiction of your National Body, and their pioneers
must report to you, and people, whose declarations are accepted, should be
registered by your National Body, or the Committee in charge of the work,
as the case may be.

Regarding the question as to whether your Assembly need do anything about
its Israel Branch here; this is a matter which concerns entirely local
procedures. Your Canadian Branch has now been legally established, and is
entitled to hold property in this country; and he is planning at an early
date to register a piece of land in its name. He will send you the title
deed as soon as all formalities have been carried out.


CRITERIA FOR TEMPLE SITE


As he has already informed you by cable, he feels that the land which you
proposed as a Temple and National Haziratu'l-Quds site was altogether too
large, too expensive, and above all, too far from the city limits. He has
given instructions to a number of other National Bodies who were pursuing
their investigations in a direction much the same as your own. He realizes
that it is difficult, and much more expensive, to find a plot close to the
heart of the city. On the other hand, he feels that even a small plot,
near to town, is much more reasonable from every standpoint than a large
plot way out in the country. The friends must remember that they have to
be able to get out to their National Centre and their National Temple and
use them; and, as Baha'is are all busy, hardworking people for the most
part, the time involved must inevitably influence their attendance at
Baha'i meetings in the Haziratu'l-Quds, and later, Baha'i services in the
Temple.

If the filling of the goals and the purchase of the Temple site can be
accomplished before the lapse of two years from the inception of the Plan,
he feels you will have carried out his instructions to the letter, and he
will indeed be very happy.

He thinks that it is very befitting that your Body, as representatives of
the Canadian Baha'is, should be responsible for the erection of a
tombstone over dear Fred Schopflocher's grave.

As you no doubt are aware, he cherishes the very brightest hopes for the
future of the Canadian Baha'is. They are a fortunate people, possessing
many of the virtues and few of the faults of both the new and old worlds.
He remembers them in his prayers in the holy Shrines, and prays that they
may speedily advance in the service of the Cause, and accomplish the tasks
outlined in the Ten Year Plan as their particular portion of the work.


CONSOLIDATION OF THE HOMEFRONT


He would like to call your attention, and indeed the attention of all the
friends, to the fact that it is time for the Baha'is everywhere, including
Canada, to devote themselves to the consolidation work. The goals on the
homefront are going to be, in some ways, even harder to achieve than those
abroad. They will require an increase of membership in the community,
which means patient and devoted teaching, the multiplication of both
Assemblies and groups, the incorporation of many Spiritual Assemblies,
etc. They now have nine years in which to do it, but the sooner they get
some of the work finished and behind them, the better! We can never tell
what the situation may be at a later date, and whether we will not have to
carry on our labours under much more difficult circumstances than those
prevailing at present.

With warmest Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.

P.S.--Regarding the contribution which Mrs. Nan Greenwood wishes to make to
the Faith, the Guardian is deeply touched by the spirit which has
motivated her; and he feels that she could spend it in no better way than
to give it to the British National Spiritual Assembly for their National
Haziratu'l-Quds. They are much in need of money, and it would be of real
help in purchasing this important and historic institution.

Please assure her of his admiration for her services, and his loving
prayers.

I notice that I have neglected to answer your question concerning ...
consent to her daughter's marriage: this must be given in order to be a
Baha'i Marriage. Baha'u'llah requires this and makes no provision about a
parent changing his or her mind. So they are free to do so. Once the
written consent is given and the marriage takes place, the parents have no
right to interfere any more.

P.P.S.--The Guardian was very pleased about the publications in Ukrainian
and will place copies in the Mansion Library. Please thank the dear
believer(34) responsible for this work on behalf of the Guardian.


THE TEN YEAR CRUSADE: RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT


Dear and Valued Co-workers:

The Canadian Baha'i Community, having recently entered the second phase of
the World Spiritual Crusade so auspiciously launched by the followers of
the Faith of Baha'u'llah, on the morrow of the hundredth anniversary of
the birth of His prophetic Mission, may well pride itself on the quality
as well as the number of achievements which, in both the teaching and
administrative spheres of Baha'i activity, have distinguished its
stewardship to His Cause ever since its emergence as an independent
national entity in the world-encompassing Baha'i Brotherhood. Its mission
in foreign lands has been befittingly inaugurated in the course of the
opening phase of this world-girdling Crusade. The expansion and
consolidation of its activities on the homefront have kept pace with the
progress of the work initiated by its pioneers beyond the borders of its
homeland in both the Western Hemisphere and the Pacific Islands. It has,
moreover, launched upon its twofold historic enterprise aiming at the
acquisition of its new national administrative Headquarters and the
purchase of the site of its future Temple. It has, in addition, been
enriched through the donation and legal transfer of a House(35) uniquely
associated with 'Abdu'l-Baha's historic visit to the Dominion of Canada,
and destined to be regarded as the foremost Baha'i shrine throughout that
Dominion.

The years immediately ahead must witness an intensification of effort, on
the part of all of its members, as well as its elected national
representatives, which will at once safeguard the prizes won in distant
fields, and lend a notable impetus to the consolidation of its
administrative institutions within its borders.

The selection of the site for the national Haziratu'l-Quds and for the
first Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar in Canada must be made with the utmost care
and promptitude. Measures must, without delay, be taken for the
construction of the administrative Headquarters of its National Assembly.
The process of multiplication of isolated centres, groups and Assemblies
must gather momentum in the course of the current year. The incorporation
of firmly established Local Spiritual Assemblies must simultaneously be
accelerated in order to strengthen the structure of these newly
established institutions, and pave the way for the establishment of local
Baha'i endowments. The one remaining virgin territory assigned to it must
be speedily opened, and every precaution taken to ensure its preservation
in the future. Particular attention should be directed to Iceland and
Greenland, as the two foremost objectives of this community in connection
with the work of consolidation assigned to its members. The meritorious
effort exerted so devotedly and patiently by its national elected
representatives for the purpose of obtaining official recognition by the
Civil Authorities for the Baha'i Marriage Certificate should be pursued
with the utmost diligence, vigilance and caution.


NEWLY-ESTABLISHED ISRAEL BRANCH OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


While the members of this valiant, this highly gifted, forward marching
and deeply consecrated community, and particularly its alert and zealous
national representatives, labour to attain these immediate goals, that
constitute the distinguishing features and the prime objectives of this
newly opened phase of the Crusade, the measures initiated recently in the
Holy Land to transfer eventually part of the international Baha'i
endowments on Mt. Carmel to the name of the newly-established Branch of
the Canadian National Spiritual Assembly will be steadily and
energetically pursued, as a mark of abiding appreciation of the
magnificence and exemplary achievements of this community in recent years
in the service of the Cause of Baha'u'llah.

A community, whose founder(36) has conferred upon it such splendid
benefits and whose dust now lies on the far-off shores of the South
American continent; which has been exalted by reason of the eminent
services which two other members(37), (38) of her family have rendered, in
the Holy Land, to the World Baha'i Community; which can, moreover boast of
the enduring and historic achievements of yet another Hand of the
Cause(39)--the third nominated from the ranks of its members; and which, in
the course of the past year, has set a further example of steadfastness
and devotion through the action of outstanding members(40) of its National
Assembly who have forsaken their homes to settle in the African
continent--such a community can well assert its capacity and determination
to consummate, within the allotted time, the laborious and mighty task it
has risen to shoulder.

The rapidity of its expansion, its sound development, the steadiness, the
single-mindedness, the tenacity, the enthusiasm, the unity and staunchness
of its members, augur well for the remarkable material and spiritual
progress which the nation to which it belongs must achieve in the years to
come, in accordance with the explicit promise enshrined in the Tablets of
the Divine Plan by the Centre of Baha'u'llah's Covenant.

May this community march forward on its destined path with renewed vigour,
with undimmed vision, with complete unity, with utter consecration, and be
enabled to play an important part in the execution of the great tasks
ahead, and worthily contribute to the prodigious efforts now being
collectively exerted by the followers of the Most Great Name, in every
continent of the globe, for the world-wide establishment and ultimate
triumph of a long-persecuted, divinely impelled, world-redeeming Faith.

Your true brother,
SHOGHI.


Letter of September 5, 1954


Haifa, Israel,
September 5, 1954.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada

Your loving letter of August 3rd came duly to hand, and the questions
which you have raised were presented to our beloved Guardian.


VIRGIN TERRITORIES ADMINISTRATIVELY SEPARATE


About a year ago, there was some correspondence with your Assembly with
regard to the Baha'is who are in the virgin territories of the Ten Year
Crusade, etc.

The Guardian renews the advice given at that time, that all pioneers in
virgin areas, or new Baha'is who are confirmed in those virgin areas, are
not part of the National Baha'i Community, and cannot vote in elections.

The virgin areas are separate, administratively, and under the
jurisdiction of the National Spiritual Assembly responsible for their
development. The same ruling applies to any Assemblies which might develop
in these virgin areas. They do not become part of the National Baha'i
Community.

The Guardian was distressed to learn of the problems which arose
concerning the election of the Spiritual Assembly of .... However, the
ruling is quite definite, that an Assembly must be elected on the first
day of Ridvan, April 21st. Regretful as it is, ... must now be considered
a Group, until the elections which take place April 21st, 1955.

The beloved Guardian assures you all of his prayers in your behalf. He
sends you his loving greetings.

Faithfully yours,
LEROY IOAS,
Assistant Secretary.


Letter of December 4, 1954


Haifa, Israel,
December 4, 1954.


LAND TITLE TRANSFERRED TO ISRAEL BRANCH


National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

The beloved Guardian has directed me to write you in connection with a
recent communication you submitted to him, in which you stated that you
were pleased to note that the Israel Branch of the National Spiritual
Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada was to be established, and land on Mount
Carmel registered in your name.

In the Guardian's Ridvan Message of April, 1954, you will note he has
advised that the Israel Branch of the Baha'is of Canada was formed. The
actual date of the formation was November 20, 1953.

The land of Mount Carmel, which the Guardian had instructed be registered
in the name of the Israel Branch of the Canadian Assembly was transferred
to the title of the National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada,
Israel Branch, on October 1, 1954.

I am attaching hereto, for preservation in your files, the title deed
covering this particular piece of land, which is Parcel No. 304, Block
10811, Mount Carmel, Haifa.

With loving Baha'i greetings, I am

Faithfully yours,
LEROY IOAS,
Assistant Secretary.


Letter of March 3, 1955


Haifa, Israel,
March 3, 1955.


DEPRIVATION OF VOTING RIGHTS


National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Our beloved Guardian has instructed me to write you on his behalf and
bring to your attention a certain matter.

He has heard from a number of sources that some of the Canadian believers
have been deprived of their voting rights; and he feels that all National
Spiritual Assemblies should bear in mind that this is the heaviest
sanction we possess at present in the Faith, short of excommunication,
which lies within the powers of the Guardian alone; and is consequently a
very weighty weapon to wield.

He considers that under no circumstances should any Baha'i ever be
suspended from the voting list and deprived of his administrative
privileges for a matter which is not of the utmost gravity. By that he
means breaking of laws, such as the consent of parents to marriage etc.,
or acts of such an immoral character as to damage the good name of the
Faith.

He has informed, some years ago, the American National Spiritual Assembly
that, before anyone is deprived of their voting rights, they should be
consulted with and lovingly admonished at first, given repeated warnings
if they do not mend their immoral ways, or whatever other extremely
serious misdemeanor they are committing, and finally, after these repeated
warnings, be deprived of their voting rights.

He feels that a great many problems within the communities would be solved
if the believers would more constructively devote their attention to the
teaching work and carrying out the provisions of the Ten Year Plan as they
affect Canada. The leadership of your Assembly in these matters will no
doubt be of great help and inspiration to the friends; and he on his part
will reinforce you with his prayers.

With warm Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.


Letter of July 16, 1955


Haifa, Israel,
July 16, 1955.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Your letters ... have been received by the beloved Guardian, and he has
instructed me to answer you on his behalf.

He considers the revised criteria you sent him for the Temple and
Haziratu'l-Quds land, as outlined in your letter of December 15,
satisfactory.


DIFFICULTIES IN PURCHASE OF TEMPLE SITE


He is extremely anxious to have these properties purchased, either
together in one place, or if this is not feasible, then in two separate
places, as he has already informed you. Eight of the eleven Temple sites
have been purchased, and many of them in very difficult places; and he
feels very strongly that it is a great pity that Canada should be
behind-hand in this matter, in view of the fact that she is one of the
oldest Baha'i Communities in the western world. No doubt the problem is
more difficult for you to solve, owing to special conditions in Toronto
and vicinity; but we know that all problems are solvable for the Baha'is,
with the power of God to help them; and he is eagerly awaiting news of
your success.

As regards your question about the nature of the endowment, which is one
of the objectives of your part of the Ten Year Crusade: although the
Maxwell house(41) in Montreal is really a national endowment he feels in
conformity to the policy being pursued in other countries, Canada should
acquire one also at this time. This may be a small piece of land purchased
for Two Thousand Dollars or even less, or for that matter, given to the
National Assembly as a gift. The important point is that Canada should
have its own National Endowment, as distinguished from the school
property.

The Guardian does not feel that it is possible or right to change
Anticosti and to substitute another goal in its place. He fully realizes
the difficulties involved; but feels convinced that sooner or later,
through perseverance and prayer, a way will open and a believer will be
able to get into the Island on a more-or-less permanent basis.

As regards the money you have received on account of the estate of dear
Fred Schopflocher(42) : this your Body is free to use for the purposes of
the Faith, at its discretion.

He hopes that the National Assembly, through its love, wisdom, patience
and leadership, will carry the members of the Canadian Community forward
during the coming year on the difficult road leading to the achievement of
their goals. The spirit of enthusiasm and consecration which animates the
Canadian Baha'is will, he feels sure, bring forth a warm and generous
response to all the plans made by your Assembly for obtaining your
objectives.

He assures you, and through you all the members of the Canadian Community
that the work in Canada is very dear to his heart, and that he will
remember you all in his loving prayers in the holy Shrines.

With warm Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.

P.S.--He is very happy to see you are expediting building Mr.
Schopflocher's grave. The details he leaves to the discretion of your
Assembly, as he is too busy to go into such matters. The most suitable
passages should be chosen from his cable regarding Freddie at the time of
his death, and engraved on the tombstone of this distinguished Hand of the
Cause.

As regards building the grave of Mr. Maxwell(43), this has already been
taken care of by his family. However, he thanks you for the loving offer.

He approves of your taking steps right away to erect a worthy monument on
the grave of dear and heroic Marion Jack(44).

Dear and Valued Co-workers:

The steady progress of the manifold activities in which the Canadian
Baha'i Community is now so devotedly and unflaggingly engaged is a source
of great joy and satisfaction to all who have, in recent years, observed
its growth and noted its consolidation throughout that vast and promising
Dominion.

Though some of its most capable and active members have, urged by a
compelling force to forsake their homes and settle in distant fields,
ceased to lend to the members of this brave and greatly consecrated
community their valued support, and though a few others to be reckoned
among its oldest and most distinguished supporters have passed to the Abha
Kingdom, leaving a gap difficult indeed to fill, yet the body of the
Canadian believers, far from flinching or relaxing in its noble
endeavours, has amply demonstrated its capacity to assume and discharge
its heavy and multiple responsibilities, has steadily enlarged the scope
of its achievements, has preserved its unity, and coherence, and set an
inspiring example to Baha'i communities, both young and old, throughout
all the continents of the globe.

The superb feats achieved by this community's indomitable pioneers far
beyond the Arctic circle, in neighbouring islands of both the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans, as well as in far off isolated territories; the
incorporation of the elected body of its national representatives; the
notable increase in the number of its members; its response to the urgent
needs of the National Fund, and the rapid enlargement in the scope of its
teaching and administrative activities, are all evidences of the intense
vitality of the faith which animates it, and of the firm attachment of its
members to the Cause which it has espoused.


TASKS STILL UNACCOMPLISHED


Though much has been achieved in various fields, the work that still
remains unaccomplished is so vital and urgent that none of its members can
afford to relax for a moment, or to lose sight of the significance and
sacredness of the immediate tasks now confronting it.

The virgin areas, so laboriously opened, must, under no circumstances, be
neglected; nay rather constant attention must be focused upon them in
order to consolidate the glorious historic work initiated in those areas.
The Island of Anticosti, the one remaining goal as yet unattained, and the
only island in the Atlantic Ocean as yet unopened in pursuance of the Ten
Year Plan, should continue to be the object of the special solicitude of
the national elected representatives of this community. The purchase of
the site of the Mother Temple of the Dominion of Canada and the
establishment of the national Haziratu'l-Quds constitute a double task
that can brook no further delay, as the entire Baha'i World, having hailed
the erection of such an indispensable institution in no less than eighteen
countries scattered throughout the continents and oceans of the Globe, is
now intently fixing its eye on this community, so richly blessed by
'Abdu'l-Baha, eager to witness this twofold consummation destined to
considerably enrich the record of the services rendered by its members.
The acceleration in the process of incorporating firmly established Local
Assemblies is yet another objective to which the closest attention must be
paid--a task which will, to a very great extent, contribute, from a legal
standpoint, to the consolidation of these Assemblies. No less important
and vital is the multiplication of isolated centres and groups, the rapid
increase in the number of Local Assemblies, and the steady numerical
growth of the community--the one enduring foundation on which the security
and future prosperity of the community must ultimately rest.


IRANIAN PERSECUTIONS MUST ACT AS STIMULUS


The sudden and indeed tragic turn of events in the land of the birth of
our Faith(45) must act as an unprecedented and powerful stimulus to the
spirit which animates the members of the Canadian Baha'i Community. It
must not, indeed it cannot for a moment, dampen their ardour, deflect them
from their purpose, or weaken their resolve to accomplish the tasks
assigned to them under the Ten Year Plan.

Conscious of their inescapable, their sacred and multiple
responsibilities; spurred on by the realization of the great and varied
sacrifices being made, and the vicissitudes experienced, by the great mass
of their long-suffering brethren in Baha'u'llah's native land; mindful of
the prophecies made by the Centre of the Covenant regarding the spiritual
and material destiny of their country; following the noble and immortal
example set by the founder(46) of their community and by the two Hands of
the Cause(47) ranking among its foremost members; encouraged by their own
splendid achievements in recent years; thankful for the unrestricted
freedom enabling them to proclaim, unreservedly and far and wide, the
fundamental verities of their Faith; and fully aware of the shortness of
the time allotted to them for the performance of their arduous and mighty
task, the members of the Canadian Baha'i Community must arise, at this
very hour, and evince such a whole-hearted dedication to the mission they
have pledged themselves to carry out as to astonish the entire Baha'i
World, and bring everlasting consolation to the hearts of the persecuted
followers of the Faith in the land of its birth.

That this community may rise to this occasion, and may befittingly fulfil
this glorious mission, and enrich immeasurably the record of its splendid
and unforgettable achievements is the object of my constant prayer and the
dearest wish of my heart.

Your true brother,
SHOGHI.


Letter of January 13, 1956


Haifa, Israel,
January 13, 1956.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

The beloved Guardian has instructed me to write you the following: He was
sorry to hear that the piece of plaster from the walls of the Prison of
Mah-ku had not been placed in the grave of Mr. Maxwell(48); and he would
like the National Assembly, with the greatest of care, to see that somehow
or other in the foundation of the monument this piece of plaster is
carefully inserted and preserved; if necessary, the head-stone can be
removed, and it can be put under it, and the head-stone rebuilt in such a
way as not to damage the head-stone.

He has decided that, in view of the fact that Anticosti is so extremely
difficult to get into, the Canadian Assembly can choose some other goal as
substitute for Anticosti. In other words, a territory or an island in the
vicinity of Canada, which has never been opened to the Faith, may be
opened in the place of Anticosti, and thus the goals of the Ten Year Plan
will not be decreased. On the other hand, Anticosti should be maintained
as an objective; and every effort be made to get a Baha'i in there.

At present, Mr. Allan Raynor(49) of your Assembly is visiting here, and,
although unfortunately he has been laid up with a cold, it has been a
great pleasure to have a Canadian Assembly member here.

With warmest Baha'i greetings,
R. RABBANI.


Letter of March 10, 1956


Haifa, Israel,
March 10, 1956.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

The beloved Guardian has been reviewing the progress of the teaching work,
particularly in the goal areas during the Ten Year Crusade.

Tremendous progress has been achieved. If the few remaining virgin goals
of the Ten Year Crusade could be promptly settled, and those which were
settled and again became virgin areas, could again be settled, it would be
a great victory at this time.

The virgin areas coming under the jurisdiction of the Canadian N.S.A. are
Anticosti and Marquesas Islands. Likewise he feels it important that
Greenland, Newfoundland, Mackenzie and the Yukon be reinforced.

It will be appreciated if you will let me know as promptly as possible
what can be done to establish the Faith solidly in these areas.

Faithfully yours,
LEROY IOAS.


Letter of June 26, 1956


Haifa, Israel,
June 26, 1956.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Your communications with their enclosures and material sent under separate
cover have all been safely received by the beloved Guardian; and he has
instructed me to answer you on his behalf...


PIONEER REACHES ANTICOSTI


The recent news that Anticosti had at last received a pioneer(50) was
immensely welcome, and enabled the Guardian to take off his list one of
the few remaining virgin territories (aside from those under Soviet
domination) on the list of countries to be opened to the Faith under the
Ten Year Plan.

The remarkable achievements of the friends during the last three years in
opening the virgin areas no doubt will be looked back upon by posterity
with astonishment and admiration; and the Canadian friends have certainly
played an active part in this process and forged ahead in carrying out
their own Plan.

He is particularly eager that Iceland should have a Baha'i nucleus formed,
a country which has for many years had the blessing of knowing about the
Faith(51), but never the blessing of resident local Baha'is. It deserves
particular attention at this time.

The achievement of the friends in the far northern territories is a source
of great pride to him; and his warm admiration surrounds the valiant
pioneers who, forgetful of self, have arisen to follow 'Abdu'l-Baha's
expressed wishes.

Another achievement during the past year of the Canadian friends has been
the publication of literature in Ukrainian and in some of the Indian
languages. He feels sure that this will speed up their teaching work
immensely amongst both of these minorities; and he hopes that more of the
Baha'is will make a special effort to get jobs in the reservations or
amongst Indian people, so that they can carry to them the Message of
Baha'u'llah.

He was glad to know that a number of Spiritual Assemblies have been
incorporated, and hopes that this process will also be accelerated during
the coming months, and that all of the Assemblies that seem to have a firm
foundation, however small the community may be, will take out their
incorporation papers.


GRAVE OF MARION JACK


He hopes that it has been possible to make the arrangements to have Miss
Jack's(52) grave built. This is a task which is indeed a precious trust
for your Assembly. When the friends realize that her grave will become in
the future a place of visitation, they will appreciate the bounty bestowed
upon the Canadian Community through being able to claim one of the most
distinguished of all pioneers as a member of their community.

It was a great pleasure to him to have Mr. Raynor(53), a member of your
Assembly, as his guest here in the Holy Land, and he feels sure that this
contact has forged yet another link between the Canadian Baha'is and the
World Centre.

Regarding various matters raised in your letters: there is nothing in the
Teachings to prevent a Baha'i from willing his body for medical research
after death. However, it should be made clear that the remains must be
buried eventually and not cremated, as this is according to Baha'i law.

He was very sorry to hear of the prolonged inharmony in the ... Baha'i
community.... Some of the ... believers, from letters and reports received
here, seem to lack a firm grounding on such matters as the Will and
Testament and the deeper spiritual teachings of the Faith. Whenever the
grasp of these fundamentals is weak, the friends are almost sure to pay
undue attention to secondary procedures, to quibble over details, to lose
themselves in personalities, and to founder in a sea of unnecessary
inharmony. This has nothing to do with their devotion, their loyalty,
their zeal, their eagerness to serve. It is merely a question of not
having received, perhaps through lack of sufficient teachers to carry on
the all-important work of deepening the friends in their own faith, a
strong enough education in the Covenant before the duties and
responsibilities of the Administrative Order were thrust upon them.

He has the greatest confidence in the abilities, and the loyalty and
devotion of the Canadian friends. They have proved themselves over and
over again, and distinguished their community through acts of great
sacrifice, vision, courage and devotion. He hopes that, during the coming
year, your Assembly will be able to send out more teachers, to assist the
friends in grasping the fundamentals of the Faith, in uniting them, and
stimulating their desire to do more in the teaching field. If the supply
of teachers is limited in Canada--and the area to be covered is certainly
vast!--perhaps your Sister Assembly in the United States can help through
lending visiting teachers.

He assures all the members of the National Assembly of his loving prayers
for the success of your indefatigable labours.

With warm Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.

P.S.--As regards the question about a person who is mentally ill attending
the Feasts, anybody who is well enough mentally to attend a Baha'i Feast
and understand what it is all about is certainly well enough to be a
voting member. Only people who are very seriously deranged mentally and
confined to institutions or under constant supervision should be deprived
of their voting rights.


BAHA'I MARRIAGE LAW


Regarding your question of applying the sanction of suspension of voting
rights to people who marry without the consent of parents, this should be
done from now on. The law of the Aqdas is explicit and not open to any
ambiguity at all. As long as the parents are alive, the consent must be
obtained; it is not conditioned on their relationship to their children.
If the whereabouts of the parents is not known legally, in other words, if
they are legally dead, then it is not necessary for the children to obtain
their consent, obviously. It is not a question of the child not knowing
the present whereabouts of its parents, it is a question of a legal
thing--if the parents are alive, they must be asked.

As regards the question of alcohol, the Guardian explained this to Mr.
Raynor(54), and he feels that his understanding of it is quite correct.
The Assemblies must be wise and gentle in dealing with such cases, but at
the same time must not tolerate a prolonged and flagrant disregard of the
Baha'i Teachings as regards alcohol.

Dear and Valued Co-workers:

The Canadian Baha'i Community, whose members are so valiantly
participating in the furtherance of the World Spiritual Crusade, now
claiming the attention of the entire body of followers of the Faith of
Baha'u'llah in all continents of the globe, has ever since the inception
of this world-embracing enterprise, proved itself capable of carrying its
share of responsibility in the accomplishment of this collective, colossal
task, and has rendered services that have enriched the annals of the
Faith, not only in a land so dear to the heart of 'Abdu'l-Baha, but in
far-off islands and territories which it is the mission of this community
to illuminate and conquer.

Ever since the emergence of this progressive, youthful and dynamic
community, as an independent entity, and particularly since the inception
of the Ten Year Plan, it has demonstrated, on several occasions, those
qualities which alone can provide the guarantee of success in carrying
out, as a worthy ally of her sister community in the great Republic of the
West, the sacred and historic mission assigned to it by the Author of the
Tablets of the Divine Plan. The staunchness of the faith of its members,
their unyielding resolve, their ceaseless efforts, their willingness to
sacrifice, their exemplary loyalty, their steadfast courage, have, time
and again, been strikingly displayed, and served to fortify the hopes
which I have always cherished for their future destiny.


VASTNESS OF NEW FIELD PRESENTS CONTRAST WITH PAST


The vastness of the field in which this firmly knit, irresistibly
advancing, steadily consolidating community now operates, stretching as it
does from the Atlantic to the Pacific seaboards, and touching, on the one
hand, the fringes of the Arctic Region, and extending, on the other, as
far as the islands of the South Pacific, contrasts with the extremely
restricted area, in which, for so many years, and until recently, the
administrative activities of this community were confined. The diversity
and multiplicity of the enterprises in which it finds itself now engaged,
the manner in which it is consolidating its strength, enlarging its
membership, safeguarding the unity of its members, and noising abroad its
fame, may be regarded as additional evidences of its spiritual vigour, and
of its rapid rise to maturity at so significant a period in the evolution
of the Faith throughout the Western Hemisphere.

At this crucial hour, when the Plan to which this highly promising
community stands committed is entering on the third phase in its
unfoldment, the responsibilities confronting its members are at once
manifold, pressing and inescapable. The situation on the homefront, so
extensive and so varied in character, calls for careful consideration and
energetic action on the part of your Assembly. The steady increase in the
number of those enlisted under the banner of the Faith must be paralleled
by a multiplication of Assemblies, groups and isolated centres. The
incorporation of all firmly established Assemblies must simultaneously be
accelerated. The virgin areas now opened, and particularly Anticosti,
Greenland, Iceland and Franklin, as well as those territories deprived
recently of the benefits of a resident pioneer, must be made the object of
the special attention and solicitude of your Assembly, for upon the
preservation of these hard-won prizes must depend the ultimate triumph of
this community's collective and historic task, and the enhancement of the
prestige it has deservedly won in recent years throughout the Baha'i
World.

Of equal importance is the strenuous yet highly meritorious obligation to
add, steadily and rapidly, to the number of the American Indian and Eskimo
adherents of the Faith, and to ensure their active participation in both
the teaching and administrative spheres of Baha'i activity--a task so
clearly emphasized by the Pen of the Centre of the Covenant, and in the
consummation of which the Canadian Baha'i Community is destined to play so
conspicuous a part.


DEEPENING OF NEWLY-ENROLLED BELIEVERS


Above all, the utmost endeavour should be exerted by your Assembly to
familiarize the newly enrolled believers with the fundamental and
spiritual verities of the Faith, and with the origins, the aims and
purposes, as well as the processes of a divinely appointed Administrative
Order, to acquaint them more fully with the history of the Faith, to
instil in them a deeper understanding of the Covenants of both Baha'u'llah
and of 'Abdu'l-Baha, to enrich their spiritual life, to rouse them to a
greater effort and a closer participation in both the teaching of the
Faith and the administration of its activities, and to inspire them to
make the necessary sacrifices for the furtherance of its vital interests.
For as the body of the avowed supporters of the Faith is enlarged, and the
basis of the structure of its Administrative Order is broadened, and the
fame of the rising community spreads far and wide, a parallel progress
must be achieved, if the fruits already garnered are to endure, in the
spiritual quickening of its members and the deepening of their inner life.

The duties incumbent upon this community, and particularly its elected
national representatives, multiply with every passing day. Heavy is the
burden they carry. Rich and immense are the possibilities stretching
before them. Priceless are the rewards which a befitting discharge of
their multiple responsibilities must bring in its wake. Boundless are the
favours and bestowals which a loving and watchful Providence is ready to
confer upon those who will arise to meet the challenge of the present
hour.

May the members of this community, as well as its elected representatives,
consecrate themselves anew to the mission which 'Abdu'l-Baha has conferred
upon them, and immortalize their stewardship to the Faith of His Father
through acts which future generations will unanimously acclaim and for
which they will feel eternally grateful.

SHOGHI.


Letter of December 14, 1956


December 14, 1956.


TEACHING FRENCH CANADIAN CATHOLICS


National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

The beloved Guardian has directed me to write you, that he feels it is
time for the Canadian Baha'is, in their teaching work, to concentrate, to
the extent possible, on bringing Catholics into the Faith.

There are the vast number of French Canadians who are of Catholic
persuasion. They would make fine Baha'is, and if representative members
could be brought into the Faith, it will add prestige to the Faith, and
help solidify its institutions.

Thus, to the extent possible, the friends should do what they can to
attract Catholics and then confirm them in the Faith.

He sends the members of the National Assembly his loving greetings.

Faithfully yours,
LEROY IOAS.


Letter of December 22, 1956


Haifa, Israel,
December 22, 1956.


DEAL WITH EACH CASE INDIVIDUALLY


National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

I have been instructed on behalf of our beloved Guardian to answer the
questions raised in your recent letter.

There are two things which he wishes to impress upon you. The first is
that depriving people of their voting rights is the heaviest sanction
which can be imposed at the present time (with the exception of
excommunication, which is a right the Guardian has never permitted anyone
else to exercise). Therefore, the greatest care should be exerted to try
and remedy a situation before depriving anybody of their voting rights,
and the action itself should only be taken if absolutely necessary.

The other point is that the Guardian is very anxious that no more rules
and regulations should be introduced by any National Spiritual Assemblies.
He has continually impressed this upon the American, the British and other
National Bodies. The spirit of the Cause will be stifled, the initiative
of the friends killed, and the teaching work come to a stand-still if the
friends are continually hemmed in by instructions. In view of this, he has
instructed the National Bodies to deal with each case as it arises.

The understanding conveyed in the quotation from "Principles of Baha'i
Administration" is correct; also people who are deprived of their voting
rights should not receive Baha'i News or Bulletins, as they are no longer
active in the administrative affairs of the Faith.

He is very happy at present to have a member(55) of your Assembly visiting
Haifa, and hopes that Miss Harvey will carry back to you a fresh impetus
from the Holy Land, which will assist the Canadian Assembly members in
carrying on their many heavy burdens in the service of the Faith.

With warm Baha'i greetings,
R. RABBANI.

December 27, 1956.


TEACHING MINORITIES


National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

The beloved Guardian has directed me to write you concerning the important
matter of teaching the minorities of Canada.

He has spoken in some detail to Miss Harvey(56) concerning the subject,
and she can and will amplify this communication.

He feels it most important that active work be done in connection with the
French Canadians, Eskimos, and Indians. You are also now actively in touch
with the Poles and Ukrainians in your country.

In order to intensify this work, the Guardian feels you should establish a
Minorities Teaching Committee, with sub-committees to specialize in the
teaching of French Canadians, Eskimos, and Indians. As the work spreads,
you can add other sub-committees, such as one for Eastern Europe, or the
countries under active consideration. In other words, sub-committees might
be formed for regional areas of the globe, where their people form a
goodly number of inhabitants of Canada.

Thus you would now have a Minorities Committee, with sub-committees to
specialize in the teaching work of the Eskimos, another sub-committee for
the Indians, another for the French Canadians, and another one for the
Poles and Ukrainians.

With loving Baha'i greetings, I am,
Faithfully yours,
LEROY IOAS.


Letter of March 30, 1957


Haifa, Israel,
March 30, 1957.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

The beloved Guardian has instructed me to answer certain matters raised in
your recent correspondence with him.

He is delighted to see that substantial progress is being made in Samoa.
It is too early for him to say under whose administrative jurisdiction the
Samoan Baha'is will come in the future. It will probably be Australia, but
at the present time, these things have not been definitely settled.


DEFINITION OF COVENANT-BREAKING


People who have withdrawn from the Cause because they no longer feel that
they can support its Teachings and Institutions sincerely, are not
Covenant-breakers--they are non-Baha'is and should just be treated as such.
Only those who ally themselves actively with known enemies of the Faith
who are Covenant-breakers, and who attack the Faith in the same spirit as
these people, can be considered, themselves, to be Covenant-breakers. As
you know, up to the present time, no one has been permitted to pronounce
anybody a Covenant-breaker but the Guardian himself.

With warm Baha'i greetings, and assuring you all of his prayers for the
success of your important work,

R. RABBANI.


Letter of October 19, 1957


Haifa, Israel,
October 19, 1957.


IMPORTANCE OF TEACHING THE INDIANS


National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Your loving letter of October 5 was duly received and its contents have
been presented to the beloved Guardian.

He was very happy indeed to learn of the very active manner in which the
Canadian Baha'is have taken hold of this most important subject of
teaching the Indians.

He attaches the greatest importance to this matter as the Master has
spoken of the latent strength of character of these people and feels that
when the Spirit of the Faith has a chance to work in their midst, it will
produce remarkable results.

You(57) yourself are to be congratulated on the very wonderful work you
have been doing with the Indians on the Tyendinaga Reserve. The Guardian
greatly appreciates this service, and wishes you to know that he values it
very highly. He hopes nothing will interfere with your carrying it forward
to the fine conclusion which you hope will be the establishment of an
Assembly on this reserve. It would be a distinct victory for the Faith if
that is accomplished.

The Guardian will pray for you and the success of your work.

Faithfully yours,
LEROY IOAS.


Letter of July 18, 1957


Haifa, Israel,
July 18, 1957.

National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Canada.

Your Assembly's communications with their enclosures have all arrived
safely, and the beloved Guardian has instructed me to answer you on his
behalf...


MOST URGENT TASKS


It is a pity that the Canadian believers are having so much difficulty
settling the question of both their Temple land and their National
Headquarters. He was very surprised and distressed to learn that the
Temple site you had chosen has entirely fallen through, and that you have
to begin all over again looking for a Temple site. He feels that your
Assembly should appreciate the fact that the important thing at this time
is to acquire a Temple site. It does not have to be a very large piece of
land, and, if the worst comes to the worst, at a future date, when the
time comes to build a Temple in Canada, it can be exchanged or sold and a
better site procured; but the question for this present National Body to
settle once and for all is the purchase of a Temple plot as a beginning in
order to remove from the Ten Year Plan one of its most important goals,
and one the accomplishment of which has been dragging too long. He feels
that your Assembly should also look around for a suitable and permanent
Haziratu'l-Quds in Toronto, and try and dispose of the one you have
without loss, if possible, in order to enable you to acquire the new and
he hopes permanent one at once.

As regards the matter of those who have withdrawn from the Faith ....: as
you know, no one has the right to excommunicate anybody except the
Guardian of the Faith, himself. Those people who have withdrawn from the
Faith, though critical of it and disgruntled, are not necessarily
Covenant-breakers. If they were associating with Ahmad Sohrab(58) and
upholding his claims actively, then they would come into an entirely
different category. If this is the case, you should inform the Guardian,
but otherwise the friends should be advised to just leave these people
alone, for their influence can be nothing but negative and destructive,
and the less they breathe the breath, so to speak, of those who have
turned their back on the light of this Faith, the better.

It is not enough to bring people into the Faith, one must educate them and
deepen their love for it and their knowledge of its teachings, after they
declare themselves. As the Baha'is are few in number, especially the
active teachers, and there is a great deal of work to be done, the
education of these new believers is often sadly neglected, and then
results are seen such as the resignations you have had recently. In this
respect, the Summer Schools can be of the greatest help to the friends,
new and old Baha'is alike, for in them they can study, and enjoy the
feeling of Baha'i companionship which is, alas, usually lacking in their
home communities, owing to the smallness of their numbers.

He is very happy to see that the friends are making every effort to
execute the provisions of the Ten Year Plan, as they apply to the Canadian
Community. The most urgent of all tasks facing them in connection with the
execution of their part of the Ten Year Plan is to increase the number of
Spiritual Assemblies.


DEADLY INFLUENCE OF MATERIALISTIC CIVILIZATION


The Baha'is should realize that today's intensely materialistic
civilization, alas, most perfectly exemplified by the United States, has
far exceeded the bounds of moderation, and, as Baha'u'llah has pointed out
in His Writings, civilization itself, when carried to extremes, leads to
destruction. The Canadian friends should be on their guard against this
deadly influence to which they are so constantly exposed, and which we can
see is undermining the moral strength of not only America, but indeed of
Europe and other parts of the world to which it is rapidly spreading.

The fortuitous combination of British solidity and good judgment and
American get-up-and-go and enthusiasm, which has characterized Canada,
must not be lost in the Canadian Baha'i Community. Its members must
demonstrate their outstanding abilities, and, through a greater vision,
more consecration and renewed self-sacrifice, arise and attain their
goals.

He is very happy over the work in the Pacific region in general, and was
glad to receive word recently of the formation of the Samoan Assembly, a
feat of which your Assembly can be duly proud. However, the situation in
the Marquesas needs immediate attention, and every effort should be
exerted to reinforce the work initiated there, at the cost of much
self-sacrifice, by the first pioneer(59).


INFERTILE FIELDS EQUALLY VITAL


The work in the north should likewise be consolidated, and every effort
made to get more pioneers to join those heroic souls already labouring in
such an infertile field. This applies equally to Labrador and Greenland,
where Bill Carr(60), the lone Canadian pioneer, is demonstrating the
Baha'i spirit in such an exemplary manner. It is hard for the friends to
appreciate, when they are isolated in one of these goal territories, and
see that they are making no progress in teaching others, are living in
inhospitable climes for the most part, and are lonesome for Baha'i
companionship and activity, that they represent a force for good, that
they are like a light-house of Baha'u'llah shining at a strategic point
and casting its beam out into the darkness. This is why he so consistently
urges these pioneers not to abandon their posts. Apropos of this, he hopes
that it will again be possible in the near future to get someone into
Anticosti. It is a great pity that the friend(61) who went there could not
remain.

The beloved Guardian sends all the members of your Assembly his loving
greetings and assures you all of his ardent prayers for your success.

With warm Baha'i love,
R. RABBANI.

Dear and Valued Co-workers:

The opening of the second year of the third phase of the Ten Year Baha'i
Spiritual Crusade presents the entire Canadian Baha'i Community, and,
particularly, its elected representatives, with an opportunity, and brings
them face to face with a challenge, unique since its inception over half a
century ago.

The achievements that have distinguished the record of its stewardship,
ever since its founding, and particularly since the launching of the World
Baha'i Crusade, both on the homefront and beyond its confines, have been
such as to ennoble the annals of the Faith to which it is so
whole-heartedly dedicated, and to arouse in the hearts of all those who
have watched, throughout succeeding decades, the rise, its emergence into
independent existence, and its rapid consolidation, feelings of profound
admiration, of pride and of thankfulness.

The distance that has been traversed, in the course of the four brief
years since the inauguration of the Ten Year Plan, by a community, still
highly restricted in numbers and circumscribed in resources, and faced
with tremendous responsibilities, as a result of the colossal task it has
willingly shouldered, is admittedly great, and augurs well for its further
advancement along the path traced for it by the Pen of the Centre of
Baha'u'llah's Covenant in His immortal Tablets(62).


VINDICATE INDEPENDENT CHARACTER OF THE FAITH


The utmost care and vigilance, however, should be exercised by this
youthful and dynamic community, so richly laden with the prizes it has so
deservedly won, lest the momentum, so painstakingly gained in recent
years, in both the teaching and administrative spheres of Baha'i activity,
be lost or reduced. The standard of dedication and of efficiency,
attained, while pursuing the goals it has pledged itself to achieve, must
never be allowed, through apathy, neglect or faint-heartedness, to be
lowered. The vision that has fired its members, on the occasion of the
centenary celebrations which witnessed the launching of the Ten Year Plan
must, no matter how prolonged or arduous the task, never grow dim. Their
unswerving fidelity to the Covenant established by the Author of their
Faith, and their attachment to the ideals and precepts enshrined in His
Revelation, should, under no circumstances, no matter how active and
subtle the machinations of its enemies, both within and without, be
weakened. The momentous and highly exacting task, initiated far beyond the
confines of their homeland,--a task which posterity will recognize as the
opening chapter of their glorious Mission overseas--must be pursued with
undiminished diligence, nay with redoubled zeal, and renewed determination
and dedication. The no less vital obligation to expand, and consolidate
the manifold activities conducted on the homefront, from the Atlantic to
the Pacific seaboard, and from the northern confines of the Great Republic
of the West to the fringes of the Arctic Ocean, must be faithfully
discharged. The setbacks and difficulties that have, unexpectedly and most
unfortunately, been recently experienced in connection with the
acquisition of both the National Haziratu'l-Quds and the site of the
future Mother Temple of Canada, must be faced with resolution and vigour,
and a definite and permanent solution be found which will ensure the full
attainment of these twofold primary objectives. The long overdue
conversion of the American Indians, the Eskimos and French Canadians, as
well as the representatives of other minorities permanently residing
within the borders of that vast Dominion, must receive, in the months
immediately ahead, such an impetus as to astonish and stimulate the
members of all Baha'i communities throughout the length and breadth of the
Western Hemisphere. The independent character of the Faith they profess
and champion must, moreover, be fully vindicated through a closer
adherence, on the part of the rank and file of the believers, to its
distinguishing tenets and precepts, as well as through a fuller
recognition by the civil authorities concerned, of the Baha'i Marriage
Certificate and of the Baha'i Holy Days. The integrity of the fundamental
teachings of the Faith, its security, the healthy and steady development,
and ultimate fruition, of its nascent institutions, must, above all, be
ensured and safeguarded, for upon these will depend the consummation of
the Mission with which the Author of the Tablets of the Divine Plan has
chosen to entrust them.


THIS COMMUNITY MUST FORGE AHEAD


The few remaining years, separating the steadfast and high-minded members
of the Canadian Baha'i Community, striving so assiduously to achieve their
goals, from the time fixed for the termination of a swiftly unfolding
Crusade, are rapidly slipping by. A community which, ever since its
inception, has, through the instrumentality of its most distinguished
members, and particularly its founder(63) and those nearest to her, as
well as a number of her spiritual children and associates, won such prizes
at the World Centre of the Faith, in Latin America, in Europe, in Africa
and in the Pacific area--such a community, at this crucial hour, cannot
afford to either stand still, falter or hesitate. As this World Crusade
sweeps majestically forward and draws nearer to its close, exploits as
superb as those its sons and daughters have successively achieved in
widely scattered areas of the globe, must continue to distinguish and
ennoble the imperishable record of its services.

'Abdu'l-Baha's prophetic words regarding the future of its homeland,
spiritually as well as materially--the initial evidences of which are
becoming more apparent every day, must not be lost sight of for a moment,
however exacting and all-absorbing the strenuous task ahead, however
complex the problems its prosecution involves, however burdensome the
preoccupations which it must needs engender.

Afire with that same love that burned so brightly in the hearts of its
earliest pioneers, holding fast to the strong cord of the spiritual
precepts and administrative principles of the Faith it has so
whole-heartedly espoused, confident of its ability to achieve, in its
entirety, the Mission entrusted to it by the Author of the Tablets of the
Divine Plan, this community must forge ahead, with undeviating loyalty,
with indomitable courage, with unbreakable unity, and exemplary
consecration, striving to scale loftier heights, and widening constantly
the range of its operations, on the American mainland as well as in
neighbouring and distant islands, until each and every objective of its
allotted task has been triumphantly attained.

SHOGHI.






FOOTNOTES


    1 Mrs. May Ellis Maxwell--spiritual mother of the Canadian Baha'i
      community, became a believer in 1898, visited 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1899
      and returned to Paris to found the first Baha'i centre on the
      European continent, married Sutherland Maxwell and settled in
      Montreal in 1902, achieved "the priceless honor of a martyr's death"
      in Argentina in 1940. For a review of the vast range of her
      contributions to the Faith in Europe and America, see "Baha'i World"
      Vol. VIII, In Memoriam.

    2 The Tablets of the Divine Plan, revealed by 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1916-17,
      and addressed severally to the Baha'is of the United States and
      Canada, constitute the authority for the successive Plans
      inaugurated by the Guardian for the spread of the Faith and the
      establishment of its Institutions throughout the world.

    3 The city of Montreal, Quebec, visited by 'Abdu'l-Baha August
      30-September 12, 1912.

    4 Mrs. May Ellis Maxwell--spiritual mother of the Canadian Baha'i
      community, became a believer in 1898, visited 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1899
      and returned to Paris to found the first Baha'i centre on the
      European continent, married Sutherland Maxwell and settled in
      Montreal in 1902, achieved "the priceless honor of a martyr's death"
      in Argentina in 1940. For a review of the vast range of her
      contributions to the Faith in Europe and America, see "Baha'i World"
      Vol. VIII, In Memoriam.

    5 The Bill to incorporate the National Spiritual Assembly of the
      Baha'is of Canada was passed by both Houses of the Canadian
      Parliament, and given Royal assent on April 30, 1949.

    6 The Bill to incorporate the National Spiritual Assembly of the
      Baha'is of Canada was passed by both Houses of the Canadian
      Parliament, and given Royal assent on April 30, 1949.

    7 William Sutherland Maxwell--architect of the Shrine of the Bab,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1951, died in Montreal in
      1952. His "saintly life" is described in "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In
      Memoriam.

    8 The first pioneers to Newfoundland, arriving in 1949, were Miss
      Margaret Reid, Miss Dorothy Sheets, and Miss Doris Skinner (who
      remained there until 1955).

    9 Miss Nancy Gates--American pioneer to Denmark who attempted to
      pioneer to Greenland, but was unable to do so.

   10 James and Mrs. Melba Loft--believers who pioneered from the United
      States to the Tyendinaga (Mohawk) Indian Reserve, near Shannonville,
      Ontario, 1949-.

   11 Miss Nan Brandle--beginning in 1950 served several years as a pioneer
      to the Indians in Department of Indian Affairs hospitals at Fisher
      River, Hodgson, Manitoba and at Moose Factory and Ohsweken, Ontario.

   12 Jameson Bond--first pioneer to the Canadian Arctic (District of
      Keewatin 1950, District of Franklin 1951-63, with Mrs. Gale Bond
      from 1953 on).

   13 The Tablets of the Divine Plan, revealed by 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1916-17,
      and addressed severally to the Baha'is of the United States and
      Canada, constitute the authority for the successive Plans
      inaugurated by the Guardian for the spread of the Faith and the
      establishment of its Institutions throughout the world.

   14 Louis Bourgeois--architect of the Mother Temple of the West, in
      Wilmette, Illinois, the construction of which was the first
      collective enterprise undertaken by the Baha'is of America. He died
      in 1930.

   15 Miss Marion Jack--"immortal heroine" and "shining example to
      pioneers", who remained at her post in Sofia, Bulgaria from 1930
      until her death in 1954. Her imperishable services are recorded in
      "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In Memoriam.

   16 Amatu'l-Baha Ruhiyyih _Kh_anum Rabbani--daughter of May and
      Sutherland Maxwell, became the wife of Shoghi Effendi in 1937,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1952.

   17 Mrs. May Ellis Maxwell--spiritual mother of the Canadian Baha'i
      community, became a believer in 1898, visited 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1899
      and returned to Paris to found the first Baha'i centre on the
      European continent, married Sutherland Maxwell and settled in
      Montreal in 1902, achieved "the priceless honor of a martyr's death"
      in Argentina in 1940. For a review of the vast range of her
      contributions to the Faith in Europe and America, see "Baha'i World"
      Vol. VIII, In Memoriam.

   18 William Sutherland Maxwell--architect of the Shrine of the Bab,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1951, died in Montreal in
      1952. His "saintly life" is described in "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In
      Memoriam.

   19 Jameson Bond--first pioneer to the Canadian Arctic (District of
      Keewatin 1950, District of Franklin 1951-63, with Mrs. Gale Bond
      from 1953 on).

   20 Palle Bischoff--Danish believer, the first pioneer to Greenland
      (1951-54).

   21 The Tablets of the Divine Plan, revealed by 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1916-17,
      and addressed severally to the Baha'is of the United States and
      Canada, constitute the authority for the successive Plans
      inaugurated by the Guardian for the spread of the Faith and the
      establishment of its Institutions throughout the world.

   22 Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island formed its first Local Spiritual
      Assembly in 1944.

   23 Siegfried Schopflocher--known as "the Temple Builder" because of his
      great contributions to the completion of the first
      Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar of the West, appointed a Hand of the Cause of
      God in 1952, died in Montreal 1953. For a review of his "numerous,
      magnificent services" see "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In Memoriam.

   24 Laurentian Baha'i School, near Beaulac, Quebec--founded 1946,
      transferred in 1949 to the National Spiritual Assembly, the first
      national endowment.

   25 William Sutherland Maxwell--architect of the Shrine of the Bab,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1951, died in Montreal in
      1952. His "saintly life" is described in "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In
      Memoriam.

   26 William Sutherland Maxwell--architect of the Shrine of the Bab,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1951, died in Montreal in
      1952. His "saintly life" is described in "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In
      Memoriam.

   27 Mrs. May Ellis Maxwell--spiritual mother of the Canadian Baha'i
      community, became a believer in 1898, visited 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1899
      and returned to Paris to found the first Baha'i centre on the
      European continent, married Sutherland Maxwell and settled in
      Montreal in 1902, achieved "the priceless honor of a martyr's death"
      in Argentina in 1940. For a review of the vast range of her
      contributions to the Faith in Europe and America, see "Baha'i World"
      Vol. VIII, In Memoriam.

   28 Amatu'l-Baha Ruhiyyih _Kh_anum Rabbani--daughter of May and
      Sutherland Maxwell, became the wife of Shoghi Effendi in 1937,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1952.

   29 Maxwell Home, 1548 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec--'Abdu'l-Baha
      stayed in this house during his visit to Montreal in 1912. It was
      given to the Canadian Baha'i community by Hand of the Cause Ruhiyyih
      _Kh_anum in 1953.

   30 Siegfried Schopflocher--known as "the Temple Builder" because of his
      great contributions to the completion of the first
      Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar of the West, appointed a Hand of the Cause of
      God in 1952, died in Montreal 1953. For a review of his "numerous,
      magnificent services" see "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In Memoriam.

   31 William Sutherland Maxwell--architect of the Shrine of the Bab,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1951, died in Montreal in
      1952. His "saintly life" is described in "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In
      Memoriam.

   32 Emeric and Rosemary Sala pioneered to South Africa, and John and
      Mrs. Audrey Robarts to Bechuanaland. The first three named were
      members of the National Spiritual Assembly 1948-53. In 1957 John
      Robarts was appointed a Hand of the Cause of God.

   33 Albert Rakovsky--first Baha'i to visit Anticosti Island, member of
      the National Spiritual Assembly 1953-56.

   34 Peter Pihichyn--a believer of Ukrainian descent.

   35 Maxwell Home, 1548 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec--'Abdu'l-Baha
      stayed in this house during his visit to Montreal in 1912. It was
      given to the Canadian Baha'i community by Hand of the Cause Ruhiyyih
      _Kh_anum in 1953.

   36 Mrs. May Ellis Maxwell--spiritual mother of the Canadian Baha'i
      community, became a believer in 1898, visited 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1899
      and returned to Paris to found the first Baha'i centre on the
      European continent, married Sutherland Maxwell and settled in
      Montreal in 1902, achieved "the priceless honor of a martyr's death"
      in Argentina in 1940. For a review of the vast range of her
      contributions to the Faith in Europe and America, see "Baha'i World"
      Vol. VIII, In Memoriam.

   37 William Sutherland Maxwell--architect of the Shrine of the Bab,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1951, died in Montreal in
      1952. His "saintly life" is described in "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In
      Memoriam.

   38 Amatu'l-Baha Ruhiyyih _Kh_anum Rabbani--daughter of May and
      Sutherland Maxwell, became the wife of Shoghi Effendi in 1937,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1952.

   39 Siegfried Schopflocher--known as "the Temple Builder" because of his
      great contributions to the completion of the first
      Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar of the West, appointed a Hand of the Cause of
      God in 1952, died in Montreal 1953. For a review of his "numerous,
      magnificent services" see "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In Memoriam.

   40 Emeric and Rosemary Sala pioneered to South Africa, and John and
      Mrs. Audrey Robarts to Bechuanaland. The first three named were
      members of the National Spiritual Assembly 1948-53. In 1957 John
      Robarts was appointed a Hand of the Cause of God.

   41 Maxwell Home, 1548 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec--'Abdu'l-Baha
      stayed in this house during his visit to Montreal in 1912. It was
      given to the Canadian Baha'i community by Hand of the Cause Ruhiyyih
      _Kh_anum in 1953.

   42 Siegfried Schopflocher--known as "the Temple Builder" because of his
      great contributions to the completion of the first
      Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar of the West, appointed a Hand of the Cause of
      God in 1952, died in Montreal 1953. For a review of his "numerous,
      magnificent services" see "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In Memoriam.

   43 William Sutherland Maxwell--architect of the Shrine of the Bab,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1951, died in Montreal in
      1952. His "saintly life" is described in "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In
      Memoriam.

   44 Miss Marion Jack--"immortal heroine" and "shining example to
      pioneers", who remained at her post in Sofia, Bulgaria from 1930
      until her death in 1954. Her imperishable services are recorded in
      "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In Memoriam.

   45 The resurgence of persecution of the Baha'i community in Iran during
      1955 is described in the booklet "Baha'i Appeal for Religious
      Freedom in Iran".

   46 Mrs. May Ellis Maxwell--spiritual mother of the Canadian Baha'i
      community, became a believer in 1898, visited 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1899
      and returned to Paris to found the first Baha'i centre on the
      European continent, married Sutherland Maxwell and settled in
      Montreal in 1902, achieved "the priceless honor of a martyr's death"
      in Argentina in 1940. For a review of the vast range of her
      contributions to the Faith in Europe and America, see "Baha'i World"
      Vol. VIII, In Memoriam.

   47 Sutherland Maxwell and Siegfried Schopflocher.

   48 William Sutherland Maxwell--architect of the Shrine of the Bab,
      appointed a Hand of the Cause of God in 1951, died in Montreal in
      1952. His "saintly life" is described in "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In
      Memoriam.

   49 Allan Raynor--member of the National Spiritual Assembly 1954-60.

   50 Miss Mary Zabolotny (now Mrs. Kenneth McCulloch)--first pioneer to
      Anticosti Island (1956).

   51 Iceland appears to have been visited first by Mrs. Amelia Collins in
      1924. Miss Martha Root spent a month in Iceland in 1935.

   52 Miss Marion Jack--"immortal heroine" and "shining example to
      pioneers", who remained at her post in Sofia, Bulgaria from 1930
      until her death in 1954. Her imperishable services are recorded in
      "Baha'i World" Vol. XII, In Memoriam.

   53 Allan Raynor--member of the National Spiritual Assembly 1954-60.

   54 Allan Raynor--member of the National Spiritual Assembly 1954-60.

   55 Miss Winnifred Harvey--member of the National Spiritual Assembly
      1950-61.

   56 Miss Winnifred Harvey--member of the National Spiritual Assembly
      1950-61.

   57 Mrs. Peggy Ross--member of the National Spiritual Assembly 1954-63,
      appointed a member of the Auxiliary Board for Teaching in 1958.

   58 Ahmad Sohrab--former secretary of 'Abdu'l-Baha, declared a
      Covenant-breaker by the Guardian, died 1958.

   59 Miss Greta Jankko--first pioneer to the Marquesas Islands (1954).

   60 William Carr--Canadian pioneer to Thule Air Base, Greenland 1955-.
      From 1955 to 1963 Mrs. Kaya Holck, a Danish believer, pioneered
      among the Greenlanders.

   61 Miss Mary Zabolotny (now Mrs. Kenneth McCulloch)--first pioneer to
      Anticosti Island (1956).

   62 The Tablets of the Divine Plan, revealed by 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1916-17,
      and addressed severally to the Baha'is of the United States and
      Canada, constitute the authority for the successive Plans
      inaugurated by the Guardian for the spread of the Faith and the
      establishment of its Institutions throughout the world.

   63 Mrs. May Ellis Maxwell--spiritual mother of the Canadian Baha'i
      community, became a believer in 1898, visited 'Abdu'l-Baha in 1899
      and returned to Paris to found the first Baha'i centre on the
      European continent, married Sutherland Maxwell and settled in
      Montreal in 1902, achieved "the priceless honor of a martyr's death"
      in Argentina in 1940. For a review of the vast range of her
      contributions to the Faith in Europe and America, see "Baha'i World"
      Vol. VIII, In Memoriam.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MESSAGES TO CANADA***



CREDITS


June 2006

            Converted from Microsoft Word document format to TEI master
            format.
            Joshua Hutchinson



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19278.txt or 19278.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/2/7/19278/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation."

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES -- Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND -- If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY -- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}'s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***
