The Project Gutenberg eBook, Everlasting Pearl, by Anna Magdalena
Johannsen, et al


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Everlasting Pearl
       One of China's Women


Author: Anna Magdalena Johannsen



Release Date: September 24, 2006  [eBook #19365]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERLASTING PEARL***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 19365-h.htm or 19365-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/3/6/19365/19365-h/19365-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/3/6/19365/19365-h.zip)





EVERLASTING PEARL

One of China's Women

by

ANNA MAGDALENA JOHANNSEN

For Sixteen Years a Missionary in China

With Preface by Walter B. Sloan

Second Impression







[Frontispiece: EVERLASTING PEARL.  The photo was taken after her
marriage to Mr. Lue.]



China Inland Mission
London, Philadelphia, Toronto, Melbourne and Shanghai
Morgan & Scott, Ltd.
12 Paternoster Buildings, London, E.C.
MCMXVIII

First Edition October 1913
Reprinted January 1918
Completing 5000 copies




PREFACE


Thirty-five years ago missionary work was commenced in the city of
Yueshan, situated on the Kwangsin River in Kiangsi, one of the central
Provinces of China.

The conversion of "Everlasting Pearl," which is the subject of the
following narrative, is a part of the harvest which has been reaped in
later years by the missionaries of the China Inland Mission, who still
continue to carry on the work in this city and neighbourhood.

In April of last year I had the privilege of spending ten days there,
and of addressing the Church on the Sundays.  On the first Monday
morning we watched, with great interest, the departure of some of the
country Christians to their homes.  The party consisted of a
simple-looking company of men and women, clad in the plain blue
garments that the country people usually wear.  The men were walking,
but the few women, with their diminutive feet, were perched on barrows,
and one of them was pointed out as being "evangelist, pastor, and
Biblewoman, all rolled into one," in the district from which they all
came.  This was the woman, a part of whose life-story is told in this
book, and after reading the many striking incidents which it contains,
I gladly welcome the opportunity afforded me of writing a brief
introduction.

Even as a study of human life, the story is one that is full of
interest.  It takes us far away from the ordinary beaten track right
into the heart of China; and so intimate is the writer's acquaintance
with the habits and customs of the people, that there are few, even of
those who know Chinese life well, who will not be able to learn
something from reading these pages.

The Chinese are a people of strong character; and although this woman
stands out as being possessed of marked ability and determination,
there are other lives of which we catch a glimpse in which similar
features can be clearly discerned.

It is, however, as an illustration of the power of the Gospel, in the
heart of one who was brought up in heathenism, that the narrative
possesses its supreme interest.  In this case from the time when the
great decision was made, after long resistance, to yield to Christ and
trust in Him, there was no going back.  We read of many trials,
sorrows, testings, but the onward and upward course is steadily
maintained.

The religious devotee, when converted, always makes a better disciple
than the person who has been entirely indifferent to the concerns of
the soul; and so it was in the case of "Everlasting Pearl."  She clung
strongly to the vow that she had taken when she became a vegetarian,
and on this account she long withstood the claims of the Gospel; but
when at last she heard the call of Christ, then she turned to Him in
full surrender and whole-hearted obedience, and became a burning and a
shining light amongst her relatives and neighbours.

The reader will observe the record of not a few dreams and visions in
the story; but instead of these tending to discredit its truthfulness,
they will only confirm it to those who know the life of the people of
this class in China.

The statement is constantly being made that the Gospel spreads more
through the life and testimony of the converts themselves than by the
work of the missionaries.  The way in which this woman was brought to
Christ, and the way in which she led others to Him, illustrates this
fact; but truth is many-sided, and here we also see how large a
ministry there still is for the missionaries to exercise, and how much
they are needed to help the people in the midst of their struggles,
perplexities, and sorrows, by their counsel, kind sympathy, and their
prayers.

I have only to add that the account of the early years is given just as
it has been told by the woman herself, and the account of the later
days is a simple narrative of the facts as they have come under the
observation of the writer.

WALTER B. SLOAN.




CONTENTS


  CHAP.

     I.  BIRTH AND INFANCY.
    II.  FOOTBINDING
   III.  CHILDHOOD DAYS
    IV.  ENGAGEMENT
     V.  MARRIAGE--PART I
    VI.  MARRIAGE--PART II
   VII.  DARK DAYS
  VIII.  MISERABLE COMFORTERS
    IX.  BROKEN CISTERNS
     X.  WAYS NOT KNOWN
    XI.  THE MESSENGERS OF PEACE
   XII.  THE BEGINNING OF CONFLICT
  XIII.  THE BATTLE GROWS FIERCER
   XIV.  LIGHT AFTER DARKNESS
    XV.  SAVED TO SERVE
   XVI.  PERSECUTION AND TRIAL
  XVII.  LABOUR AND FRUIT
 XVIII.  FRUIT MORE ABUNDANT
   XIX.  PREPARATION FOR FURTHER SERVICE
    XX.  DAYS OF SHADOW
   XXI.  THE SHADOW DEEPENS
  XXII.  ENTERING THE VALLEY
 XXIII.  ANOTHER JEWEL WON FOR CHRIST
  XXIV.  CONCLUSION




ILLUSTRATIONS


   EVERLASTING PEARL . . . . . _Frontispiece_

   A PRECIOUS BUNDLE

   PLAITING SILK BRAID

   A SOURCE OF GREAT DELIGHT

   WRITING THE ENGAGEMENT DOCUMENT

   ADORNED AS A BRIDE

   THE OUT-STATION OF KUCHENG

   ANOTHER JEWEL FOR CHRIST




EVERLASTING PEARL


CHAPTER I

BIRTH AND INFANCY

It was a warm, close day in May, in Central China.  The summer heat had
just set in, and the inhabitants of Kucheng (Ancient City) were
somewhat weary and languid, when a woman brought the news to her
neighbour--"A daughter has been born to the Tu family."  The news soon
spread from door to door.  All languor was shaken off, for curiosity
got the better of lassitude, and the women, now fully alert, hobbled on
their small feet to the little house where farmer Tu lived with his
young wife and parents.

The house was a small, unpretentious building, with mud walls and a
tiled roof.  The interior was like that of all the homes around.  If
you had seen one, you had a good idea of the appearance of the rest.
You entered the guest-hall, where on the wall at the farther end hung a
large centre scroll, representing the "Ruler of Heaven," before which
incense was lighted morning and evening.  On either side of the idol,
and on all the pillars you would see paper scrolls pasted up, with
trite sayings written in flowery phrases, such as--

"If in your house you walk circumspectly, then when you leave your home
you will associate with virtuous friends only."

"If the house is clean and beautiful, an excellent wind will be wafted
through it."

"If the flowers give out their fragrance, a bright moon will shine upon
them."

On either side of the guest-hall were doors leading into the bedrooms.
Into one of these the women crowded eagerly, in search of the little
newcomer, shouting, as they entered, their congratulations, first to
the grandmother, and then to the parents of the child.  On seeing the
precious bundle held out to them, decked out in all the new, gorgeous,
but uncomfortable clothes bought by the maternal grandmother, one
visitor could not help whispering, "What a pity it is not a boy!"  But
the other women politely interrupted her, and the young mother looked
proudly at the "bundle of clothes" handed back to her.  It was true she
would have preferred a son, so would her husband, and above all her
mother-in-law, but as it was their first child, even the little girl
received a welcome.  Had she been the second or third girl in the
family, she would not have had the same kind reception.  Very likely
she would have been given away to some other family, who would have
made her a drudge, and in later years have married her to one of their
sons; or she might even have been left to die from want.

[Illustration: A precious bundle.]

But now things were different.  Her parents were ready to lavish all
their love and kindness on the little girl.  They called in the
fortune-teller, asking him what her fate would be in after years.  He,
having been told the day and hour of her birth, declared the child had
been born under a lucky star.  Her heart was good, her disposition kind
and amiable; they need not worry about her, only, he added, she was
born to toil and hard work.  Satisfied with his prophecies, Mr. Tu paid
him his wonted fee, fully believing in his skill.

After a month had elapsed, the relatives and neighbours were invited to
a feast in honour of the child.  Candles and incense were lighted
before the gods, the babe was presented to them, and henceforward she
was regarded as under their protection.  When the little girl was a
year old, the relatives assembled again.  The grandmother had brought
another lot of presents, among them some beautifully embroidered shoes,
as the time had come for the child to learn to walk.  She was old
enough to notice things, and the baby eyes looked delightedly at her
feet, that had never worn shoes before, now so beautifully adorned in
the gayest of colours.  Again a thank-offering was given to the gods.
The grandmother carried the child forward, and this time the baby
fingers had to hold the incense that was lighted before the sacred
picture.

Thus, instead of being brought to the living, loving Saviour to be
blessed, the little Chinese boy or girl is led before the dead idols,
and dedicated to them.  Do not say, "Oh, it will make no difference,
the idols are nothing."  The idols _are_ nothing, but there is a
fearful power of darkness behind them.  The longer one lives in China,
the more one feels that in a true sense the Chinese child is dedicated,
not to the idols only, but to the prince of darkness himself.  And oh!
how one longs to lead the parents into the light of Christ, so that
they may bring their little ones to Him, who is waiting to bless them.




CHAPTER II

FOOTBINDING

The name given to the little girl was _Ch'ang-Chu_, which means
"Everlasting Pearl," and a little treasure she proved herself to be to
her parents.  She was good-natured and kind-hearted, full of life and
spirit, and gave much joy to those who watched over her.  But it was
very seldom--indeed, only on state occasions--that she was called
Everlasting Pearl in her home and among her little friends.  More often
she went by the name of _Nue-ku_, or "Girl-dog."  Her parents, afraid of
losing her, had given her this name in order to deceive the evil
spirits who might be seeking her life, but who were not likely to
trouble themselves about a "dog."

One day, when Everlasting Pearl was about six years old, she saw her
mother working on a pair of small shoes, and asked for whom they were.
Her mother informed her they were for her, as it was time she had her
feet bound.  "Your feet are getting so big and clumsy," she said, "and
you are running about far too much for a girl.  It is high time that
you had them bound."  Everlasting Pearl made no protest.  She knew all
girls had to have their feet bound, and, of course, she could not be
different from the rest.

So when the shoes were finished the footbinding was begun.  But oh, the
suffering of it!  The mother took a long strip of calico, and wound it
tightly round the little foot, bending the toes right under the sole.
She did not succeed at once in getting the right size, so she undid the
binding and tried again, whilst the little girl cried aloud for pain.
Over and over again the process was begun, but not finished, as the
shoes were so small that the feet could not be squeezed into them.  But
at last they were made to fit the shoes, and Everlasting Pearl walked
about with sore and aching feet, wondering if they could ever become as
small as those of some young girls she knew.  Night after night she
cried herself to sleep, wondering whether the pain would ever come to
an end, and how she could possibly endure it much longer.  But there
were compensations.  Month by month and year by year her feet grew
smaller, until her shoes were tinier than those she had worn in her
babyhood.  Her little girl-companions admired the tiny feet, and
respected their owner, and both she and her mother received a great
deal of praise from the older women.  Her small feet were a sign that
her mother cared for her, and meant to marry her well: so the future
looked bright and promising.




CHAPTER III

CHILDHOOD DAYS

A few uneventful years passed by; happy ones for the little girl, as
she was loved and appreciated by all.  Two little brothers had been
born in the home, and Everlasting Pearl might often be seen with the
younger of them strapped to her back, rocking herself to and fro, and
softly cooing to the babe.  Or she might be found crouching before the
cooking-stove, feeding the fire with brushwood, dried bracken, and
fern, trying to use as little fuel as possible; for strict economy had
to be practised in that home.  At other times she would be sitting on a
low stool beside her mother, spinning hemp, not with a spinning-wheel,
but separating the threads with her fingers, and afterwards winding the
thread into balls.  Or she would be learning to sew, to embroider, and
to make silk braid.  By all these occupations she could only earn about
a farthing a day; but that small sum would pay at least for her
vegetables, salt, and oil, and even leave a little balance.

[Illustration: Plaiting silk braid.]

During the summer and autumn she often had to take her low stool and
work outside, so as to watch the grain, which was drying on a large
bamboo mat in front of the house.  On such occasions a long bamboo
stick lay at her side, and this she used most vigorously, and with as
much noise as possible, whenever the inhabitants of the poultry-yard
paid her a visit.

But her life was not all work.  There were some variations.  Her little
brothers were a source of great delight to her.  Her love for them was
intense and motherly, though she would often tease them.  When one of
them happened to be dawdling over his food, she would do her best to
coax him to eat, but often without success, until she playfully
exclaimed:

  Who first shall be satisfied may do as he wishes,
  But the last one to finish must wash all the dishes.

[Illustration: A source of great delight.  "Is there too great a burden
on the shoulders of the Chinese Christians?  Surely not.  A little girl
once was carrying a little boy on her back.  Some one said, 'I see you
have a big burden, haven't you?'  'No,' replied the little girl, 'that
is not a burden; that is my brother.'"--Rev. Cheng Ching Yi, Edinburgh
Missionary Conference.]

Her ready wit often helped to keep herself and others in good temper.

Not only was she full of life and humour, she was also kind and
generous, and had sympathy with those who suffered.  When, for
instance, a poor, blind beggar came to her home, chanting his doleful
refrain:

  Oh, friends who can see, in heaven you dwell;
  To have sightless eyes is like living in hell,

her heart would be touched, and she would beg and obtain permission
from her mother to give him some rice.

Mrs. Tu was a home-loving and industrious woman, who did not often
leave her home, or allow her children to run wild.  Once a year,
however, there was a big dramatic performance at Kucheng, and then
Everlasting Pearl, dressed in her best, was taken to the theatre.
These were red-letter days in her life.  Chinese plays are mostly very
stupid.  Often immoral, and almost invariably connected with idolatry,
they are a snare to some of the people when they want to break with
everything idolatrous.  But to the little country girl the theatre was
all that could be desired, and gave her much pleasure.  She understood
little of what she saw and heard there, but was carried away with the
excitement and noise.

Another great occasion was that on which the famous god from Tanyoh
passed through Kucheng.  This deity was supposed to have his abode in
Tanyoh, and called it his paternal home; but his maternal home was in
Hongtsun, a few miles off, and to that village he paid yearly visits.
He was carried with great pomp through Kucheng, and as he passed along
all the people came to their doors to bow to him, and implore his
blessing and protection.  For the little girl this yearly visit of the
idol was a very solemn occasion, as she was a firm believer in his
power.  As yet she had not heard of any greater power; she had never
heard of the true and living God.  The ugly idol she saw carried
through the streets of Kucheng embodied the highest object for her
worship, and to him she gave unreserved reverence.

Surely the messengers of Christ had been a long time in reaching
Kucheng,--yet it was situated on one of the main roads in China.  They
had indeed been slow in obeying their Lord's command, "Go ye into all
the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature."




CHAPTER IV

ENGAGEMENT

Everlasting Pearl was now thirteen years old, and by many relatives and
friends her parents were urged to make arrangements for her future.
"You can keep her a few years before you marry her, but she certainly
ought to be engaged," was the advice given generally.

A middleman, therefore, had to be found.  There are always numerous
applicants for that office, as not only is a good fee usually given,
but it is considered an honour to be entrusted with the future
arrangements for a young couple.  On such occasions a great many
untruths are often told, which are only discovered after the marriage,
when it is too late to mend matters.  In Everlasting Pearl's case, the
middleman was a relative, one of those who had been urging a speedy
engagement.

He took the girl's _Pah tsi_,[1] and went with these to a family of the
name of Hsue, who lived in a village four miles distant.  The Cyclical
Characters were closely examined, and put in front of the ancestral
tablet, incense being lighted before them morning and evening.  There
they remained for a month, and as nothing happened to disturb the peace
of the family during the interval--no child was hurt, no pig died, no
rice basin was broken--they were thought to augur only good luck, and
to promise well for the alliance of the two families.  So Mr. Hsue made
out the "Cyclical Characters" of one of his sons, a young man
twenty-five years old.  He then called in an astrologer, and asked him
to compare the two papers and give his verdict as to the advisability
of the two young people being joined in marriage.  With an important
air, this gentleman examined the two papers put before him, and
announced that everything was in favour of such an alliance.  Several
of their characters were alike, the two young people were both born
under the "Tiger," and other things agreed as well.  Whereupon the two
families expressed their satisfaction, and declared themselves ready to
arrange for an engagement.

But now the middleman had a busy time of it, for there were many things
to settle before the engagement could take place.  First of all, he
went to Mr. and Mrs. Tu, and asked how much money they would want for
their daughter.  "As she is our only daughter, we want her to have a
good outfit," replied the parents, "so Mr. Hsue must give at least $40
and some good clothes."  The list was then made out--$40, ten articles
of clothing, a ring, two bracelets, a pair of earrings, and three
silver hair ornaments.  The indefatigable middleman took the list to
the Hsue family, who looked at it critically.  After some time of
haggling over the different articles, they finally agreed to furnish
all, and preparations were begun in full earnest.

The day appointed for the engagement arrived, and there was great
excitement in the two homes which were filled with visitors and
well-wishers.  The feast on both sides had to be provided by the young
man's family.  About dinner-time, on the day appointed, a party, headed
by the middleman, was seen advancing toward Kucheng, carrying a sort of
wooden box or basket, with several trays, one piled on top of the
other.  One tray carried all sorts of sweetmeats and the half of the
money, twenty dollars, wrapped in red paper.  Another tray was filled
with pork and fish; again, another with different kinds of expensive
vegetables.  Another carrier brought the engagement cake, and five
articles of clothing, and all the silver ornaments.  Everywhere,
scattered among all the things, were cypress leaves, a symbol of
longevity and good luck.

On reaching the Tu home, the men with their precious burdens were
received with fire-crackers, and eagerly all the things were examined,
some of them meeting with approval, others with disapproval.  After
dinner the party started off again for the Hsue home, taking the return
presents.  These consisted of the following articles--a hat, a pair of
shoes and stockings, a sash, a number of embroidered purses, with a few
dollars in them, also some vegetable seeds, peanuts, sunflower seeds,
etc.  Most of these things were graciously received by the young man
and his family, and the parents on both sides were satisfied.

The Engagement Agreement, as binding as a marriage certificate, had
been signed by the two families, and Everlasting Pearl's parents had
returned it to Mr. and Mrs. Hsue.  The girl of thirteen had her future
settled for her before she had any idea of what such a future might
mean.  Her little girl-friends teased her, but there was an added
respect in their treatment of her.  She dimly realised that somehow she
had risen in their estimation and that of others.  The change was
rather a pleasant one, the new clothes were a welcome addition to her
scanty wardrobe, and she was too young to worry about the future.

[Illustration: Writing the engagement document.  As binding as a
marriage certificate.]



[1] The Eight Cyclical Characters appertaining to the hour of a
person's birth.




CHAPTER V

MARRIAGE--PART I

Again we pass over a few years.  Everlasting Pearl had now reached the
age of seventeen, and her future husband was twenty-nine years old;
therefore the day of the wedding was drawing near.  The intervening
years between engagement and marriage had been busy ones.  Little by
little the trousseau had been prepared, and was all ready.  A lucky
day, the third of the eleventh moon, had been chosen for the
approaching wedding; and already, a few days before that date, some of
the guests began to arrive, each one bringing a present of some
garment, or hair flowers, shoes, etc. for the bride.  A present of 120
lbs. of pork, 60 lbs. of fish, 12 chickens, and a good supply of
expensive vegetables had been sent by the young man, and the guests,
with many of whom luxuries were rare, set themselves to enjoy the good
things.

The evening before the wedding the middleman arrived with the bridal
chair, which was covered all around with red cloth, and embroidered in
gay colours.  Now the feasting began in real earnest.  The pipers
struck up their usual melody, and with each hour the excitement grew.

The following morning the trousseau had to be packed, but the bride had
nothing to do with it.  She did not rise from her bed at all.  Her
breakfast was brought to her by one of her relatives, and she was
exhorted to eat heartily, as that would be her last meal till the
following morning.  Towards dinner-time she was coaxed to get up, but
she persistently refused to do so, and began bemoaning her fate, in
having to leave her parents and her own home to go to strangers.  Every
now and again the mother joined in the wailing, and the relatives stood
round them crying, trying in vain to comfort them.  After dinner the
bride was again urged to get up, but maidenly modesty and her
dutifulness to her parents still forbade her to obey.  No one should
have any reason to say that she was anxious to go.  She wanted to show
how loath she was to leave her parents, and every one was praising her,
and saying that such a dutiful daughter would make a filial
daughter-in-law.

But even the most ardent filial piety could not put off the hour of
separation much longer.  At last she was dragged from her bed by the
women who had to prepare her for her journey, and she reluctantly
submitted to the preparation.  Her hair was shaved all around the
edges, the hair in front, which used to make the fringe for the
forehead, was pulled out.  Then her hair was combed straight back to
show that she was now to enter the ranks of the married women.  Then
she was powdered and painted, and dressed in her bridal attire, which
consisted of a red skirt, and red cloak, beautifully embroidered in
bright colours, but rather the worse for wear, as it had accompanied
the bridal chair on many another journey.  The box with the mitre was
brought forth and the crown was placed on her head, already too richly
adorned with artificial flowers.  And now the wailing broke forth
beyond all bounds, the young bride and her mother vying with each other
in making the greatest possible noise; at times beating their heads
against the wall, the bed, or the table in their self-imposed
manifestations of sorrow.

Outside, the trousseau was being sent off, as it had to reach the
bride's future home before she entered the same.  Two men carried a
cupboard between them.  Others followed with some chairs, and a table
covered with candlesticks and all kinds of utensils.  A pair of the
bride's shoes might also be found, placed within those of the
bridegroom's, for, as every one remarked, "The two must now walk
together till old age."  Others carried a couple of red wooden boxes
filled with the clothes and personal belongings of the bride, also a
wadded bed-quilt, a bed-curtain, and two embroidered pillows, etc.  The
whole procession made an imposing show, and the relatives of
Everlasting Pearl looked after it with pride.  The girl had been well
provided for, and could lift up her head without shame before her
husband's people.

The bride herself was at that time kneeling in her bedroom on a large
sieve (a token that all evil influences are "sifted out" and all good
luck and riches "sifted in"), bidding farewell to all her relatives.
One by one they were led to her, beginning with her parents and
brothers, and ending with the distant relatives, neighbours, and
guests.  To each one she clung in despair, clutching their feet, and
vowing she could not leave them; and she did not let go her hold until
a coin, wrapped in red paper, was dropped into the sieve; then, with a
few words of comfort, the giver would move away to make room for
another, and all the time the red paper parcels increased in number.

When the farewells had nearly come to an end, the middleman urged a
speedy departure, and at last, when she still delayed, he entered the
room, lifted the weeping girl into his arms, and carried her out into
the guest-hall.  Standing on the table before the ancestral tablet, she
worshipped her dead ancestors for the last time, for from henceforth
they were nothing to her, as she would bear another's name.  This
performance over, the middleman again lifted her up like a child, and
placed her in the chair.  The little bride was then locked in, the key
to the chair resting in the pocket of her guide.  Fire-crackers were
let off, the pipers piped, and the bride, loudly wailing, was on her
way to her future home.

Her brothers followed her for a short distance.  After having escorted
her for about a mile, they handed her the keys of her boxes and
cupboard, bade her a last farewell, and returned home, leaving the
middleman and his assistant to escort her all the way.  Some ragged
little boys were carrying the large lanterns, on which was inscribed
her husband's name, in front of her chair; others carried red banners;
again, others were beating gongs.  One carried the big red umbrella,
which only a bride or a Mandarin is allowed to have carried in front of
the chair.

It was a proud day in the young girl's life.  Everywhere the people
crowded round to get a peep at her through the glass windows of her
sedan chair.  And she, sitting motionless and with bent head all the
way, was conscious of the deference paid to her.  All the people turned
respectfully aside for the procession to pass, and even if a Mandarin
had happened to meet her on the way he would have had to turn aside.
For once in a lifetime the simple country girl was to be honoured by
him, to whom all others had to bow, for, as he would have said, "Who
knows if the bride of to-day may not bear a son, who shall far exceed
me in position and power?"




CHAPTER VI

MARRIAGE--PART II

Meanwhile the bridegroom's family had not been idle.  They had prepared
and decorated their house; had put up new red scrolls, and draped the
guest-hall and the outside door with red cloth.  Large red candles,
painted with gold, were burning on a sort of mantelpiece at the top of
the room, and new lanterns were adorning the hall.

The bedroom for the bride had also been prepared.  A man who had been
prosperous in his life and home decided where the bed was to be placed;
and a woman equally prosperous in her home made the bed, and took good
care that no ill-luck should come near the dwelling of the young couple.

When about a mile's distance from her future husband's home,
Everlasting Pearl suddenly ceased her wailing, for it now behoved her
to show the right submission.  The old life lay behind her; she had
mourned for it, but must now prepare for the new life ahead.

She was met by messengers from the Hsue family.  The chair was put down
and some superstitious rites were performed to drive away the evil
influences which she might have encountered by the way.  And then, as
it was getting dark, the lanterns were lighted for the last stage of
the journey, and soon she was carried into her new home.  She entered
it to the sound of fire-crackers, music, beating of gongs, and the
shouts of all the people who had gathered in great numbers, each one
present trying to catch the first glimpse of the bride.

The bridal chair was put down in the guest-hall, and there it remained.
After what seemed an exceptionally long waiting time, the door was
unlocked, but still the bride could not move.  At last, a woman, the
proud mother of several sons, came forward and helped her out of the
chair.  Two little girls, richly adorned with flowers, were waiting,
one on either side of the chair, to offer her some tea.  After that she
was led into the room prepared for her.  Her own furniture had already
been placed in the room, and the bridegroom, clad in official robes,
was standing near the bed, waiting for her.  Then they both sat down, a
table was placed before them with two basins of rice, some eggs,
vermicelli, and a chicken leg for each.  Not much of it was eaten,
however; the little bride, still veiled, could touch nothing, but the
guests, who had crowded into the room to stare at her, helped
themselves freely to the rice.

After a short time the bridegroom left the room, and a little later the
bride was led out to the public guest-hall, supported by two women.
The young man was waiting for her.  They took their stand in front of
the ancestral tablet side by side, and now the real wedding ceremony
began.

A wadded quilt, covered with red, was spread on a mat on the floor, the
bride and bridegroom knelt down on it, and three times worshipped their
ancestors, their heads touching the ground each time.  Then they turned
round and worshipped "Heaven and earth" in the same way.  Afterwards
two cups of wine were brought from the table.  The man who was
supporting the bridegroom offered the latter one of the cups, and the
second one was held to the lips of the bride by the women in charge of
her.  Then the wine from the two cups was mixed, and each one took a
sip from the same cup, indicating that from now on they were united,
and must share life together, whilst some of the bystanders laughingly
chanted:

  Together they walk, each other aid,
  The knot is tied, the covenant made.


The first ceremony had come to an end.  Bride and bridegroom bowed to
each other, and then the latter lifted the veil, and beheld for the
first time the face of the girl who had been given him to wife!  The
crowd was getting excited, and from all sides the shout arose:

  Oh, with what joy the hour we hail,
  When time has come to lift the veil.

The poor little bride was getting weary, and her bridesmaid led her
back to the bedroom, closely followed by the bridegroom.  For a few
moments they took their stand together in front of the bed, but soon
the young man went out of the room, threw off his wedding garments, and
began to help in looking after the guests.  Soon all of them were
feasting around a number of square tables, the bridegroom being one of
the busiest in ministering to them.

But the bride had not got over her ordeal.  The whole evening she was
made a gazing-stock to all.  Any one might go in to stare at her, and
acquaintances of the bridegroom and even strangers who crowded into the
room were allowed to make any remarks they liked.  The children were
dancing around her singing:

  Little bride, little bride!
  You climbed the wall from the other side!

Every now and again this refrain was started, and sometimes a more
mischievous boy or girl would take it up, adding another line:

  Little bride, little bride!
  You climbed the wall from the other side!
  And to steal our potatoes moreover tried!

Later on, a table was spread in front of the bride, and a few intimate
friends and relatives had their supper with her, but she herself could
touch nothing.  She was sitting on the edge of the bed, trying to keep
calm and composed; no smile lit up her face, no word was uttered, and
it was very seldom that a sentence was addressed to her.

In the middle of the many courses, her mitre was placed on her head
again, and she was led out to the guest-hall.  With a wine cup in her
hand, she went from table to table, and bowed low to her husband's
friends.  Their cups were filled afresh, and each one took a drink in
honour of the bride, while the band played vigorously.  After she had
finished her round, she went back to her bedroom till the feasting was
over.

[Illustration: Adorned as a bride.  A proud day in the young girl's
life.]

It was then getting late, and the young bridegroom entered, accompanied
by his friends, who were carrying big red candles in front of him, and
sending off fire-crackers.  They did not leave the young people till
after midnight, and not before having tried to get hold of as many of
their belongings as possible.  These they endeavoured to hide, and a
good thing it was that the bride had got plenty of sweets, peanuts,
beans, etc., for all the stolen articles had to be redeemed the
following morning.

After a few short hours of rest, the young people had to get ready for
breakfast, and soon afterwards the second part of the wedding ceremony
began, the part which is called _Fen ta siao_, which, literally
translated, means "To distinguish between great and small."  Bride and
bridegroom were arrayed once more in their wedding robes, and proceeded
to the guest-hall where all the relatives were assembled.  Again the
two knelt together on the red quilt, bowing their heads three times to
the ground before Mr. and Mrs. Hsue, who bowed in return.  Mr. Hsue threw
down the keys of the household before the young people.  He had,
however, no thought of giving them any responsibility, and every
intention of getting the keys back into his own pockets and keeping
them there.

Then the uncles and aunts were led forward, to whom was paid the same
respect.  The brothers, cousins, and other relatives came next, but
being of the same generation as the bride and bridegroom, they also
knelt down and "worshipped" them in return.  Each relative put a piece
of money, wrapped in red paper, on a tray placed there for that
purpose, and, when filled, it was carried to the bride's room until a
more convenient time was found for the counting of the money.

The whole party, headed by the bridegroom and the bride, then proceeded
to the kitchen for the purpose of worshipping the kitchen god.  The
bridegroom carried a rice measure with a lamp placed in it, the bride a
brush for cleaning the cooking pan.  Many superstitious rites are
connected with the worship in the kitchen, the smallest detail has its
own meaning, but it would be too tedious to relate all.

The dinner came next, and this time the bride had to take the seat of
honour at the top table, but once seated there, she remained as silent
as the night before, and ate nothing.  Again she went round to bow to
the guests at the different tables, who all stood up and solemnly drank
her health.

After dinner she was allowed to put off her bridal attire, and wear
some of the clothes sent her by her husband.  She was also permitted to
throw off some of the reserve of the past days, and could talk more
freely to those around her.

The following day a messenger arrived from Mr. and Mrs. Tu, inviting
the young couple to return to the bride's home for dinner.  They were
both carried in sedan chairs, and had to wear most of their wedding
garments again.  They were very careful and modest in their
behaviour,--young Hsue especially was afraid of offending in word or
deed,--and they were not sorry when, soon after the formal dinner, they
could once more return home.  Another formal visit had to be paid,
about two months later, at the beginning of the Chinese New Year, to
the bride's home, but then a more free and natural relationship was
established between the two families.




CHAPTER VII

DARK DAYS

The home Everlasting Pearl had entered was not a rich one.  The members
were all simple, hard-working people, ordinary country farmers who had
to earn their living by the sweat of their brow.  But they were honest
and peace-loving, and the five brothers worked together in unity.
Although one of the Chinese sages had said:

  Let brotherly love in the home abound
  And to gold will be changed the dust of the ground,

the gold seemed a long time coming to the Hsue family.  They were able
by steady work to make a comfortable living at their farming, but there
was little over to make a fortune.  On the whole, Everlasting Pearl was
moderately happy.  Her husband was quite satisfied with his bright
young wife, and treated her kindly.  The mother-in-law was rather hard
on her and inconsiderate, but the father-in-law loved her as a
daughter, and made things as easy as possible.  Her husband's brothers,
too, were kind, and she went about her common task cheerfully, quite
ready to take her share in the household work.

Four years passed peacefully, but no child came to gladden the home,
and that was a sore disappointment to the young people.  The
mother-in-law too was disappointed, and did not look very kindly on the
young wife who was trying so hard to do her duty.  Old Mr. Hsue had left
this world.  For three days and nights the Taoist priests had come to
chant their formulas, promising to cleanse the house from evil spirits,
and to break open the door of hell and rescue the soul of the departed
father.  There was real sorrow in Everlasting Pearl's heart as she
knelt near the coffin wailing.  The old man had been like a father to
her, and had helped her over many rough places.  She knew things would
be harder without him, but little did she realize what heavy trials
awaited her.  A merciful God had hidden the knowledge from her sight,
or her inborn courage might have failed.

During the fifth year of Everlasting Pearl's married life her sorrows
began.  Twice within a few months she was summoned to the deathbed of
her loved ones.  She first knelt mourning at the grave of her father;
and then, before that sorrow had had time to lose its sting, she was
throwing herself in agony over the body of her dead mother, the mother
who had always loved her so tenderly.  And death was fearful to her.
The "three souls and seven spirits" had evidently all taken their
departure.  Where had they gone?  If only she knew, the separation
would not be so hard.  But there was no one to solve the mystery for
her; no ray of light to dispel the darkness and fear that crept over
her; no hope of a reunion; no Resurrection Morning to look forward to,
and therefore no comfort to lighten her sorrow.

But greater trials were yet in store.  The brothers did not work quite
so well together after old Mr. Hsue's death, and decided to divide their
fields between them, which they did equally and peacefully, and each
one set up for himself.  Everlasting Pearl and her husband worked
harder than ever, as now all the profit they made would be their own.
The harvest promised to be a good one.  In the beginning of the sixth
moon, after the early crops of rice had been cut, they ate their new
rice on the day appointed by the Mandarin.  Before touching any of the
food they took it to the temple near by, and earnestly invoked the
blessing of the gods on the new grain, after which they sat down to
partake of it without any fear of sickness or trouble coming to them
that year.

But alas!  Only a few days later the husband was taken ill, and day by
day became worse.  The wife was naturally anxious, and when his illness
deprived him of his reason, her cup of sorrow seemed full.  For three
years he was raving mad, and often, when in one of his fits of rage, he
would ill-treat his wife.  These fits might come on without any
warning, day or night, so that she was kept in constant fear.

These were dark days indeed for the young wife.  Not only had she to
nurse her husband, but she was obliged to do a great deal of his work
in the fields, although it required a man's strength.  Bravely she
plodded on, but often lost heart and gave herself up to her sorrow.  If
only her parents or her father-in-law had been alive, they would have
comforted her.  If only she were not so alone in the world.  If only
she had had a child of her own to love and to work for, she could have
borne it better.  Many a time she would repeat the sad cry of the
childless wife:

  No son, no daughter to call my own,
  Thus daily my pitiful lot I bemoan!

How hard it was to be all alone, without a refuge to turn to, without
some one to share her sorrow.  How her heart longed for comfort, but
there was none to give it.  How she needed a friend to stand by her,
but none was found.  Alas! no one had told her of "the Friend that
sticketh closer than a brother."  She was so weary and burdened, but no
one had ever whispered in her ear the sweet and tender invitation of
the great Rest-Giver: "Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest."  No one around her knew of that
blessed invitation, for the messengers to whom it had been entrusted
had been sleeping and taking their rest, neglecting their Lord's
command, and forgetting that "the King's business requireth haste."




CHAPTER VIII

MISERABLE COMFORTERS

The case of Everlasting Pearl's husband was a hopeless one, and despair
took possession of both mother and wife as time went on.  They
exhausted all the means in their power, but very soon realized that
vain was the help of man, for the doctors could do nothing for him.
They then turned to the spirits and implored their help.  In these
surely they would not be disappointed.

First of all they sent to a medium to ask what was the matter.  She
told them that the sick man had lost a soul, and they would have to go
out and find it.  A party of them, therefore, quickly set out, carrying
a measure of rice, which they strewed by the way to show the spirit the
direction home.  At every step Everlasting Pearl frantically called
out, "My husband, come home, come home."  Each time, when her cry
arose, the rest of the party answered with assurance, "He has come
home, he has come home."  But when they returned, after their weary
tramp, the lost soul had not found its way home, and there was no
improvement in the condition of the patient.

A few days later, the mother decided that they would have to call in a
Taoist priest for a ceremony called _kan tong_, or "influence."  In the
middle of the afternoon, when the spirits were supposed to have come
out of their hiding-places, the priest started his work.  Three men
were beating the gong and drum most vigorously, while he himself took
three sticks of incense and worshipped the idol hanging before him.
Then he drew a tiger on two pieces of paper, put them down on the
ground, and called for the chosen medium.  A relative of young Hsue,
with a red turban round his head, stepped forward, and took his stand
somewhat reluctantly on the tigers.  He had seen other mediums return
with their bodily and mental health impaired, and he had no desire to
risk his own; but his duty and brotherly love bade him perform this
service for his young kinsman.

The priest now began chanting his formulas to the beating of the gong,
keeping his eyes steadfastly fixed on the medium, watching for the
latter to show signs of being mesmerized.  After a time, when the
pupils of the eyes began to dilate, and when the man started jumping,
as the tigers were unable to keep his feet quiet any longer, the priest
asked, "Have you seen light?"  The medium answered in the affirmative,
and off he dashed, whilst a number prepared to follow him.  They were
horribly painted and armed with pitchforks.  On and on they rushed,
calling for the soul.  Anything more devilish can hardly be imagined.
Suddenly the medium stopped in one of the fields, and declared that
that was the place where the soul had been lost.  Lighting their
incense, they called loudly for the soul, till the medium rushed off
home again, telling them the soul would return with them, and the sick
man would recover.  But again the gods had played them false, for the
sick man got worse instead of better.

What was to be done next?  An astrologer's advice was sought, and
readily given.  He informed them that they had made a mistake the first
time, when they called in the Taoist priest, and that the wrong
ceremony had been performed.  They must call in four Taoist priests to
perform for a day and a night, so as to drive away the evil spirits
which had taken possession of the sick man.  The house was accordingly
decorated with idols on all sides, and the four priests began their
work.  The noise in the house was almost unbearable, and thus it
continued for twenty-four hours, after which time the priests announced
young Hsue to be out of danger, as the evil spirits had taken their
departure.  In reality there was only one thing that had taken its
departure, and that was the money possessed by the Hsue family, which
had now found its way into the roomy pockets of the priests.

The young wife was almost in despair.  But it never occurred to her, or
to any one else in the family, to blame the idols or the priests.  Very
likely they had not done enough for the sick man.  They would call the
Taoist priests again, and let them go on for three days and three
nights.  But where was the money to come from?  A consultation was
held, and it was decided to mortgage the fields in order to get the
money needed.  Of course it would mean poverty afterwards, but that
point could not be considered just now; all that mattered was to get
the young man well again.  So the fields were mortgaged, and the
priests were more than pleased to come again.  Needless to say they
succeeded no better than before, but that did not trouble them.

At last the whole family gave up in despair.  It was true there was
still the rite called "The turning of tables," but that was too
expensive, and there was no money left for it.  Nothing more could be
done.  Young Hsue would have to be left to his fate, and they had to
resign themselves and make the best of their difficulties.




CHAPTER IX

BROKEN CISTERNS

Time dragged wearily on in that afflicted household, and Everlasting
Pearl walked about with a heavy heart.  Her brothers-in-law felt sorry
for her, and several times offered to kill her husband, or get rid of
him somehow, thinking they might do the young wife a service.  But she
refused to accept their offer, and said she would much rather do his
work, and earn what was necessary to supply his needs as well as her
own.  He had been kind to her, and had worked for her in earlier years,
and now, in his weakness, it was her turn to work for him.

Day after day and month after month she toiled on, through hard work
and sorrow and trials, often suffering herself both in body and mind;
and all this had to be borne without a shadow of comfort.  She knew
nothing about the "God of all comfort," and had never heard of Him who
"day by day beareth our burden."  No wonder she was at times almost
driven to despair, and cried out for a ray of light in the darkness,
for a flicker of hope amid the hopeless condition and sad chaos of her
life.  Through all the bitter days of suffering her mind was turned to
the things hereafter, and she determined that if she had to toil and
suffer here she would, if at all possible, do something to escape the
suffering in the life to come.  But how should she begin?  What was she
to do?  Was there anything that could give her aching heart some
comfort, her despairing soul some hope?  Was it possible to flee from
the suffering in the next world? for that such existed she was sure,
and her heart cried out for deliverance.

In the neighbourhood a great many vegetarians resided, and one day,
when Everlasting Pearl was engaged in irrigating the field, a woman,
one of the leaders among the vegetarians, passed by.  Of course she
knew all about the trouble of the young wife, and stopped to speak to
her.  Everlasting Pearl instantly ceased her work.  The sun was just
then at its hottest stage, and as she had been standing the whole
morning exposed to its scorching rays, doing work which was far too
heavy for any woman, her tired body was glad of a moment's rest.  The
kind words of the woman went to her heart, so she soon confided all her
troubles to her.  The listener had only one way of helping her, and
began to exhort her to become a vegetarian for life.  She offered to
look upon her as a daughter, and declared herself willing to instruct
her in the vegetarian doctrine.

Everlasting Pearl eagerly reached out after the comfort promised.  The
necessary rosary was bought.  She went to the leaders of the vegetarian
sect, and told them of her decision.  They gladly welcomed her among
their number, gave her a book and the necessary instructions, with many
exhortations to be steadfast in the way she had begun to walk.  If she
remained firm to the end, they promised her what her heart desired, a
life hereafter without any suffering.  Through her life as a vegetarian
she would be accumulating merit day by day, and would be able to lay up
such a large store for herself that she would not have to pass through
all the usual stages of transmigration in the next world, but would be
able to go straight to the goal she had set before her, the "Western
Heaven," or "Paradise."

Everlasting Pearl started as a vegetarian when she was twenty-two years
old, at the advice of the woman whom, from that time on, she adopted as
her mother.  She did so in uprightness of heart, seeking after the
truth, and as determination and steadfastness were two very strong
traits in her character, she found it easier than many others to keep
to what she had promised.

Seldom had the vegetarian cause had a more decided and devout follower
than she was, and Everlasting Pearl soon won a name among the members
of her faith, and far beyond that circle.  She was deeply respected,
not only for her steadfastness of purpose, but also for her general
conduct, which was in the eyes of men blameless.  Every evening, when
her day's work was done, she would take down her beads, and, kneeling
down before the picture of Buddha, would repeat over and over again
_O-mi-to-fuh_--"In Buddha do I put my trust," counting her beads all
the time.  Sometimes she continued till far into the night; thousands
of times she would count her rosary, trying to persuade herself that
she had found relief from her suffering.  In reality her heart remained
empty and devoid of any true comfort.  The longer she went on, the more
her assurance grew.  After all, it was the next world she was working
for, and all things would come out right in the end.

But God, who looks upon the intents and motives of the heart, saw this
poor, struggling soul trying to grope her way in the darkness, and
determined to work out her own salvation, since she had no one to show
her the true way.  In His love and pity He had laid up a better
inheritance for her, and in His own way, all unknown to her, He began
to lay His plans for bringing her into contact with His children and
the messengers of Peace.  Slowly, but surely, all things worked
together for her good, and for the salvation of her soul.




CHAPTER X

WAYS NOT KNOWN

As mentioned previously, Everlasting Pearl's husband was raving mad for
three years.  Then he took a turn for the better, but was still insane
and unable to do any work.  For seven years he remained in that
condition, and then, when death knocked at the door, it seemed to bring
relief to the members of the family.

A few months later Everlasting Pearl was persuaded to marry a widower,
a quiet, honest tailor, who lived at Kucheng.  So she returned to the
place of her birth, and found a real home awaiting her.  Mr. Lue, her
husband, was a man of sterling worth, and soon a real affection sprang
up between them.  Mrs. Lue, for as such Everlasting Pearl will now
appear, was very happy, and fully appreciated her change of
circumstances.

Mr. Lue had three little children when his new wife entered his home;
but about a month later one child died.  He had been ill for some time,
and Mrs. Lue's motherly care could not save him from death.  A second
son died three years later, apparently from the same illness, both
seeming to waste away.  Their mother had died from consumption, and
evidently her weakness had affected the children.  Only one child, a
brother's son, remained, and Mrs. Lue took him to her loving heart.  The
lad, in his turn, lavished all his childish affection on her, for she
was a real mother to him.

About two years after her marriage to Mr. Lue, the latter was asked by a
neighbour, who was a seeker after the Truth, to accompany him to the
Gospel Hall.  We were then holding meetings in the house of a
Christian, who lived in a village about two miles' distance from
Kucheng.  But Mr. Lue, being a very nervous man, felt shy about going
and shrank from meeting strangers, especially when these appeared in
the form of foreigners.  Moreover, he was loath to give up his time
without having a sure compensation for it, as he was hard-working, and
did not like to spend an hour in vain.  So he refused to go.

Another two years passed by.  The Boxer troubles had quietened down,
and the workers who had returned were again holding meetings in the
little village near Kucheng.  The place was very hard, the Christians
cold, and the man in whose house the services were held was not on good
terms with the other Church members in the village.  One Sunday, when
the writer was there, her heart was specially heavy.  The coldness was
appalling, and she came to the point where she said, "Lord, I cannot go
on with the work here.  If Thou dost not show forth Thy mighty power in
doing a new thing in this place, I must give it up!"  The spiritual
battle was a fearful and exhausting one.  Returning home to the central
station, she told her fellow-workers how she felt, and all set to pray
for that place as never before, claiming victory from the Lord.  A
month later, the writer visited that centre again in fear and
trembling; but the Lord had already begun to work.  He was manifestly
in the midst, and it was easily realized that God had granted a real
answer to prayer.

In one of the meetings one of the Christians humbly confessed his sin
before God, and asked for forgiveness and for strength to walk in
newness of life.  Another Christian gave a bright testimony.  Life was
beginning to get into the dead bones.  That Sunday morning, too, a new
enquirer came to the meetings, and stayed for the whole day.  His
presence there seemed to be a promise of coming blessing.  And this
impression was not wrong, for the following month a few others came
with him, some of them from Kucheng.  One of these enquirers invited
Mr. Lue to the services, and this time he consented.  Well does the
writer remember the first Sunday he came.  His face and manner alike
were altogether out of the ordinary, and somehow, from the very
beginning, a conviction was received that God had chosen him for
Himself.  From that very day a work was begun in his heart.

Soon the little meeting-place became too small for the congregation,
and a house was rented at Kucheng.  Many enquirers had gathered around
this centre, some with mixed motives, it is true.  There were those who
only came for worldly advantages, and these soon dropped off.  Others
were touched by the Spirit of God, and a real work was begun in their
hearts.  But two or three years later, when they had to make their
decision for or against Christ, when they had to count the cost, which
in some cases was a heavy one, they were not willing to pay the price,
and gradually grew cold and indifferent.  Some of them caused real
disappointment, as they had been so bright and promising.  But there
were a few who went steadily on, and among them was Mr. Lue.  He never
wavered, never missed a Sunday.  Although in the beginning he used to
do some pressing work after the Sunday meetings, it was pointed out to
him one night that it was not only he who should keep the day of rest,
but all within his house.  He listened and understood, and the next
morning, being Sunday, he brought his son to the services.  From that
day he never sent him to work again on the Sunday.  To those who knew
that Mr. Lue had never wasted an hour before, or let his work stop for
any pleasure of his own, it was a real miracle that he should now be
willing to allow his whole household rest on Sunday.  What had happened
to the man?  What power was there in that strange religion that could
make him forgo all the money a weekly day of rest meant to him and his
family?  What was it that had given the timid and reserved man courage
to speak out freely about the new life that had opened up before him,
and had made him strong to stand against all the ridicule that was
heaped upon him in many of the houses where he worked?  A God who could
bring about such a change was a God indeed.

From the very beginning, Mr. Lue showed unusual understanding about
spiritual things.  Was it not because he believed God and took Him
simply at His word?  He never attempted to bring in his own wisdom,
never leaned to his own understanding.  Very often, when asked
questions about spiritual matters, his answers would cause astonishment
and surprise.  The Spirit of God was taking of the things of Christ,
and showing them unto him, and day by day his faith grew stronger and
his trust in the Lord firmer.




CHAPTER XI

THE MESSENGERS OF PEACE

When first Mr. Lue began to attend the services his wife did not like
it.  She exhorted him to continue in the old way, living a quiet and
respectable life lest he should be involved in difficulties and trouble
because of his friendship with the foreigners.  But when she saw that
his mind was made up, she left him alone.

The writer's first acquaintance with Mrs. Lue dates back to the spring
of 1902, when the out-station at Kucheng was opened.  The house that
was rented adjoined that belonging to Mr. and Mrs. Lue, and when the
writer, in company with a Christian woman who was to fill the office of
chapel-keeper, arrived in Kucheng late one evening, Mr. and Mrs. Lue
were there to receive us.  The enquirers had had the house cleaned up
and prepared for our coming, and the key to the house had been given to
Mr. Lue.  His wife's mind was rather in a state of confusion.  She tried
to persuade herself that the coming of this strange religion, which
seemed to take a wonderful hold on the minds of people, could be
nothing to her, as her way was the only right one.  But, of course, she
must be neighbourly.  Moreover, the strangers were friends of her
husband, and her loyalty to him bade her do all in her power to be kind
to the new-comers.  Thus it came about that she, together with her
husband, gave us a hearty welcome, and informed us that supper had
already been prepared.  Our heart went out to Mrs. Lue, and very soon a
firm friendship was established.  She was exceedingly kind, but there
she stopped.  She was very pleased to see her husband and other members
of the family becoming Christians, and even exhorted them to be
steadfast and give their whole hearts to what they believed.  But they
were not to ask her to accept their creed.  She must go her own way,
and pursue the path she had marked out for herself for so many years.
The doctrine was very good, she said, and she did not mind attending
the meetings.  That could not do her any harm, as she intended to go no
further.  Thus everything went on smoothly, Satan left her in peace,
whilst others kept on praying for her and claiming this precious soul
for the Lord.  It was impossible not to realize what a power this woman
would have for good, if only she were won for the Master, and very soon
some of us received the assurance that one day she would become a
trophy of His grace.

[Illustration: The out-station at Kucheng.  The place where Everlasting
Pearl was converted.]

All during that summer Mrs. Lue continued to attend the meetings, and
she enjoyed them thoroughly.  In spite of herself she got more and more
interested in what she saw and heard.  In the autumn of that year the
writer stayed at Kucheng for a fortnight, and while there held Bible
Study for the men twice a week, and although visiting some of the
villages around, gave a good deal of time in teaching the women and
children to read.  Mrs. Lue came as usual, and as she was more
intelligent than the average Chinese woman, she not only obtained a
good deal of knowledge concerning salvation in Christ Jesus, but
learned to read quite a little and enjoyed it with all her heart.

Something happened at that time which made a great impression on her
mind.  Early one morning a dreadful quarrel broke out in Mr. Lue's
house.  It seemed incredible, as they were a very affectionate family.
But there was no doubt about it; Mrs. Lue had completely lost her temper
with her brother, and was scolding and swearing like any other Chinese
woman.  For a while the writer kept quiet, but as the quarrel continued
and increased, we dressed quickly, and made our way to the place from
which the angry voices came.  Mr. Lue was sitting there, meekly
listening, and evidently on his wife's side, but not opening his lips,
while Mrs. Lue could not control her voice for anger.  The writer,
putting her hand on Mrs. Lue's shoulder, said, "Mrs. Lue, what are you
doing this morning?  I never heard you like this before."  Then she
narrated all, and added, "If only he would keep quiet and not answer
back, I would get over my anger; but when he retaliates, I lose my
temper altogether, and he ought to have done what I told him!"  We said
it was quite true, but she was wrong in saying all these things against
her brother, which she really did not mean, and which would only rile
him instead of bringing him to his sense of duty.  After being exhorted
to keep quiet, she calmed down.

When returning home, we met the brother, who had been hiding in the
kitchen, and had evidently been listening to what had been said to his
sister.  Going up to him we said, "Look here, you know you are in the
wrong.  Your sister has your good at heart, and has only asked you to
do what it was your duty to do.  Now say nothing more about it, but go
and do it, and you will all have peace again."  He looked very
shamefaced for a moment, then he got the victory and said, "Very well,
I will do it."  And with that he went out to do his work, and the
quarrel was ended.

But the best result was yet to follow in two hearts.  Towards noon Mrs.
Lue appeared, looking very sad and dejected.  She said how miserable she
was because she had given way to anger; that after all these years of
trying to live uprightly and do her duty by all, she had no control
over herself when she was roused to anger.  "So that is all your many
years of vegetarianism have done for you," the writer added.  The tears
started to her eyes, and she answered, "That is all.  I have no more
control over myself than I had seventeen years ago, when I first
started as a vegetarian."  Solemnly and tenderly we pointed her to the
cleansing and keeping power of Christ.  She listened eagerly, for her
heart was sad and weary.

Her brother, as yet, had not been willing to come to the meetings,
although his brother-in-law had tried earnestly to persuade him to do
so.  But that night he walked in and smiled happily, evidently glad
that the little domestic scene had ended so well.  So there was a
double victory won, for from that time he came off and on, till about a
year later, when he started to come regularly, and ultimately became a
real enquirer after the Truth.  When the writer left for home in
November it was impossible not to praise God for all the blessing He
had given in Kucheng, and to hope and pray for greater things.




CHAPTER XII

THE BEGINNING OF CONFLICT

A few weeks went by, and then Miss M---- paid a visit to Kucheng.  On
her return she said that Mrs. Lue had stopped coming to the meetings, as
she was frightened.  At night she was haunted by horrible dreams, and
was afraid she had sinned against her cause in learning our doctrine,
and in listening to the preaching of the Word.  So she stayed away
altogether, and began reciting her prayers to Buddha more diligently
than ever before.  She determined never to give up her vow, but to go
steadily on, and to be even more earnest in the future, so that if
possible she might find peace and rest for her soul.

In that state we found her when next we visited the place.  She was so
unhappy.  Till late into the night she could be heard counting her
beads, and reciting her _O-mi-to-fuh_, in earnest and pleading tones.

One Sunday, after the meeting, her husband took down the idols and
burned them publicly.  Even to please his wife he could not leave them
any longer.  The ancestral tablet was destroyed the same day, and some
Christian scrolls and pictures were hung up, to show that henceforth
the Lord Jesus was to be Master in the house instead of Satan.  His
real power was to take the place of the imagined power at the disposal
of the idols.  Mr. Lue was so happy when his house was cleansed from
everything idolatrous, and we heartily rejoiced with him, praising God
for his salvation and for his bright testimony.

But as for Mrs. Lue, her face was a picture of sadness.  She had not
dared to come to the meeting, but came privately afterwards.  We asked
her why she had been sitting alone and miserable in her own house, when
she might have been gathering with others joyfully before the Lord.
The tears started to her eyes, as she answered, "I do want to come, oh
so much, but I dare not, I dare not!"  When asked what she was going to
do now, as all the idols had been burned, she said she would have to
recite her prayers without a Buddha to burn incense to.

"What about your beads?  Where are they going to be hung?"

"Oh, I don't know.  My husband says they cannot be hung on the wall
beside the Word of God."

"You will have to put them in the bedroom."

"That will not do either, for my husband shares that with me, and he
will not have them there."

"Well, then, you must make a corner somewhere in the house, all to
yourself," we told her laughingly, but not laughing in our heart.

Her suffering was evident to all; and one day one of the enquirers
suggested that her husband should secretly give her an egg to eat, and
so break her vow.  Turning round, he said, "No, I do not want to do
this, but will continue to pray for her.  When the Holy Spirit opens
her understanding, she will break it herself."  This gave us an
opportunity of telling him and all present that the Lord would not
compel any one to serve Him, but wanted a willing people.  We must
wait, until in His light she would see light, and realize her
nothingness and the utter vanity of her own striving after
righteousness.  So she was left with Him who was able to remove the
veil from her face, and lead her into the true and living way, fully
assured that He had already begun a gracious work in her heart.




CHAPTER XIII

THE BATTLE GROWS FIERCER

At that time the Lord began to prepare Mrs. Lue's heart through dreams
and visions, as is so often His way in heathen countries.  Once after
her husband had forbidden her to have idols and burn incense in his
house, she was sitting alone in the evening, feeling dejected and
forlorn, and sadly counting her beads to herself.  At last she grew too
weary to continue and sought her pillow.  That night she dreamed that
some one she had never seen before came to her, put his foot on her
breast, and said, "And still you will continue to recite your prayers
to Buddha!"  She awoke terrified, and for a long time was unable to
shake off the fear that had laid hold of her heart.

Another time one of the Biblewomen had been telling her about the Lord
being the great Physician, and that He was able to heal her from the
infirmities she had had since the time she had been working too hard
for her strength.  When she went to rest that evening she dreamed that
she saw a rope, in the shape of a circle, swinging between heaven and
earth, and on it an old man was standing.  After a while he came close
up to her, and said, "Trust me, I have come to heal you."  When she
awoke, she was wondering if it was God who had appeared to her in a
vision.

Time after time, when we visited Kucheng, she would tell us of her
experiences, her dreams and visions, her fears and conflicts.  Night
after night she would dream that somebody was setting meat and fish
before her, tempting her to eat, whilst she turned away determined not
to be tempted, not to defile herself, not to lose the merit she had
stored up for herself all these many years.  Day and night her mind was
in confusion.  She dreaded the night with its visions, and could not
welcome the day that would only bring her unrest.  In her agony she
cried out, "No, I will never go back.  I will be steadfast to the very
end, and keep my vow till death.  Others may walk their different ways,
but no one shall make me change.  I have never doubted, have never been
vacillating, and am not going to be so now."

Oh! how she longed for peace, but none came to end all her struggles,
for they only increased.  But God had chosen her for Himself, and could
not give her heart rest until it rested in Him for whom it was made.
But she did not see that all her struggles were "cords of love" with
which the Father was trying to draw her to Himself.  One day she said
to me, "If you only knew what I suffer.  But it is impossible to put
into words what I have been passing through.  It is as if two mighty
powers were fighting about me, and I am just torn between the two."
"Quite true," we answered; "two great Powers, God and the Devil, are
fighting for you; both want you, but God will conquer."  It was pitiful
to behold her sufferings.  We had never seen any conflict like it in
China, and our heart cried out to the Lord for the deliverance which we
knew must surely come.

The following day she spoke again about her two dreams.  She dreamed
that with many others she went to worship a removed idol, the one she
had so often looked upon with awe in her childhood days.  One after
another went to kneel down before the idol, worshipping it, and praying
for health and happiness.  But when, after some time of patient
waiting, her turn came, something strange happened.  She was just about
to kneel down, when the idol took off his hat, and showed her his head,
which was bald from a loathsome skin disease.  He told her he was false
all through, and she was not to worship him.  Why should he reveal to
her what he had hidden from the other worshippers?  When she awoke she
kept pondering over the meaning of it all.

Another dream was that she was trying to settle a quarrel, and in doing
so received a wound in her leg.  She looked down to where the cut was,
and to her horror she saw no flesh revealed, but only straw.  She
examined it closely, but it seemed to be the same all through; she had
nothing but straw inside, and she turned from the sight that had met
her eyes in horror and despair.  She was not able to get away from that
dream, feeling quite sure that it had some special teaching in it for
her, and she turned to the writer to help her understand what it might
mean.  Recognizing that the dream was from God, that He was teaching
her through these visions, we lifted our heart to God in prayer.  We
were standing beside a stack of straw in Mrs. Lue's yard.  Pulling out
one straw, and showing it to her, we said, "Do you see that straw?
Now, how much is it worth?  You just touch it and it is broken.  There
is no real value in it.  Suppose you take a match and set fire to this
whole stack of straw, in a few minutes all would be burned up, nothing
but ashes would remain.  As with this straw, so will it be with all the
merit you think you have stored up for the life to come.  The Word of
God says that everything which is not built on Christ as the foundation
is wood, hay, and stubble, and shall be burned up.  So all your
supposed merit will vanish when the day of reckoning comes.  There is
no real, lasting value in it; it will all be burned up, only the ashes
will remain, and you will have nothing with which to appear before God.
But all that is built on Christ Jesus will abide."

This interpretation may not appeal to Western minds, but it made a deep
impression on Mrs. Lue, and we believe it was the message God meant for
her.  That night she came again to the meeting.  She could stay away no
longer, the time of her deliverance was drawing nigh.




CHAPTER XIV

LIGHT AFTER DARKNESS

Quite a few weeks elapsed before we went to Kucheng again, and during
that interval nothing had been heard of Mrs. Lue.  But we had not been
silent before the Throne of Grace.  When we reached Kucheng, several
met us at the gate, shouting, "We have good news for you, which will
give you great joy; Mrs. Lue is now your friend indeed, she has broken
her vow, and has been eating meat for the first time to-day!"  That was
good news indeed, and there is no need to tell what joy this news
brought; indeed, it would be impossible to do so.  How we did praise
God for having answered prayer and given such a glorious deliverance.
And that song of praise rose higher when we heard from Mrs. Lue's own
lips the full story of God's dealings with her.

She met us with a radiant face, and began immediately to tell how it
was the Lord Himself who had constrained her to yield.  No other power
or person could have done so.  The story must be told in her own words.

"After you had left me," she said, "I was still restless and could find
no peace.  As the days passed by, I became more and more miserable, and
at night my sleep was disturbed by all kinds of dreams.  I knew I ought
to trust God and break my vow, but I could not.  I felt I must go on in
the way I had walked for so long, and I determined again not to turn to
anything or to anybody else.  But one night, in my dream, I saw the old
tailor who is living with us and who is earnestly seeking after God,
standing before me in new, beautiful garments.  He was altogether
changed, and oh how glorious he was.  At that moment, when I was
overwhelmed with the appearance of the old man, I caught sight of some
blood which seemed to flow from his heart, and I cried out, 'That is
the blood of Jesus, the Son of God, which has cleansed away his sin.
That is why he is so beautiful.'  How I wished I were like him!

"After that I awoke, but soon went to sleep again, and then another
vision came.  Some one with supernatural strength caught hold of me.
His grasp was so firm that I had no power to move a finger, and I
screamed out, asking him to free me.  But he answered, 'Unless you
promise to give up your vegetarian vow, I will not let you go.'  Now I
knew it was the Lord speaking to me, and in my terror I cried out,
'Yes, Lord, I will, I will give up my vow.'  Still He kept His hold on
me, and said, 'Unless you promise that you will not only give up your
vow, but repent with your whole heart, I will not let you go.'  Again I
replied, 'Yes, Lord, I will repent with my whole heart, only let me go,
and I will serve Thee.'  As soon as I had promised, He let me go, and I
awoke, feeling so free and happy.  My chains were gone, my fetters
broken, and all my unrest had departed.

"The following day I kept repeating, 'Lord, I have repented.  I have
promised to serve Thee, and I will keep my promise to the very end.'
My heart is filled with joy and peace, and now I want to tell you that
you may not worry or be anxious about me any more.  You have fought the
battle with me, you have prayed much for me, you have often felt sad
and anxious about me, but now you can be at rest.  It is God Himself
who has made me take this step, who was too strong for me, and there is
no turning back."

That was Mrs. Lue's story.  What joy it brought to us as we stood and
listened to that testimony.  She had spoken truly, "there was no
turning back," and so there was only grateful praise in our heart, no
fear for the future, for the victory had been won once for all.  Mrs.
Lue's conversion was like that of the Apostle Paul, a radical change;
and like him she began to preach boldly the Truth in Christ Jesus.  All
who saw and heard her marvelled and could not understand what had
brought about such a change.  Over and over again she had to tell the
wonderful story of her conversion, and it made a deep impression on
many.

The vegetarian leaders were angry, and came time after time to try and
win her back, sometimes by earnest pleading, at other times by threats
and denunciations.  But she remained firm, and to each party confessed
that it was God who had called her.  It was in His almighty power that
she had been constrained to give up her vow and seek salvation in
Christ Jesus, and she could not resist Him.  He had done for her what
no human power could ever have accomplished.  She told them it was no
use trying to persuade her to go back, for she would never serve any
one but the Lord Jesus, so they might as well leave her in peace to go
her own road.  Her old friends and instructors did not like it, but
while they threatened, she remained calm and spoke kindly to them, and
even suggested that they too should believe; whereupon they began to
curse her in their rage.

Steadily Mrs. Lue went on growing in the knowledge of Christ.  She
continued her reading, and soon began to teach others.  About six or
seven months later she and her husband were baptized together into the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.  They returned to their home,
full of joy in the Lord, and with the earnest desire to live for Him
who had died for them, and to show forth His salvation from day to day.




CHAPTER XV

SAVED TO SERVE

But the story does not end here.  It is possible to go on to tell a
little of the life of Mrs. Lue as a follower of Him whose Name she
bears.  The more we saw of Mr. and Mrs. Lue the more we loved and
appreciated them, and many happy hours were spent in true fellowship
with them and a few other Christians at Kucheng.  We felt indeed that
we were one family, united in one Lord and Master and in His service.
As they lived next door to the chapel they had special opportunities
for service, and the way in which they took up the responsibility of
the place, and of the people there, often awakened surprise.  At times
it seemed as though they were taking too great a share in the burden.
But they did it so joyfully that it was not easy to restrain them.

When any newcomer attended the meeting, who did not know the rule that
each person must bring his own dinner with him, Mr. and Mrs. Lue would
invite him to their house, "just to make him feel at home the first
time"; and they did it in such a way that the visitor did not feel that
he was receiving any grace from their hands.  If, after some of the
Christians had gathered together on a Sunday, it began to snow or rain,
Mr. and Mrs. Lue would persuade them to stay with them for dinner--"Just
that we may be able to have the afternoon meeting together," they would
say quietly.  When remonstrated with about doing too much, they
answered cheerfully, "Oh, we like to do it.  We put two or three loads
of rice aside for that purpose every year.  We give that to the Lord
who has blessed us so greatly."  What more could be said?  They were
doing it joyfully for the Master, and He who "is not unrighteous to
forget the labour of love" done for Him and for His sake, will surely
reward them "according to His riches in glory in Christ Jesus."  And He
did reward them even here.

When they had been coming to the services for about a year, they were
asked if they had any want, or if they had lost that year, seeing they
had given all their Sundays and many evenings, whereas they had worked
hard all the time in former years.  They replied that they had lost
nothing, but had a greater surplus at the end of the year than
formerly.  And the following year that surplus increased, and they
declared laughingly, "Why, we are richer than ever."  Is not this a
practical testimony to the way in which God keeps His promise--"Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, and His righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you"?

They also taught some of us practical lessons, which will not soon be
forgotten.  One year they had some building and repairs done, and had a
number of workmen working for them by the day.  When Saturday came, the
question was what was to be done with all these men for the Sunday.
The men said they must go on working, or leave for a few days, as they
could not begin work somewhere else for one day.  Mr. and Mrs. Lue were
in great need of their house; and yet what were they to do, for they
felt they could not let the men work for them on the day of rest?  The
whole day they were ill at ease, but towards evening Mrs. Lue said to
her husband, "I know what we will do.  We will just give them their
food and their wages the same as any other day, but tell them they need
not work.  And then those who are willing can come with us to the
meetings."

"But what about the money for all these men?"

"The Lord is able to give that back to us in some other way," she said,
"and, at any rate, we shall have the assurance that we have done our
best to let them have a chance of hearing the Gospel."  So it was all
settled, and their hearts were at rest.

The writer arrived at Kucheng that Saturday evening, and was surprised
to see some of the workmen in the meeting, listening very attentively.
The following day, Sunday, three of them came again, but others went to
some of the shops for a talk and a smoke.

"But why are you not working to-day?  How can you play about like
this?" thus some of the shopkeepers addressed them.

"We were working at Mr. Lue's house, but he told us not to do any work
to-day."

"But how can you afford to lose a day's money like that?"

"We do not lose anything.  Mr. and Mrs. Lue give us our board and wages,
just as if we were working for them the whole day."

"Well, that is strange.  They used to be careful over their money, and
they seem to be so even now."

"That is quite true, but they say they will not sin against their God
in making us work for them on Sunday."

"That doctrine about Jesus is really good: surely there must be
something in it."

Thus the people reasoned, and it need hardly be said that Mr. and Mrs.
Lue, through their steady and careful walk with God, gained a respect
among the people which only few in their position could attain.  It was
to them that the people came in sickness and sorrow, counting upon
their help and prayers.  It was from them they sought advice when in
perplexity and uncertainty.  And it was in their home the Christians
often gathered for a helpful talk before or after the meetings.



CHAPTER XVI

PERSECUTION AND TRIAL

Things did not always go smoothly for Mr. and Mrs. Lue, and the narrow
way was not always easy to tread.  As followers of Christ they had to
share in His sufferings, in His being rejected and despised by the
world.  They had to learn by practical experience that "the servant is
not above his Lord," that if they had persecuted Him, the Lord of
Glory, they would also persecute His followers.  A share in His
rejection must, in greater or smaller measure, fall to the lot of every
true believer, and Mr. and Mrs. Lue were not excepted.  Persecutions,
threats, and even cursings were not lacking, but as those who uttered
them received only meek answers and kind treatment in return, some of
them, at least, very soon became ashamed of themselves, and left Mr. Lue
and his wife alone.  The Lord was on their side, and did not allow
their persecutors to go a step beyond His control; and His servants
found that it was easier to go all lengths with Christ, than to serve
Him in a half-hearted way, as they saw some others doing.

When the annual theatre was held in Kucheng and every one subscribed to
meet the expenses, the collectors came as usual to Mr. Lue's house.  Of
course he and his wife refused, saying they had given up idolatry and
could not subscribe to the theatre in future.  The collectors began to
curse, but found Mr. and Mrs. Lue steadfast in their refusal.

"We are quite willing to entertain you," they said, "we are quite ready
to provide dinner for you to-day, to show you that it is not a question
of money, but we cannot and will not give money for idol-worship and
stage-playing."

The people left enraged, but came again next day, and for many days,
but they had always to return empty-handed.  In such cases where the
money is refused, those who will not contribute invariably get into
trouble.  The collectors, aided by others, take such things as chairs,
tables, etc., by force.  Some of these things are used at the play,
others are sold to make up for the money the owners have refused to
give willingly.  Day by day Mr. Lue and his wife were threatened by the
collectors, who had gathered in great numbers, and when threats failed
to achieve anything, their tormentors began to curse them, and declared
they would beat them and soon teach them what it meant to turn from
idols to a new religion.  But the Lord kept His children calm and
joyful in Himself, and they answered quietly:

"Very well, if you take our chairs and tables and break them to pieces,
as you say you will, we cannot hinder you.  And if you beat us, as you
threaten to, we cannot help that either; but we are not going to give
you any money for the play, as it is against our conscience and we will
not sin against God."

Some of the persecutors still threatened, but others listened to the
promptings of their better nature and gave up the quarrel.  These,
thoroughly ashamed of themselves, restrained the rest from going any
further.  Soon all of them scattered, and Mrs. Lue and her husband were
left in peace, thanking God for the way in which He had undertaken for
them.

The next year the people threatened them worse than ever, and then Mr.
and Mrs. Lue, with some other Christians, almost lost heart.  They began
to look at the difficulties.  They feared the storm that was
threatening, and like Peter, as soon as they turned their eyes from the
Lord and began to look around at the wind and waves, they lost faith,
and were tempted to look to the missionaries for help.  We told them,
however, to cry to their Master.  They did so, and soon realized that
He was still the same as in His days on earth, that the hearts of men
were in His hands, and that He turneth them according to His own will.
At a word from Him the tempest ceased, and there was a great calm.  The
enemies, evidently restrained by the hand of God, did not even come to
the house of His servants.  The Lord was fighting for them, and they
could afford to stand still and see His salvation.




CHAPTER XVII

LABOUR AND FRUIT

Mrs. Lue was faithful in using her opportunities for service, and not a
few precious souls have found Christ through her.  Some had been coming
to the meetings before she had given up her vegetarian vow, and were
still halting between two opinions.  Mrs. Lue helped such to break
through and fully decide for Christ.  She did not believe in half
measures.  Others first heard the Gospel message from her lips, and
were not able to resist the power with which she spoke.  Amongst the
latter was an old woman, called Mrs. Hsiao.

The first Sunday Mrs. Lue brought her to the meetings the writer
happened to be at Kucheng.  A collection was being taken for the Bible
Society, and this old woman wanted to give thirty cash.  We did not
wish to receive it, fearing that she did not know what she was giving
it for.  But she pressed us to take it, and Mrs. Lue said, "Please, do
take it.  She understands quite well.  Although she is at the services
for the first time to-day she knows the Gospel already, for I have
spoken to her several times, and she has quite made up her mind to
serve the Lord.  If you do not take it, she will be disappointed."  And
when Mrs. Hsiao herself was asked, she said she wanted to give the
money so that others might hear the "Good News" Mrs. Lue had been
telling her.

Mrs. Lue went on teaching her about Christ, and helped her to learn some
hymns and to read a little.  This latter work seemed a hopeless task,
as Mrs. Hsiao was not young; moreover, she was half blind.  When the
writer saw her next time she had, however, mastered quite a few hymns.
Patiently she was plodding on, using every spare minute, determined to
learn as much as possible, but lamenting her own stupidity.  Mrs. Lue
showed herself a patient teacher, and it was touching to see how
persevering they both were, never losing heart, even when the hymns
were specially difficult, and one sentence had to be repeated over and
over again before it had any meaning at all to the student.  The
catechism did not prove easier, but little by little some real progress
was visible.

When Mrs. Hsiao had learned several hymns she longed to possess a
hymn-book of her own.  She asked if she might buy one and pay for it in
instalments, as she could not afford to pay for it all at once.  We
gladly assented, and gave her the book.  She made Mrs. Lue her
treasurer, and whenever she had been able to save ten cash she brought
them to her.  About a month or two later she had paid the whole amount,
and Mrs. Lue handed the money over to us.  Gladly would we have given
the book freely, but felt that Mrs. Hsiao would prize it more if it
cost her a little, and at the same time it would afford us a better
chance of seeing how far she was in earnest.

When the theatre collectors arrived that year at Mrs. Hsiao's house,
they were met with a decided refusal.  The time had been when she
believed in their false gods, and rejoiced with them in the play they
got up to honour their objects of worship, but it would never come
again.  She had changed Masters, and her desire was to have His favour.
So she remained firm, even when the men threatened to take away the few
things she possessed, which were indeed few enough, and most necessary
for her daily use.  That day the men left peacefully, but came again
after a day or two, determined to take some of her things if she
refused to give the money.  When they arrived she was in the
guest-hall, and as soon as she saw them enter, she knelt where she was
standing and cried to the Lord for help.  In her fright she forgot she
was in a public place and lost sight of her surroundings.  She only
realized that the test had come; they meant to take away the little she
possessed, and so she cried simply and earnestly, but with intense
fervour, that the Lord would undertake for her and show that He was
mighty to deliver.

When the collectors saw her on her knees praying they got frightened,
and said, "She is going to ask Heaven and her God to punish us.  Let us
go!"  But some of them said they were not going to be fooled by an old
woman and her God, so snatched the cooking-pan from the stove and went
hastily out.  When she had finished praying, Mrs. Hsiao found them all
gone, but she was minus her cooking-pan.  She was glad to have got off
so easily, but even that one article was necessary to her.  How could
she do without it?  She had no money to buy another.  After a few
moments' perplexity she made her way to Mrs. Lue's house, and told her
story, and together they prayed that the missing article might be
returned to her.

We heard about her difficulty, and one of the missionaries suggested
that as the woman was so very poor we might give her a new cooking-pan.
But some of us answered, "No, let her fight her own battle.  It will be
better for her, as it will strengthen her faith.  Even if she does not
get the article back (which we believe she will), it will only show her
that we have to be willing to suffer for His sake."  So we remained
silent, that is, silent before men, but not before God.  We prayed
earnestly that the Lord, who understood how much this small test meant
to the poor woman, still a babe in Christ, would restore unto her what
she had lost, if it were for her good.  And God did undertake for her.
Day by day Mrs. Lue prayed with her, and expected the Lord to work for
them.  And He did not let them ask in vain.  In His love He pitied His
children, and in His power He touched the hearts of those who had made
Mrs. Hsiao suffer, and soon the lost cooking-pan was restored, and the
hearts of the two women overflowed in praise to God for His goodness
and care.




CHAPTER XVIII

FRUIT MORE ABUNDANT

In a former chapter Mrs. Lue's brother was mentioned.  Although he came
off and on to the meetings, and gave up idol worship, he did not take
his stand for Christ for a long time.  Mr. Lue had tried earnestly to
lead him into the way of salvation; and after Mrs. Lue had yielded to
the Lord, she joined her husband in his efforts, and they soon had the
joy of seeing him on the Lord's side.

A few months later he was married to a young woman who professed to be
an earnest enquirer.  That was the beginning of trial for him, for the
woman had only been pretending to seek after God, as she knew he would
not marry her unless she professed to be a Christian.  She would have
ruined him perhaps spiritually and financially, had not the Lord taken
him to Himself.  The year before he married he had been seriously ill,
but had been healed in answer to prayer.  Now the malady returned with
redoubled force.  It was a great trial to Mrs. Lue to see his suffering,
for she loved her brother.  Her heart was sad when he poured into her
sympathetic ear the sorrow he felt in not being able to hinder his wife
and her relatives having idolatrous performances for his recovery.  He
knew he was not going to recover; he longed to go home to the land
beyond the shadows.  From his wife he received no kind treatment.  When
almost at death's door he asked in the night for a cup of tea, but she
refused to move from her bed.  At last some neighbours, who heard his
pitiful moan, got up and brought him the desired drink.  He prayed that
God might call him speedily, and his prayer was answered.  Mr. and Mrs.
Lue mourned for their brother, but could only thank God that He had been
merciful enough to take him to Himself, for his sufferings in this
world would have been prolonged.

Another one to whom Mrs. Lue was a great help was an old lady of eighty
years, her father's step-mother.  The old lady had been coming to the
meetings since the first night we arrived at Kucheng, and was very
intelligent and quick of understanding.  There had not been much love
lost between her and her grand-daughter, but when her heart was
touched, and the light of God began to shine in, things began to
improve.  Mrs. Lue had hitherto been patient with her, but out of duty
only.  But when she herself learned something of the compassionate love
of Christ, there was an added tenderness in all her dealings with her
grandmother.  Her kind words and loving deeds did much toward hastening
the day when the old lady stepped out into the light of God, and began
to shine for Him.  For several years she bore a bright testimony to His
redeeming grace, and each Sunday was a real feast day to her.  Even
when on her sick-bed, her heart was with the loved ones gathered around
the Word of God, and she prayed for His blessing upon them.  On her
last Sunday morning on earth she asked, "Who is coming to preach
to-day?"  They told her, and she nodded, satisfied.  That day she was
gathered to the multitude of worshippers around the Throne in Heaven.
What a trophy of God's grace!  Her life had been a hard one.  For many
years she had toiled and laboured; sorrow had not been lacking, and all
those weary years she had served and feared the powers of darkness.
But Christ had set her free, and at eventide there was light and peace.

Soon after their conversion Mrs. Lue and her husband were much concerned
about the parents of their little daughter-in-law.  The latter came
into their home the day we opened the chapel at Kucheng, and was from
that day brought under the influence of the Gospel, as she was allowed
to come and go as she liked.  She was bright and affectionate, and soon
learned to read.  Unlike many girls who come to their mother-in-law's
home while they are still children, she was treated with great
tenderness and consideration, and her heart soon warmed towards Mr. and
Mrs. Lue.  But although she was won, that was only a small step, and
greater difficulties had to be overcome.  The girl's parents were
entirely heathen, and clung to their beliefs and customs with great
zeal.  They had no interest whatever in the Gospel, nor had they any
sympathy with those who believed it.

The first difficulty started when the girl became ill, soon after Mr.
Lue had decided for Christ.  His wife was not yet converted.  The
parents came, and demanded that the Taoist priests should be called in
to perform their rites for the recovery of the girl.  Mr. Lue told them
he was now a believer in God, and could not allow anything idolatrous
in his house.  He would spend all the money that was needed in doctors
and medicine, but could not sin against God.  The parents of the girl
were angry, but it was of no use--Mr. Lue remained firm.  After a long
time of argument on both sides, the parents said they would take their
daughter home with them and do all they could for her, but Mr. Lue
refused to have anything to do with their practices, and would not bear
the expenses either.  The girl did not want the Taoists.  She had lost
all faith in the idols, and was learning to pray to the living God and
to trust Christ; but she was still a child, and too young to stand out
against her parents.  Her illness was not serious, and she soon
recovered.

But when Mr. and Mrs. Lue were both on the Lord's side, they were very
much exercised in their minds about the future arrangements concerning
this girl.  She was ailing again, and the parents began afresh to
trouble them.  Mr. and Mrs. Lue felt that, according to the law of the
land, she now belonged to them, and they had the responsibility for
her.  The girl, too, loved the Lord, and objected to have anything
idolatrous done for her.  Yet, what were they to do?  It was not a
cheery outlook to think that every time the young girl was not well
they should have to quarrel with her parents, Mr. and Mrs. Wen.  They
were peace-loving, and dreaded any disagreement and strife between
themselves and their relations; and yet such seemed unavoidable.

It was at this point that the Lord showed them a way out of the
difficulty, and reminded Mrs. Lue of the power of prayer.  So she turned
to her husband and said, "We cannot sin against God by calling in the
Taoist priest; we cannot allow anything in our house which would be
dishonouring to the name of our Lord and Master; but He has showed me
that there is one thing we can do--we can pray; and we will pray, that
the Lord may open the eyes of Mr. and Mrs. Wen, and lead them to
Himself.  If they are led to repentance--and why should they not
be?--all the difficulties will be at an end."

With a steadfast purpose, therefore, these two servants of God set
themselves to pray for those who were on their hearts.  And the God of
Israel heard the cry of His chosen ones, and soon His Spirit was at
work in the heart of the mother of the girl.  Sooner than they had
dared to hope, Mr. and Mrs. Lue rejoiced in the answer to their prayers,
and could praise God for His wonder-working power.  Mrs. Wen opened her
heart to the call of the Spirit; she began to enquire after God, and
very quickly, through the instrumentality of Mrs. Lue, she was brought
into the light.

From the first it was evident that the Lord Himself had touched her
heart.  She sought salvation most earnestly, and her former
indifference gave place to an intense longing after God.  When once she
had started out, there was no turning back, and nothing was allowed to
hinder her in the race.  She seemed to have imbibed something of Mrs.
Lue's earnestness, and was altogether changed under the new influence
that had come into her life.  She became bright and energetic, and with
a will set herself to learn as much as possible.  She bought a
hymn-book and catechism, and began to read, Mrs. Lue being her teacher.
Through storm or rain, cold or heat she would tramp to the services;
nothing could keep her at home.  It did one good to see her appear with
her bright smile, which had almost become part of her since she had
learned where true happiness was to be found.  Now and again her family
would say, "We are so busy, you might stay at home for once."  "No,"
she answered, "I will not stay at home, but I will get up early in the
morning and prepare all I can for you before I leave."  And she had her
way.

In the beginning her husband laughed her to scorn, sometimes he scolded
her and called her a fool.  But very soon he had to acknowledge that
Christianity was no mere fancy, but a reality, and he could not but
admire his wife's earnestness.  So he left her in peace, and did not
allow the sons to trouble her.  After a while he began to take an
interest in the daily prayers to God, and would try to help her, in
securing for her all the quietness and comfort possible.  That made
home life pleasanter and easier for her, and she praised God for this
token of His grace and favour.

How Mrs. Lue rejoiced, and what a bond there was between the two
relatives!  They were one in the Saviour whom they loved, and both were
filled with the one desire to please Him.  Mrs. Lue had to share in the
new-found joy of the one she had been leading to Christ, and every one
who has been used in winning souls for the Master knows the blessedness
of such hours; an abundant reward indeed for prayers and labours.

Advice and teaching had still to be given, and Mrs. Lue not only began a
good work, but tried to carry it on to the best of her ability--to help
the new believers by counsel and intercession, and to strengthen their
hands in the Lord.  And the one who had so recently passed from death
unto life was not idle either.  Especially in her own home she began to
witness for Christ, and found a willing listener in the wife of her
second son.  This young woman gladly accompanied her mother-in-law to
the meetings and heard the Word with joy.  Her father, who heard of her
attending Christian services, was furious, and declared he would disown
her and bring severe punishment upon her and her home if she continued
to go to the meetings.  He insisted on her husband forbidding her to
go.  So with a heavy heart the young woman had to stay at home.  She
knew how hard and cruel and unforgiving her father was, and she dared
not disobey him.  But she determined to continue in the worship of God,
for even her father could not hinder her in that.  She asked her
mother-in-law to buy her a book so that she might go on learning at
home.  She never dared to brave her father's anger, and step right out
for Christ, but she never worshipped idols again, and when she had a
very serious illness, she trusted the Lord for healing instead of
turning to the Taoist priest.  She only lived for a few years, but her
mother-in-law had the full assurance that she died trusting in Christ
Jesus and His redeeming Love.

After a while old Mr. Wen started coming to the meeting, and his wife
was full of joy.  But trouble arose in the home, and their eldest son
had to suffer through an unrighteous law case.  He wanted us to
interfere on his behalf, which we could not do, so Mr. Wen and his sons
turned away from us in anger for a time, and Mrs. Wen had a hard test
in her home.  But she and Mrs. Lue, and some of us, prayed through, and
Mr. Wen soon saw that he had been too hasty in his judgment, and came
back.  From that time he went steadily on, and husband and wife were
once more walking together on the same road, but this time it was
leading them upward into light and glory.

For Mr. Wen the journey was soon ended.  Even before he had been
baptized and had his name put on the Church roll, he heard the
roll-call from above, and gladly answered.  Mrs. Wen pursued her lonely
way, faithful to the last.  She, too, has left for the Home with the
many mansions.  A short serious illness brought her suddenly to the
brink of the river, but there was no fear in her heart as she had to
ford that stream.  She gave her last bright testimony to the saving
power of Christ, and told her loved ones that she was going to be with
Him, and they were not to be anxious about her future after death, for
she was going to the home of eternal blessedness.  For the last day or
two she was more or less unconscious, but always at peace.  She had
lived and walked with Christ, and He carried her gently through the
chilling waters to the other shore.

Mrs. Wen will be one of the jewels that will shine brightly in Mrs.
Lue's crown, when she receives her reward from the hand of her Master.
May none who read this be found starless or empty-handed in that day!




CHAPTER XIX

PREPARATION FOR FURTHER SERVICE

We must go back again to the time when Mrs. Lue had her heart's desire
in seeing Mrs. Wen beginning to seek after God.  In the midst of that
joy the testing time began, and the Lord brought His child through deep
waters.  For days and weeks she was lying on her sick-bed, with,
humanly speaking, no hope of recovery.  These weeks were hard and
trying, especially to her loved ones, who watched her anxiously.  The
native doctors had given up the case as beyond their ability, and said
there was nothing more to be done; Mrs. Lue would never get well again.
Many friends crowded around and entreated her to make her peace with
the gods she had offended, and to let some Taoist ceremonies be
performed for her, as that was her only hope of restoration to health.

She, of course, would not hear of it, and to one and all testified to
the joy and peace she had in God.  "Do not worry about me," she said
brightly, "I am not afraid to die.  I rather long for death, for I
shall then be at home with Jesus, which is far better."  Weak as she
was, she used every opportunity for pointing the unsaved ones to
Christ.  When asked if she did not feel anxious about leaving her
husband, and the children who were still young, she replied, "The Lord
will take care of them."  She was anxious about nothing, but was
longing for her heavenly home, although she said she would be glad to
serve the Lord a little longer, if He wanted her here.

Many went away wondering what the treasure was that she possessed,
which they knew nothing about.  A wonderful treasure it must be, they
reflected, to keep her so calm and peaceful, yes, even rejoicing in the
face of death.  But others insisted that the gods were punishing Mrs.
Lue for having left them; and as she would not take their advice and try
to reconcile the idols, they were furious and loud in their
denunciations of her.  One of Mrs. Lue's relatives came to her and said:

"I am so frightened for you, all the people are cursing you.  They
declare you are now reaping your punishment for leaving the idols."

Mrs. Lue only smiled and answered, "Let them curse, they can do me no
harm, neither they nor their gods of clay, for my God does bless me."

"But they say, you will surely die."

"Even if I should die, there is no punishment.  I shall be most glad to
go to my Saviour, and I have nothing to be afraid of.  I shall only
have the greater happiness and glory."

It need scarcely be said that we pleaded earnestly and constantly with
God to spare Mrs. Lue's life, if it would be His will, as we felt that
she was so much needed for the work at Kucheng.  He graciously heard
and answered prayer, and Mrs. Lue began to take a turn for the better.
Slowly, very slowly the improvement showed itself.  She would insist on
being carried to the services every Sunday, her husband fetching her
from her bed, and seating her in a chair in the little chapel, which
had become a sacred spot to her.  There she would sit with closed eyes,
listening to the service.  She could not read or sing, as she had no
strength to open her eyes even, but she said softly, "I can pray."  At
the close of the service she was carried back to bed again, entirely
exhausted.  But God, who knew her motives and saw the longings of a
heart full of love to Him, kept her from taking any harm through what
might otherwise have been considered very unwise.

What a joy it was to see her well!  She had only gained, and not lost,
in her spiritual life during the time the Lord had laid her aside.  She
had been chastened through her pain and suffering, through the
temptations from without and within, and would be more meet for the
Master's use than formerly.  And so her later service proved.  Often
when she went out shopping, or when any other business took her to the
street of the village, she would get an opportunity of witnessing for
her Lord.  The shopkeepers and their wives would say, "Now, sit down
and tell us something of the Jesus doctrine first, and then we will
serve you."  To that she gladly assented, and with pleasant manner and
convincing words, she would tell of the love of Christ, and what it had
done for her.  It often happened that others came to listen to the
message; indeed, many went to her home for that very purpose, and to
each and all she related the story of her conversion, giving God all
the glory for having conquered when she had determined never to yield.
She told them of the blood of Christ and its cleansing power, and of
the great privilege of being a child of God.  Mrs. Lue did not get
discouraged when they did not believe at once.  "I do not wonder you do
not believe," she would say, "I was just the same once, and worse than
you.  No power on earth could have made me leave my old way; but the
wonder-working power of God did it, and that same power will still
bring you into His fold."

Many strong opponents of the Gospel, many full of arguments and worldly
wisdom sought her out to argue and reason with her, fully assured that
their clever and witty speeches would soon bring ridicule and shame
upon her and her belief.  But quietly and earnestly she silenced all of
them, often even outwitting them in arguments; at other times just
telling her simple story, but with such power that all mouths were
closed.  The Lord indeed gave her "mouth and wisdom" according to His
promise in Luke xxi. 15, and very often, when the husband and wife were
telling their experiences, the former would say, with a proud, fond
look at his wife, "They are never able to get the best of her in
argument.  The Lord always helps her to overcome them all."  How he
loved her, and how united these two were in heart and mind!  Day by
day, as they both followed Christ, they were drawn closer to each other.

Mrs. Lue was always ready for service, and whenever the Lord called her
to do something for Him, she did it joyfully and with all her might.
When some days had been set apart for the worship of a famous idol
visiting Kucheng, the people, especially the women, streamed together
from all quarters.  A good many of them were strangers in the place,
and all sights worthy of notice had to be seen.  The "Jesus Hall" was
one of them, perhaps the most important of all, for the women had heard
strange tales of the foreigners with their new doctrine, and they
wanted to see the place with their own eyes.

Mrs. Lue saw them coming, and realized that here was work for her to do,
as the old chapel-keeper was little good at preaching.  That morning
Mrs. Lue had read in her daily text-book: "Be of good cheer.  Speak, and
be not silent, for I have much people in this city."  Now the message
came back to her, and it seemed to be the voice of God Himself, so she
answered joyfully, "Very well, Lord, if Thou dost want me to preach, I
will preach.  I will put down my own work, and only work for Thee
during these days."  So without delay or regret, she put everything
else aside, and for three or four days witnessed from morning till
night to all the women who came, so that each one might hear the glad
tidings of salvation before returning to a distant home.  Could such
faithful work, done through the prompting of the Holy Spirit, and
through the constraining love of Christ, be in vain?

She would say in her own bright way--"I am glad and willing to work for
the Lord, even if it should mean great loss; but the Lord does not let
me lose anything, not even in worldly things.  I give my time to Him,
and He so often helps me to do a piece of work that makes up for all
the time I have given.  Do you know what happened last week?  I gave my
time to preaching the Gospel during the week, and then on Saturday
somebody brought a pair of shoes to be mended.  It was a difficult
piece of work, and few were able to do it.  I undertook to mend them,
and in that one day I earned 100 cash, when others were only able to
earn 20 or 30 cash a day."

Does not this story give a striking example of how God rewards glad and
willing service for Him, even here, in addition to the greater
recompense above?  "Therefore be ye steadfast, immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your
labour is not in vain in the Lord."




CHAPTER XX

DAYS OF SHADOW

Reference has already been made to the death of Mrs. Lue's brother.
This had been a great trial to her, as he was the only one left who
bound her to the home of her girlhood.  It was in June 1904 that he
left them for the better world above, and already in July death called
another one from the immediate circle.  This time it was the old tailor
Chang who was summoned into the presence of the King.

He was, indeed, a brand plucked from the burning.  He had been pretty
well off, and was a good tailor.  When a child, Mr. Lue had been
apprenticed to Chang by his parents.  Chang was fond of the quiet,
conscientious boy, and treated him well, and the two grew fond of each
other.  But soon their ways parted, and later on Chang sunk very low on
account of his opium-smoking habit.  He kept an opium den, lived with a
woman who was not his wife, and became more and more a slave to opium,
until he had wasted his last dollar and sold all he possessed.  It was
then, when he was landed in utter misery, and knowing not where to
turn, that his former apprentice, Mr. Lue, came forward, and offered him
a home and shelter.

Chang's body was ruined through former sins, and when trying to
diminish his daily supply of opium, he suffered acutely, and was often
ill for weeks together.  It was during one of these attacks that the Lue
children told him to pray to God for healing.  He did so, as he said he
could not withstand the pleading of the children, although he had been
very displeased with Mr. and Mrs. Lue being Christians.  The Lord did
raise him up the next day.  Chang realized it was an answer to prayer,
and set himself to seek the Lord.  Little by little he was led on to
know the true way of salvation, and decided to serve Christ.  Having
taken the first step along the narrow way, he went steadily on and
never wavered in his decision.  It was touching to see his earnestness
in worship and prayer, and in listening to the Word.  He left off
smoking opium, and was only swallowing one small pill a day as
medicine.  He tried hard to reduce even that small pill, and several
times decided to do without any opium, but he got so ill that he had to
take the pill again.

In the spring of 1904 he tried again to do without opium altogether,
and we gave him some anti-opium medicine, but he could not take it.
His poor body was altogether ruined.  Soon he had to keep to his bed,
and Mrs. Lue looked after him as if he were her own father.  The old man
loved her, and could not bear her out of his sight.  The children, too,
cheered him greatly, as they would come to his bedside and talk to him
about God, and sing their hymns to him.  During his illness he drew
nearer and nearer to the Lord, and was constantly in prayer.  Often
during the day, and especially during the long sleepless nights, his
voice could be heard in praise and prayer.  For the last few days he
refused to take even the smallest pill of opium.  They told him that it
was only as medicine he needed it, for he could not take any food; but
the old man firmly resisted, saying, "I will go to meet my God
altogether free from opium, and from any other of my former sins.  The
blood of Christ has cleansed me, I will not defile myself any more."
Although suffering all the time, he awaited his end joyfully, and
continually repeated to those around him that he was trusting in the
merit of the Crucified.

One day shortly before his death an old vegetarian leader came to call
upon Mrs. Lue.  His chief motive was to point out to her that all the
sickness, sorrow, and trials, and the deaths of some of her family had
come to her as a result of her breaking her vegetarian vow.  He
finished up by saying, "You see how wrong you were.  Your God does not
care for you, He only sends you trouble."  Mrs. Lue felt tired and weary
that day, and being downhearted did not answer so quickly and brightly
as was her wont.

Old Chang, lying on his death-bed in the next room, could hear all, and
noticed not only the man's cruelty, but Mrs. Lue's depression.  Feeble
as he was he managed to get out of bed, and stumbled into the room, to
the great distress of Mrs. Lue.  She knew he had not walked a step for
days, and was afraid he might fall, so prepared to help him back again.
But he took no notice of her, and confronting the vegetarian, said,
"No, she is not wrong; you are wrong, our God is worthy of our trust.
He does care for us, He does love us, and the trials are only for a
short while."  He asked for a New Testament, and began looking for a
text.  His eyes were dim, and he wanted to put on his glasses, but had
not the strength to do so, and his fingers were almost unable to turn
the pages of the book.  Mrs. Lue remonstrated, telling him that he was
ill, dying, and must go back to bed.  But he heeded her not, he must
show the vegetarian in black and white on Whom their hope was built.
At last he found what he wanted.  His trembling fingers pointed to the
Word, and in a weak, but glad voice, he read out--"Be ye also patient,
stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh."  His
eagerness and earnestness, even when at the very door of death, made a
great impression on all around, and the vegetarian leader took his
departure.  A few days later old Chang was called Home.  He was never
enrolled on the Church register, but no one ever doubted that his name
was registered in the Book of Life.  His faith kept firm to the last,
and he gave instructions that no heathen rites were to be performed for
him.  He said, "I am going straight to my Saviour.  I do not need any
Taoist priest to break open the door of hell, or to bridge the gulf,
for the door of heaven is opened wide for me through Jesus and His
blood."

Mr. Lue bought a coffin for him, and his own relatives were to take the
coffin to the home of the old man, three miles out in the country.  The
relatives came, but not to do their duty, only to make trouble.  They
declared the Lue family must have received a lot of money from old
Chang, and demanded it back.  They refused to bury their relative, so
Mr. Lue calmly called others to bury him, and paid all the extra
expenses.  Then the shop-keepers at Kucheng got enraged, and made the
relatives ashamed of their behaviour, for they knew in their hearts,
and all others knew, that Mr. and Mrs. Lue had pitied the old man in his
poverty and sickness, when his own people had spurned him.

Again the Lord had been glorified through His servants, and although
they did not receive much gratitude here for many of their loving
deeds, they will not lose the reward laid up for them in the Father's
Home.




CHAPTER XXI

THE SHADOW DEEPENS

So far reference has only been made to the trials connected with the
illness and death of two in the family circle.  But another storm was
already pending, and a great dark cloud was yet to break over the heads
of these two devoted servants of God.  Did the Lord not have compassion
on them, or had He ceased to care?  Why did they not prosper in
everything as before?  Had the Lord changed in His love for them, or
had He forgotten to be gracious?  They did not think so, neither did
they murmur.  They were ready to take what He sent, and could say with
Job, "Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him."  They knew they
could trust Him; and their faith was kept firm and bright, and the
presence of their Heavenly Guide grew more precious as He led them
through the valley of shadows.

Mr. Lue had not been strong for years, and every now and again,
specially during the winter and spring, he had a bad cough, with some
slight haemorrhage.  As he got better as soon as the warm weather set
in, they had not considered the attacks dangerous, and Mr. Lue would
work as hard as ever, often doing night work by the dim light from the
Chinese oil-lamp.  On Saturday they would all come to the prayer
meeting, and then go back home and work till long after their regular
bedtime, so that they might be free for the Sunday.  Mr. Lue was a very
hard worker, and never spared himself.

In the beginning of 1905 he took a more severe cold than before; his
cough became very troublesome, and he was constantly spitting blood.
He believed everything was owing to the exceptionally cold winter we
were experiencing, and hoped to be better as soon as the spring set in.
But before spring came, he gave every evidence of serious consumption.
Knowing that he had been ailing for years, it was hoped that he might
possibly improve again, and perhaps live on for some time.  He was
therefore invited to come to the city Mission Station for a while, so
that he might get proper medicine and better nourishment than he could
have in his own home.  As soon as his strength allowed him to take the
journey, he came and stayed with us for a month.  During that time all
was done that love could do.  At the end of the month he felt better
and seemed stronger, but soon after his return home he began to get
worse again, and his cough grew more violent.  Soon it was evident to
all that there was no hope of his recovery, but he and his wife were
the only ones who remained calm about it.  Many doctors came to ask if
they could do anything for him; some out of kindness, others to enrich
their own pockets.  But Mr. Lue only replied, "No, you are not able to
do anything for me.  I am going Home.  The Lord is calling me."

His wife was blamed by everybody for "letting him die," as they put it.

"Why don't you try to save him?  The Taoist priests would restore him
to health.  Why do you not call them?"

"Because," she replied, "what you and the priests trust in, is all
false and powerless.  Life and death are alike in the hand of God, and
He will do what is best."

The people shook their heads at her obstinacy; others declaring it
served her right.  Her husband's death would be at her door, for had
she not angered the idols in leaving them?  Mrs. Lue heeded them not,
for her heart was fixed.  The Rock upon which she had built was the
Rock of Ages, and upon it she stood secure, firm and unshaken in the
time of trial.  She knew whom she had believed, had proved His
faithfulness, and that He would remain though all else were taken from
her.

Mr. Lue, though glad for his own sake to go to the Home above, would at
times feel sorry for his much-loved wife and son, and would express his
regret at leaving them while the boy was still so young.  But Mrs. Lue,
instead of complaining or murmuring against her fate, as others would
have done, gently encouraged her husband in the Lord, saying, "Never
mind about us.  You just prepare yourself to meet your God.  We have
Him, and He will take care of us.  Do not worry."  With words like
these she would comfort his heart, although her own was bleeding.  But
she knew where to take her sorrow, and every day, and many times a day,
she fled to her safe and happy refuge.

When Mr. Lue was staying in the city and she was left alone, her heart
often went out in longing after him, and she was wondering anxiously
how he was.  She felt lonely without him, and, try as hard as she might
be to cheerful, sad thoughts would come.  Just then one of the
evangelists went to Kucheng to take the Sunday services.  He was led to
speak on John xiv. 1--"Let not your heart be troubled, ye believe in
God, believe also in Me."  That was the message Mrs. Lue needed.  She
felt comforted, and, after the meeting, she started to read the whole
chapter.  What treasures it revealed, and how precious it became to
her.  She heard, while reading it over and over again, the voice of Him
who first spoke these words to His beloved disciples, and that voice
had lost none of its former power.  Eagerly and joyfully she drank in
the beautiful words and precious promises, spoken to those other sad
ones when the loving Master was about to leave them, and in her quiet
room her heart was filled with "the peace that passeth all
understanding."  Needless to say, John xiv. became her favourite
chapter henceforth.

When the writer went to see Mr. Lue for the last time, we arrived late
one Friday night.  He sat up joyfully when he heard our voice, and
greeted us with the words--"Our next meeting-place will be in Heaven."
It did not need more than one look at the wasted form to realize that
for him, at least, that happy place would soon be reached.  It was with
a sad and husky voice we replied, "Yes, Mr. Lue, it will be with our
Lord in Glory."  The native evangelist who had accompanied us now
entered the room, and after some talk we had prayer together.  Although
our hearts ached and the tears could not be kept back, we were filled
with praise to God for His saving grace, for the hope of glory, and for
the eternal inheritance laid up in heaven.  Oh, how near Heaven seemed!
Christ was in our midst, and the humble room seemed hallowed by His
presence.  Having commended our brother to our Father's tender care, we
separated for the night.

The following day he was much the same.  In the evening the prayer
meeting was held in his house, as we had a message from the Lord we
wanted to deliver to him and his wife.  He insisted on being helped out
into the public room, and remained there while the meeting lasted,
which was consequently shortened.  It was a blessed hour we spent
together in communion with the Lord, and in hearing His voice speaking
through Psalm xxiii.

The following day, Sunday, the meetings were held in the chapel, so Mr.
Lue could not be present.  But he was present in spirit, and during the
prayer meeting his heart was lifted up to God in his lonely chamber.
In the evening the little praise meeting was held at their home, and we
shall never forget the picture that met our eyes as we entered.  Mr. Lue
was lying on a low couch, his wife sitting close beside him, holding
his hand.  Their little son was sitting close to both of them at the
end of the bed, leaning against his mother, and gently stroking his
father's feet.  It was the most touching and home-like thing we had
ever seen in family life in China.  But, if the shadows rested over
that united and loving home, the Sun of Righteousness was shining also.

Everybody seemed to choose bright hymns about the Heavenly Home and the
coming again of our Lord in glory.  Mr. Lue was lying there with a happy
smile on his face, and the last hymn he asked for was "Oh, thou my
soul, bless God the Lord."  As we sang our praise to God our souls were
lifted above the sufferings and trials of this life, and seemed to
realize already something of the glory which was to be revealed.  One
of our fellow-workers had sent a card for Mr. and Mrs. Lue with Romans
viii. 28 on it, and as we read it, it seemed as if we already saw
beyond the veil, beyond the "workings" to the blessed result--"The joy
unspeakable and full of glory."  Mrs. Lue said after a while, "The
longer I sing, the happier I get.  My sorrow has quite departed, and is
no more."  Oh, how little does the world know what real joy means!
What are all the pleasures this world can offer, yea, even the choicest
ones, compared to one hour's real joy in fellowship and communion with
Him who is the Fount of every Blessing, and in whose presence there is
fulness of joy?  Would that the poor souls hungering for rest and
happiness, dissatisfied with the worldly pleasures, tired of their
empty show, might turn to Him who is the source of all true and lasting
joy.  How abundantly they would be satisfied with the fatness of His
house, for He would make them drink of the rivers of His pleasure.  How
much richer their lives would be already here, to say nothing of the
life hereafter.

  Take the world, but give me Jesus,
  Other joys are but a name,
  But His love abideth ever,
  To eternal years the same.
    Oh, the height and depth of mercy,
    Oh, the length and breadth of love,
    Oh, the fulness of salvation,
    Pledge of endless life above.




CHAPTER XXII

ENTERING THE VALLEY

The following morning there seemed to be a change in Mr. Lue, and
thinking that the end would come that day we stayed on until the
afternoon, for which he was very grateful.  Several times he would say,
"I know quite well why you are staying here, it is only for my sake.  I
shall never be able to repay you for what you have done for me, but God
will."  And yet it seemed so little that one had been able to do for
him, and he had been such a help to us, and to the work in Kucheng.
Towards evening we had to return to the city; so after a parting prayer
and a last farewell, or, rather, a hopeful "We shall meet again up
yonder," we left him smiling his bright farewell.  The evangelist
remained with them till the end should come.

Mr. Lue lingered on till Thursday night.  During those days many came to
see him, and expressed their regret and pity at his not getting better.
But he answered brightly, "No, I am not sorry that the end is near.
Although I am loth to leave my family, I am still full of joy.  There
is no fear of death in my heart, I am prepared for it, and I know my
Saviour is coming to take me to my Heavenly Home, to be with Him, which
is far better.  What about you?  Take heed and prepare quickly for the
day when you, too, may be called."  With these words and many others,
he would testify to the joy he had in Christ, and exhort his neighbours
and friends to seek salvation before it was too late.

The day before his death he had a visit from a Christian distantly
related to him.  He greeted him brightly, and said, "Jesus has not yet
come.  I wish He would come quickly and take me Home.  Our teacher left
the evangelist here to help us, and I know she has other work for him
to do."  Up till the very end his thoughts were for others and not for
himself.

Towards midnight he called for his wife.  "Please wash me quickly and
put my old garments aside, and help me into my new clothes, for I am
soon going: the Lord is calling me."

"Do not say this," she remonstrated.

But he answered, "Do not hinder me, do not try to delay me.  My time
has come, my God is calling me."

So she did as he bid her, and prepared him for the journey.  Some days
previously he had asked her to make him a long white robe, as it was in
pure white, within and without, that he wanted to meet his Lord.  When
their preparations were ready, his wife wanted to call the evangelist,
but even then Mr. Lue was thoughtful enough to say, "No, do not wake
him; he is getting old, let him sleep.  I am all right and need
nothing."  He was called, however, and soon stood at the bedside of his
friend, praying for him for the last time.  Before that prayer was
ended, Mr. Lue called out, "I am going, Jesus is here," and with that
word upon his lips his spirit had left the mortal body and taken its
flight to God who gave it.  There was no pain, no sorrow, no last
struggle.  Gently and peacefully he passed over Jordan into the
presence of the King.

The funeral took place a week later.  Our hearts were sore and the
tears flowing fast as we remembered we should see his face no more.  In
some measure we could sympathize with those who were nearest and
dearest to him, and who had lost so much.  But through the whole
service a joy note rang out clearly.  We felt the very presence of the
Lord, and even all the outsiders were awed and listened attentively to
the message given, in which the evangelist sought to bring home to
their hearts the necessity for receiving Christ and His redeeming
grace, so that their end might be like the one they had so recently
witnessed.  Many of them never forgot the peace that kept Mr. Lue's
heart at perfect rest, even when he stood on the brink of the river.
His joy in the Lord under such circumstances was a surprise and a
mystery which would again and again force itself upon their minds.
They asked each other, and they asked us, where that joy came from.

On the morning of the burial, a heathen man came and told us that he
had seen Mr. Lue in his dream the night before.  He was walking on a
beautiful shore which must be Heaven, and was so joyful and beautiful.
Mr. Lue had called to him, begging him to come across, and he decided to
go to that glorious place.  When starting to go he felt some change
come over him, and at last reached the glory-land where he conversed
with Mr. Lue.  This was his dream; but was it not a clear call to that
man to seek the things above?  God grant that he may heed the call.

In other ways, too, the Lord spoke to some of the ignorant, idolatrous
people around.  He knew just the state of their minds, and what would
appeal to those who as yet had no light.  In His tender mercy He sought
their lost souls, and spoke to them in a language they could
understand.  Some of them said to one another, "Well, it is strange,
the God of the Christians does seem to care for them.  They refuse to
choose days like we do, and yet every Christian has died on a lucky
day.  We can choose our days for the funerals, but we cannot choose
lucky days for those dying.  But God does that for those who worship
Him."

Poor benighted souls.  They do not know that to the God of the
Christians all days are alike, but in His love He teaches them
according to their understanding.  How great is His long-suffering!  It
was a great help to me to see how the Lord did not despise their
ignorance, but fitted His voice and doings to their understanding.
While we should have got impatient, God took the trouble of teaching
them in this small way.  What a good thing it is that our Father is
more patient than we His children are.  We want light and full
understanding straight off; but He does not despise the very smallest
beginning, does not reject the poor soul in darkness, who shows,
perhaps, only a feeble groping after the light.  May He make us more
like Himself!


It is true that the "tender mercies of the wicked are cruel."  While
Mr. Lue was lying on his death-bed, one of the idols was having its
birthday celebrated, and again the people of the place were collecting
money for the theatre.  Mrs. Lue replied again that she would be glad to
give her share for anything which would benefit her fellow-men, and was
even willing to give a double share, but could not give them any money
for idolatry.  The men threatened that she should ask them in vain for
help when her husband died.  They would not carry the coffin, neither
would they lend her the things needed for carrying it to its
resting-place.  She did not reply, but came and told us.  We advised
her to act as if no word had been said, for we believed the men would
think better of it, and not carry out their threats.  And if they did,
the Church members from other villages would gladly do that service for
her.  So she said nothing till after her husband's death, when all of
them came without any refusal.  Only one man said that he would not
carry a Christian's coffin, but the others soon made him ashamed of
himself.  None could keep up his displeasure with Mrs. Lue for very
long, for she was too much respected by all.

As the funeral procession passed through Kucheng the streets were lined
on both sides with onlookers.  But even there a hush seemed to have
fallen on the people.  Here and there a quiet remark was heard, "Oh,
the Christians do pay proper respect to their dead.  Even all the
missionaries and preachers follow them to the grave, and wear mourning
for them!"  Some little boys were walking ahead of the coffin, beating
the gongs and carrying four banners, with the inscription, "He shall
certainly rise again," and, "He shall ascend to heaven and dwell
there."  One long banner showed the text, "For there is one God and one
Mediator between God and men."  And another, "For God so loved the
world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in
Him should not perish, but have everlasting life."  One boy carried a
large white umbrella, then followed the coffin, carried by eight men,
behind which the wife and nearest relatives went weeping and wailing,
recalling all the virtues of the one who had gone from them.  Further
behind, other relatives and friends followed, ourselves among the
number, all with white headgear.

The remains of Mr. Lue were put to rest on the quiet hillside, beside
his first wife.  Before he died, we had chosen the words for his
gravestone--"He that believeth in Me, though he die, yet shall he
live," and also the word of the Apostle Paul, "For ever with the Lord."
Yes, for ever with the Lord, separated from us for a little while, but
not for ever.  Here the short time of warfare apart, there the long
eternity of victory and blessedness together.  What a glorious hope is
ours!

God's ways are wonderful, and His thoughts past finding out.  To our
finite minds, Mr. Lue seemed needed here.  The Lord had put him in a
place where he had many opportunities for service, and those
opportunities were not left unheeded or misused.  "Oh, that he might be
spared to us!" that was the cry in the beginning, but already we began
to see the purpose of God in taking His servant away, as so much was
accomplished through his death.  God, our God, does not make any
mistakes.  He buries His servants but carries on His work.  May it be
said at the end of the life of each one of us, as I think it might
truly be written over Mr. Lue's service--"He has done what he could!"




CHAPTER XXIII

ANOTHER JEWEL WON FOR CHRIST

"Old Grandfather, you are early this morning at your worship."  Thus
Mrs. Lue addressed an old man who was earnestly worshipping at a shrine
she was passing.  Her heart went out in compassion for the old man, who
was nearing the end of life's journey without God and without hope.  So
she addressed him kindly, hoping she would be able to point him to
Christ.  The old man was hard of hearing.  After having finished his
worship, he slowly turned round and looked at her, and again she
repeated her greeting.  "You are early at your worship, old
Grandfather.  You are very earnest about it."

"Well may I be in earnest," he replied, "for herein my only hope lies.
I am an old man, without kith or kin, without anybody to care for my
soul when I die."

"But you are wasting your money on worshipping these false gods, and
you are spending your energy in vain.  I know of a better way."

"A better way!  What might that be?  I never heard of any better way.
And as I have no sons or grandsons, I must look out for myself.  I do
not need my money.  I have buried my wife and my children.  Now I have
been preparing for my own burial.  For twelve years my grave has been
made and is well lined with bricks.  My coffin is in my house waiting
for me.  I have prepared many boxes full of paper clothes, and many
thousand paper dollars to be burned for me when I am gone, for I do not
want to go hungry and naked into the next world."

[Illustration: Another jewel for Christ.  "You are early at your
worship, old grandfather.  You are very earnest about it."]

"But all these things will be of no use to you in the next world.  The
priests are deceiving you.  You ought to come and worship God."

"You say I ought to worship God.  I do worship heaven.  We all ought to
worship heaven and earth."

"I do not want you to worship heaven, but the Creator of heaven and
earth.  There is no God beside Him."

"But I have not seen Him.  I do not know Him."

"No, you cannot see Him, for He is a Spirit; but He sees you, and He
supplies your need every day by sending the rain and sunshine when
needed.  And better still, He will forgive your sins.  He is the only
one who can forgive sins."

"The only way to get your sins forgiven is to do good deeds, and
accumulate as much merit as possible."

"That way, too, is false.  You know I was a vegetarian for many years."

"Yes, I remember you when you lived in my native village, in my
relatives' home, and when your first husband was ill.  Ah, you were a
strict vegetarian then!"

"That is true, but God taught me the better way, and now I am serving
Him.  There is no need for me to lay up merit for myself, for I trust
in the atoning Blood of Christ and stand upon His merit.  Indeed, I
have merited only condemnation, but God in His infinite grace has
forgiven all."

"The doctrine you preach is good, and it is quite true, but I am too
old to obtain such happiness as you speak of."

"No, you are not too old--the Lord Jesus wants you to come to Him.  And
the older you are the more important it is for you to believe quickly,
so that you may escape the sufferings in the next world."

"I should like to do that, but I do not understand.  What am I to do?"

"If you will come to see me in my own home, I will tell you more about
Jesus and His teaching."

With that invitation, Mrs. Lue left the old man, but she began to pray
for him and for his salvation.  She realized that it would not be easy
for his darkened mind to understand the good news she had been telling
him, and yet she felt that he would be saved.  A few days later, old
Grandfather Hsue appeared in her home.  He had been thinking about the
strange doctrine, and wanted to know more.  Gladly Mrs. Lue explained
the way of salvation to him, and pointed him to the Crucified and Risen
Saviour.

The next Sunday he came to the services, and it did not take him long
to find out that he had at last come upon that which would satisfy his
heart, and for which he had been longing in vain for many years.  The
old man, who had been bowing down to wood and stone for eighty years,
was brought into touch with the Living God, who soon became a bright
reality to him.  He who had done his utmost to prepare himself for the
world to come, learned to rejoice in the eternal inheritance laid up
for him in heaven.  His faith was so simple that it gave no room for
doubt or reasoning.  Like a child who, weary with chasing the shadows,
nestles down to rest in his mother's arms, so old Grandfather Hsue
turned from his weary search and vain strivings after peace, and
pillowed his head on the loving breast of his Saviour, and there his
heart found rest.

A year later he was baptized, being then eighty-one years old.  How our
hearts rejoiced when we looked upon his shining face and listened to
his bright testimony.  Some months before his baptism we asked him,
"Grandfather Hsue, what about your boxes of clothes and all your paper
money?"

"Oh, these false things are burnt.  I fetched them down from the loft
and made a bonfire of them."

"Were you not sorry to see them burnt, seeing that you had prepared
them so carefully, and had spent a lot of money on them?"

"Oh no, I do not need them now, for Jesus has prepared all for me.
When I die there is nothing left for others to do but to lower the
coffin already prepared, and complete the grave.  Some one will do that
for me.  My heart is at peace.  I have nothing to be anxious about, but
am just quietly waiting till the Lord Jesus calls me Home."

And so he kept on waiting till he was eighty-three years old, without a
shadow of doubt darkening his simple, child-like faith in the Lord.
One Sunday he gathered as usual with the Lord's people at the little
chapel at Kucheng, and only bade them good-bye after the afternoon
meeting.  No one thought that Grandfather Hsue had been amongst them for
the last time in this world.  The next morning he was found dead in his
bed, with a happy smile on his face.  Evidently there had been no pain.
Death had been a messenger from God, calling him Home, and not the
"king of terrors."  Could the Lord have dealt more kindly with the old
man, who would have had none to lovingly care for him had he passed
through a long illness?  Quickly and gently he had been lifted up into
the Everlasting Arms.  There was joy in Heaven, for another priceless
and precious jewel had been brought into the King's Treasure Chamber.
"They shall be Mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make
up My jewels."




CHAPTER XXIV

CONCLUSION

Mrs. Lue is still living and working for God.  But her name is no more
Lue, for she has been married for several years to an earnest Christian,
and the two are serving the Lord together.

When we first heard of her contemplated marriage we were loth to let
her leave Kucheng, but in talking to us about it, she said, "Do not be
anxious about this matter.  I am seeking the Lord's guidance.  You say
you are afraid it is the devil trying to get me away from the work
here.  But I promise that I will not leave unless it is the Lord's
will.  If He says I must go, I will go."

We had to leave her future with the Lord, and we knew that one of the
Christians was right when he said, "The work in Kucheng may be harder
without her, but as for her she will be a light wherever she goes."

She has remained faithful to the Church at Kucheng.  Sunday after
Sunday she is to be found there, and tries her best to bring others.
Through heat or cold, rain or sunshine, she walks the four or five
miles cheerfully, showing in word and deed Whose she is and Whom she
serves, buying up the opportunities God gives her.

"Everlasting Pearl" is still seeking jewels for her Master, and the
first one given to her new home was her husband's mother, a dear old
lady, seventy years old, who was baptized two years ago.  The two are
firm friends.  They have gone through sickness, persecution, and other
deep waters together, but joy in the Lord and in His Word has been
their strength.  When the day's work is done, the three who love God in
that busy, worldly home have a quiet hour together for the reading of
the Word and for praise and prayer.  There at the Throne of Grace they
gather strength and courage and patience.  All these are needed, for
the other members of the family are strongly opposed to the Gospel.
Their sister-in-law weeps for their hardness of heart, and prays
earnestly for their salvation.

We have followed "Everlasting Pearl" on her life's journey for nearly
fifty years.  She has aroused our pity for her in her heathen darkness,
and has claimed our sympathy in her sufferings and trials.  She has
excited our admiration for her steadfast devotion, and stirred our
hearts through her loving and zealous service.  What is the outcome to
be?  Her voice is raised as eagerly as ever in testifying to the grace
in Christ Jesus and salvation in His Name, but it is only able to reach
a few of that vast unsaved throng.  Shall we not unite our voices with
hers?  Her heart is lifted up in prayer to God for a lost world; shall
we let her wrestle alone, and let the cry of many a despairing soul go
unheeded?  What is our part to be?

  A cry as of pain, again and again
  Is borne o'er the deserts and wide-spreading main;
  A cry from the lands that in darkness are lying,
  A cry from the hearts that in sorrow are sighing.
    It comes unto me; it comes unto thee;
    Oh what, oh what shall the answer be?

  It comes to the soul that Christ has made whole,
  The heart that is longing His Name to extol;
  It comes with a chorus of pitiful wailing,
  It comes with a plea which is strong and prevailing.
    For Christ's sake to me; for Christ's sake to Thee;
    Oh what, oh what shall the answer be?



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERLASTING PEARL***


******* This file should be named 19365.txt or 19365.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/3/6/19365



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

