The Project Gutenberg EBook of Report of the National Library Service for
the Year Ended 31 March 1958, by G. T. Alley and National Library Service (New Zealand)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Report of the National Library Service for the Year Ended 31 March 1958

Author: G. T. Alley and National Library Service (New Zealand)

Release Date: November 13, 2006 [EBook #19780]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATIONAL LIBRARY SERVICE ***




Produced by Jonathan Ah Kit, Mark C. Orton, Ralph Janke,
New Zealand Parliamentary Library and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Coat of Arms]




REPORT

OF THE

NATIONAL LIBRARY SERVICE

FOR THE YEAR ENDED

31 MARCH 1958


_Presented to the House of Representatives by Leave_


BY AUTHORITY: R. E. OWEN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WELLINGTON, NEW
ZEALAND--1958




CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE

Letter of Transmission                                                  3
  Scientific, Technical, and Commercial Library Service                 3
  Regional and District Library Service                                 4
  National Library Proposal                                             5
  Book Stock                                                            5
  Request Service                                                       5
  Expenditure                                                           5

Country Library Service                                                 6
  Free Public Libraries                                                 6
  Book Van                                                              7
  Minimum Standards for Public Libraries Participating in the
    Country Library Service                                             8
  Independent Subscription Libraries                                    9
  Hamper Service                                                        9
  Lighthouse Service                                                    9
  Free Service to Ministry of Works, State Hydro-electric, and
    New Zealand Forest Service Camps and Stations                       9
  Hospital and Institutional Library Service                            9
  Loan Collections                                                     10
  Periodicals Service                                                  10

School Library Service                                                 10
  Loans to Smaller Public Libraries                                    11
  Information and Request Service                                      11
  Book List                                                            11
  Assistance to Islands Schools                                        13

Library School                                                         14

National Library Centre                                                14
  Inter-library Loan                                                   15
  Central Bureau for Library Book Imports                              15
  Libraries of Government Departments                                  16
  Book Resources Committee of the NZLA                                 16
  Union Catalogue                                                      16
  Bibliographical Section                                              16




The Hon. the MINISTER OF EDUCATION.


Wellington, 16 July 1958.

SIR,

I have the honour to submit the following report of the activities of
the National Library Service. The report covers the work of the Service
as a whole and its four divisions--Country Library Service, School
Library Service, Library School, and National Library Centre.

The functions of the Service may be summed up as the provision of such
assistance to any New Zealand library maintained directly or indirectly
from public funds as circumstances and policy permit. More specifically,
help is given by a lending service to rural, borough, and county
libraries, by the provision of books for school libraries, by advancing
professional training through the Library School, and by maintenance of
records of all library holdings of books and periodicals, as well as
other facilities and stock to aid the cooperative use of this material.

The National Library Service was formed in 1945 from the Country Library
Service by Cabinet decision with the strong support of the New Zealand
Library Association. During the war the Country Library Service had been
given responsibility for several tasks of national scope, such as the
War Library Service, the Central Bureau for Library Book Imports, the
formation of a Union Catalogue, and the operation of part of the
inter-library loan scheme.

The Country Library Service, which began in 1938, has maintained
its van services to rural areas and has been brought into closer
contact with its districts by decentralisation to three district
offices--Christchurch in 1944, Palmerston North in 1948, and Hamilton
in 1953.

The number of free libraries regularly receiving service has grown to
112. Special assistance in a number of cases has been given to libraries
serving a population of up to 50,000 operating a free and rental
service. The assistance given to the Gisborne and Wanganui Public
Libraries has continued. New Plymouth Public Library which changed to
free service in November 1957, and Palmerston North Public Library,
which is expanding its service, have also received assistance. The
fundamental principle of encouraging full local responsibility for
adequate rate-supported libraries has continued.

The School Library Service has continued to bring a wide range and
variety of books to school children, the rate of issue now exceeding one
million copies annually. Distribution is effected through 15 centres.

During the year this Service received three valuable sets of books
chosen to represent all phases of American life and thought. The
Carnegie Corporation of New York made these sets available to some 26
libraries in New Zealand.

_Scientific, Technical, and Commercial Library Service_--A
recommendation has been made by the New Zealand Library Association that
impetus be given to scientific and technical library service, chiefly
through public libraries. At a time when increasing reliance is being
placed on the efficiency of our secondary industry the necessity of
providing the fullest technical information to aid manufacturers will be
apparent. Authority was obtained 12 years ago to establish such a
service but it was not then possible to obtain qualified persons to
begin it. It is hoped that conditions will permit a senior appointment
during the present financial year to inaugurate the service.

_Regional and District Library Service_--Study has continued on the
problems of ensuring an efficient and soundly based library service for
New Zealand's whole population. The problems facing a local authority
overseas with a population of 2,000,000 within a radius of a few miles
are minor ones compared with those facing New Zealand library
authorities, where the secondary cities are small, where the pattern of
local government is uneven, and where the population as a whole has a
high standard of education and is avid for books. Costs in New Zealand,
per head of population, are bound to be relatively high; vigilance is
necessary to ensure that they are no higher than they need be.

It has been apparent that cooperation between local authorities will be
the major factor in making economies on a national scale. A note of the
work of the Working Party on Library Cooperation of 27-28 August 1956
appeared in last year's annual report, and it was recorded that the
Minister of Education, at the request of the New Zealand Library
Association, had authorised payment of travelling expenses for its
Committee on Regional Planning to enable its work to be carried out.

The committee worked during the year and met in Wellington for two
full-day sessions on 6 and 7 June 1957 for consideration of the
"establishment of regional and district library services as the best
method of providing a more effective library service for the whole
country". Its report was made to the New Zealand Library Association.
After consideration by the executive of the Local Authorities Section,
some amendments were made and the report published by the Association as
_Co-operation: A New Phase_. Fifteen hundred copies were printed and
were circulated to all local authorities for discussion.

The report states:

"1. The main problems facing public libraries are:

     (i) The unfair distribution over the whole community of the costs
         of library service.

     (ii) The continuing growth of the cost of municipal government to
          the point where it has become an embarrassment to the cities
          and boroughs concerned.

     (iii) The failure of some local authorities to provide for library
           services."

"8. The basic factor in improving library services will be cooperation
among local authorities. Such cooperation should be the condition of
increased Government assistance."

"10. Government assistance to such federations should take the form of
cash subsidies on all expenditure approved for subsidy by the
federation, and by the Minister (or National Library Board)."

This report formed the main topic of discussion at the New Zealand
Library Association conference in Invercargill in February 1958. The
Association approached the Government for favourable consideration of
the proposals contained in the report on 11 April 1958.

In the meantime the work of the Royal Commission on Local Government
Finance is being followed carefully, as its findings will have
considerable bearing on the problem of library finance.

An effort is also being made to foster among local authorities the
willingness to cooperate, but progress in this field is slow.

_National Library Proposal_--The report of the Working Party of the
Public Service Commission on the National Library proposal was earlier
considered by the Government, which had approved it in principle. The
House of Representatives last year approved the terms of reference of a
Select Committee to be appointed to make recommendations for "ways and
means of carrying out the decision of the Government to establish a
National Library" and to consider various other associated matters. The
decision to appoint such a Committee was reaffirmed in February 1958,
the Committee was named shortly afterwards and has since met on several
occasions. Independently of any solution of the accommodation problems
of the Service which such a move might bring, the proposal merits the
most careful consideration.

_Book Stock_--During the year, 19,283 fiction and 35,573 non-fiction
were added to stock, a total of 54,856. Of these, 10,442 separate titles
of non-fiction and 205 fiction titles were added to the headquarters
collection, which now contains approximately 135,000 titles together
with 11,000 volumes of periodicals; 15,305 volumes were
withdrawn--12,134 fiction and 3,171 non-fiction--making the net
additions 39,551. The total of headquarters and Country Library Service
stock now amounts to 652,308, comprising 176,600 fiction and 475,708
non-fiction. As at 31 March 1958 the stock of the School Library Service
was 1,091,189 the grand total of stock in the Service as a whole being
1,743,497.

_Request Service_--All libraries and groups receiving library service
from the Country Library Service and all Government Departments may ask
for special short-term loans of books of an informational type from the
headquarters stock of this Service and, in addition, the headquarters
stock is used extensively to satisfy inter-library loan requests. (See
also the report of the Librarian, National Library Centre.)

                   BOOKS REQUESTED AND SUPPLIED
                                      Year Ended 31 March     Increase
                                         1957      1958       Per Cent

To Country Library Service libraries    55,782    61,870        10.9
To Government Department libraries       6,423     6,998         8.9
To interloan libraries                   8,051     8,801         9.3

     Total issues                       70,256    77,669        10.6

During the year, 26,047 requests (an increase of 9.2 per cent) were
referred to Wellington. Of the total issues, 4,975 were books belonging
to other libraries throughout New Zealand, whose willing cooperation is
gratefully acknowledged.

_Expenditure_--Expenditure under Subdivision XII, vote "Education", for
the year was L264,956. This figure includes L94,544 for the purchase of
books, of which L45,357 was for books and periodicals on behalf of
Government Departments. The expenditure on behalf of Departments
represents 12,146 books and standing orders for approximately 11,000
serial publications.

Expenditure under Subdivision III for the purchase of books by the
School Library Service was L50,580.

G. T. ALLEY, Director.




SECTION I--COUNTRY LIBRARY SERVICE


On 31 March 1958, 989 towns and small centres were receiving regular
loans of books, an increase of 32 centres over the previous year. In
addition, 54 Ministry of Works, State Hydro-electric, and New Zealand
Forest Service camps and stations were given library service. Books are
also on loan to six places in the Chatham Islands, and to Niue,
Rarotonga, and Pitcairn Island. Free loans of books on a population
basis are given to mental hospitals and prisons situated both in country
and urban districts.

Books, periodicals, and information are available to country people in
the following ways:

(a) Free loans of books on a population basis to libraries controlled by
    the local authorities, which in turn agree to make their libraries
    free and to maintain reasonable standards of library service.

(b) Loans of books to independent subscription public libraries at a
    small annual charge per fifty books loaned.

(c) Loans of books through hamper collections to isolated groups of
    readers at a small annual charge.

(d) Free loans of books to lighthouse keepers and similar very remote
    readers.

(e) Free loans of books on a population basis to Ministry of Works,
    State Hydro-electric, and New Zealand Forest Service camps.

All libraries served under (a) and (b) and the majority under (c)
receive regular visits from one of the especially equipped book vans of
this Service; at least three visits being paid to each library during a
normal year. In addition, all persons, by whichever of the above means
they receive library service, may obtain loans of requested books by
post.


FREE PUBLIC LIBRARIES: "A" SERVICE

On 31 March 1958 there were participating in the service 107 libraries
controlled by the following local authorities:

Administrative counties           5
Borough councils                 94
Independent town districts        6
Dependent town districts          2

In addition, the following counties contribute to the funds of a public
library supplying a free service to county residents:

County              Public Library
-----------         --------------
Eltham              Eltham
Patea               Waverley
Wairoa              Wairoa
Golden Bay          Takaka
Lake                Queenstown

These libraries served an estimated local population of 437,000, with a
considerable number in surrounding areas. Besides the many requested
books and periodicals 91,954 books are on regular loan to them.

By arrangement with the Waitemata, Patangata, Egmont, and Rangitikei
County Councils the public libraries at Titirangi, Otane, Opunake, and
Bulls respectively receive a free service.

Library buildings continue to improve. During the year new libraries
were opened in Geraldine, Greymouth, New Lynn, and Morrinsville, and new
buildings are planned in several other centres. This Service continues
to assist in making available material on good overseas practice and New
Zealand achievement. Assistance is also given in the design of the
interiors of libraries and in specifications for equipment.

The best results are achieved when a local authority and the librarian
prepare a written building programme, specifying the functions of the
library, the various areas to be provided, the relationship between
each, the number of books, readers, and librarians to be accommodated,
and the equipment to be housed for efficient service. Such a document
gives a clear directive to the architect, but at the same time allows
him complete freedom of expression in designing the building.

The shortage of trained librarians continues. Three students from the
1957 Library School professional course accepted positions in public
libraries serving centres of under 20,000 population, but they were all
replacements for qualified librarians who had taken library work in
other fields, so there was no net gain. There was at least one public
library in a small town unable to fill its vacancy for a qualified
librarian.

The short course for librarians from smaller centres, held at the
Library School from 12 to 30 August 1957, was of great value to the
participating librarians. The demand for training is very great and,
with such eagerness to learn, the training given is immediately
effective.

Cooperation between libraries participating in the Country Library
Service has been developing slowly. A little more interest has been
shown in the cooperative book-buying scheme fostered by this Service.
There are now 22 libraries taking part. Libraries working together in
this way for the first time this year are Blenheim, Cambridge, Kaikoura,
Morrinsville, Picton, Putaruru, and Te Kuiti.

Assistance in staffing was given to the public libraries at Morrinsville
and Picton for reorganisation and extension of local services. Field
librarians continue to advise and assist on their regular visits.

A collection of 300 books was lent to the New Zealand IGY party at Scott
Base, Ross Dependency, as had been done in the case of the New Zealand
Antarctic Expedition a year earlier.

During the year ministerial approval was given for provision of a
full-time librarian and complete service to be granted to the library at
the new Benmore camp, subject to the Ministry of Works providing a
satisfactory building.

_Book Van_--During the year one of three book vans operating in the
South Island was replaced. Using experience gained in recent
replacements in the North Island the new van is constructed of aluminium
alloy on a four-ton, long-wheel-base chassis. Particular care was taken
in providing good sealing against dust and water, adequate natural
lighting, and the best possible insulation.

Excellent insulation is achieved by a thick layer of expanded
polystyrene on all sides, roof, and floor. Very efficient lighting
without excessive heat problems has been provided by the installation of
two large roof lights of double glazed, toughened, anti-sun polished
plate, the upper light being held an inch above the roof line with a
free flow of air between the panes. This form of construction has
contributed to the good handling qualities of the van. Approximately
2,000 books are carried.

_Minimum Standards for Public Libraries Participating in the Country
Library Service_--Overseas, most national and State organisations
consider it their responsibility to publish statements of standard
library practice, and codes for its evaluation. The most important
statement is _Public Library Service: A Guide to Evaluation, with
Minimum Standards_, which was approved by the Council of the American
Library Association and published by the Association in Chicago in 1956.

In 1952 the New Zealand Library Association Standards Research Committee
prepared its "Basic Standards for New Zealand Libraries, 1952", which
was published in _New Zealand Libraries 15_:121-131; 145-150, Jl-Ag, S
'52. This was based on the survey attempted by the visiting American
librarian, Miss Miriam Tompkins, in 1950, but was not a formal
pronouncement of the Association.

For the Country Library Service the problem has been present since 1938.
Assistance to local authorities has been given on three conditions,
approved by the Minister of Education at the inception of the Service.
The third of these conditions is that the "local authority should
maintain the library at a reasonable standard of service".

Country Library Service assistance to libraries has always been planned
as service to assist local effort, not to supplant it. Where the local
service does not reach a certain standard a certain proportion of the
Country Library Service assistance loses its force. No matter how much
the assistance is increased the local people cannot benefit fully from
it unless the local authority houses it in a fair building, grafts it on
to a reasonable local book collection, and has the whole serviced by an
active and informed librarian. Continuity of good service is assured
only when the basic objectives of library service are enunciated and
clearly understood by the local authority.

Local authorities have not abused the flexible interpretation given to
the "reasonable standard of service" condition, but have appreciated the
fact that the Country Library Service always took into consideration any
local difficulties that existed. Libraries generously supported by their
local authorities without exception have made full use of all the
services the Government has offered, and the local people have benefited
from a first-class library service in its fullest cultural and
educational sense.

Local provision has naturally varied, but since 1950 the pattern of
local achievement has become more apparent, and the possibility was seen
of drawing up some code for evaluation. Local authorities participating
in this service were consulted and agreed to provide statistical notes
on their own work. These data formed the basis of a draft statement
which set out standards under headings of functions, service, staff,
books, and buildings, and which was sent to local authorities for
comment. It was gratifying to receive replies from so many, saying that
they would consider such a statement quite fair and reasonable.
Accordingly, the "Minimum Standards for Public Libraries Participating
in the Country Library Service" was approved by the Minister of
Education on 22 April 1958 and issued formally.

The document emphasises that it gives standards for minimum provision,
and that local authorities aiming to give good service will not be
satisfied until they are exceeded. That they are exceeded in several
centres is a matter for congratulation, and the local authorities
concerned have reason to be proud of their libraries, and are in every
case anxious to maintain their good record.


SMALL INDEPENDENT SUBSCRIPTION LIBRARIES: "B" SERVICE

During the year, 832 of these libraries were linked with this Service,
compared with 801 for the previous year. Of these libraries, 253 are
served from Hamilton, 191 from Palmerston North, and 388 from
Christchurch.

Altogether 75,997 books were on loan to the 832 libraries, an average of
over 91 books per library. Over the past 10 years the average for each
library has increased from 79 books, or 15 per cent, thus demonstrating
the increasing interest that country readers are taking in the type of
books supplied by this Service. The figures shown as basic issues do not
include the thousands of books loaned to these libraries on short term
through the "request service".


"C" OR HAMPER SERVICE

In places where no library exists and where it is not possible for one
to be formed and visited by a book van, a service to properly
established groups by means of hampers is provided. During the year 45
of these groups received service, there being 3,325 books on regular
loan to them. The hamper service is also extended to six places in the
Chatham Islands and to Pitcairn Island.


LIGHTHOUSE SERVICE

The postal service has been continued to lighthouse keepers, fire
lookouts in State Forests, and a few very remote readers in coastal
islands. During the year a total of 1,851 books was issued, mostly by a
hamper service.


FREE SERVICE TO MINISTRY OF WORKS, STATE HYDRO-ELECTRIC, AND NEW ZEALAND
FOREST SERVICE CAMPS AND STATIONS

During the year 54 camps or stations received visits from the book van,
in addition to one receiving hamper service from the Christchurch
office. Altogether 7,691 books are on loan to such places.


HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE

Visits have continued from the book vans to 12 general hospitals with an
exchange of 1,405 books. Twelve mental hospitals received 3,910 books
and 13 prisons 3,125 books. During the year assistance has been given to
the Department of Justice in book and periodical selection.

Difficulties occur from time to time in connection with the service to
prisons and mental hospitals. They arise from the lack of supervision of
these libraries by trained library staff. Officers engaged in other
duties are not in a position to organise the full service which would be
of such benefit to patients and prisoners.

From the special TB collection 1,620 books were exchanged at
four-monthly intervals for 15 sanatoria and tuberculosis wards of public
hospitals. Three hundred and thirteen books were sent on request (250
non-fiction and 63 fiction). Sixty-four requests could not be fulfilled
as the required books were not available through the stock or through
purchase, and the resources of other collections are not used for these
borrowers.


LOAN COLLECTIONS

Collections of books, pamphlets, and periodicals to illustrate
particular subjects are available for short periods not only to
affiliated libraries but also to university and the larger public
libraries.


USE OF LOAN COLLECTIONS

                              Year ended 31 March
                                 1957      1958

Number of collections sent        628       640
Number of books included       26,667    26,645


PERIODICALS SERVICE

A total of 1,127 titles is now taken by the Wellington office, of which
821 copies are circulated regularly to Government Department libraries.
Four hundred and eighty copies are sent direct from the publishers to
the Country Library Service offices in Hamilton, Palmerston North, and
Christchurch, and are sent out regularly to 93 affiliated libraries. In
addition, the periodicals held in Wellington are available on short-term
loan to public and other libraries which are interested in them.




SECTION II--SCHOOL LIBRARY SERVICE


In 1941 the Minister of Education approved the establishment of a New
Zealand School Library Service, the purchasing of books to be financed
from the augmented item "School and Class Libraries" in the vote
"Education", the administration being undertaken by the Country Library
Service, as it then was. This new service was to provide not school text
books, but a wide and varied choice of books of high imaginative quality
or technical excellence, suitable for children at all levels of ability
and stages of development. The smaller and more remote country schools
were to be given priority. Books were to be freely available for reading
at home.

The provision of supplies of books which circulate among schools goes
some way towards setting free the money for library books, available to
schools by way of annual capitation grant and from local contribution,
which is eligible for subsidy. These funds may then be used to build at
each school (a) a collection of such basic reference books as are needed
always at hand; (b) reading material for the preparatory classes; (c)
books of purely local interest; (d) other books which it is desired to
have permanently.

By cooperation between the Education Board and the Dunedin City Council
considerable progress had been made in service to schools in Otago since
1938. Vigorous exploitation of a book stock selected in terms of
children's interests followed the most enlightened overseas practice,
linking skilfully the activities of home, school, and public library, as
well as introducing to this country books not previously known here.

Beginning in Canterbury in March 1942 by incorporating the Travelling
Library for Rural Schools, the School Library Service has developed
until, today, exchanges of books are sent to 2,490 schools with a total
roll (excluding primers) of 298,317. These figures do not include those
for post-primary schools, which make use of the information and request
service only.

Services available to schools and to the smaller public libraries can be
broadly defined as general exchanges of books, information and request
service, provision of book lists, and advice on library planning.

General exchanges of books, changed regularly, are sent to all primary,
intermediate, and district high schools and the primary departments of
registered private schools which join the service, for the use of pupils
in Standard 1 and upwards. These books are intended mainly for
recreational reading, both at home and at school. The number sent in
each exchange is based on the school roll, exclusive of primer classes,
on a scale of not fewer than one per child, while for small schools it
is usually possible to increase this to two or three books per child.
Exchanges are made at least once a year, with further exchanges during
the year for smaller schools to the extent that books and staff make
possible. Where satisfactory arrangements for storage and adequate use
can be made, exchanges of suitable books are also sent to the smaller
public libraries which provide free service in their children's and
young adults' sections. The number of books sent is based on the
population of the area controlled by the local authority. Post-primary
schools depending, as they do, mainly on their own libraries, do not
receive exchanges of books but participate with the other schools in the
information and request and other services available. The post-primary
departments of district high schools are eligible for all services,
including exchanges.

The information and request service, available to all schools which have
joined the service, supplies to both children and teachers, on
short-term loan, books and other material to meet individual needs not
satisfied by the general exchanges. The particular aim is to meet
requests for children's books and books for school purposes. Schools
have been urged to make the fullest use of this service which helps to
ensure that the right book reaches the child who needs it, for classroom
activity or any other worth-while purpose. Material for the personal or
study needs of teachers cannot usually be supplied by the School Library
Service; such requests can, however, be handed to the nearest public
library or "B" library group linked with the Country Library Service.
When schools are establishing new libraries extra help by way of special
collections or indefinite loans is given. All public libraries and
groups receiving library service from the Country Library Service may
use the information and request service. During the year 328,482 books
were sent out in response to requests.

The preparation of book lists, which have proved of value to schools and
public libraries has been continued this year. The supplements to
_Junior Fiction_ and _Non-Fiction for Primary Schools_ are annotated
lists of the better, recently published children's books, other than
those appearing in countries with which there are currency difficulties;
these supplements are distributed twice a year to schools and public
libraries which ask to be placed on a mailing list. "For the
Post-primary Library", a series of annotated lists of current titles,
has been appearing regularly in the _Education Gazette_ since 16 July
1951. Public libraries and larger post-primary schools will find further
suggestions in the cyclostyled series "Books for Young Adults" which
appears at intervals; it includes books for recreational reading and
gives special consideration to suitable adult titles. Other lists are
prepared for publication as the need arises. A bibliography of material
published by the Service from its inception in 1942 appeared in the
annual report for the year ended 31 March 1956. Since that date the
following items have been added:

     Books for young adults: List 5, October 1956; List 6, June 1957;
     List 7, November 1957.

     Books for young people, 1957.

     Interim list of subject headings for New Zealand school libraries,
     o.p.

     Junior fiction.

     Supplements: April 1956 to September 1956; October 1956 to March
     1957; April 1957 to September 1957.

     Non-fiction for primary schools. (Supplements have title, _Junior
     Non-fiction_.)

     Supplements: April 1956 to September 1956; October 1956 to March
     1957; April 1957 to September 1957.

     Quick-reference books for high-school libraries, 1956.

     Sets of books for French classes, August 1956.

In addition to this published material, buying and reading lists are
constantly being prepared to meet the special needs of individual
schools, public libraries, and groups concerned with the reading of
children and adolescents.

Assistance is given to schools planning new libraries or reorganising
existing libraries. The visiting of schools to give help where needed
and to discuss the use of books is still limited by staff shortages.

Except for small parcels which are sent by post, books are distributed
in hampers or cartons by rail or road transport from 15 centres--North
Island: Whangarei and Hastings public libraries; offices of the Country
Library Service in Hamilton and Palmerston North and of the School
Library Service in Auckland, Napier, New Plymouth, Wanganui, and
Wellington. South Island: Greymouth, Timaru, Dunedin, and Invercargill
public libraries; the office of the Country Library Service in
Christchurch and of the School Library Service in Nelson. Schools are
usually served by the nearest School Library Service office.

The headquarters office at Wellington is responsible for the
coordination of the service, for the selection, ordering, classifying,
and cataloguing of new books and their dispatch to district offices, the
maintenance of a comprehensive collection of children's and young
people's books used to meet requests which cannot be supplied from local
offices, and the distribution of books to schools and public libraries
in or near Wellington city and the Hutt Valley. To enable children at
smaller country schools to see and to choose for themselves from a wide
range of books, the possibilities of service by book van are being
considered.

Since its establishment schools joining the service have paid a
subscription at the rate of 1s. per pupil (Standard 1 and upwards) for
each of the first two years. Ministerial authority was given during the
year to discontinue this levy.

Schools borrowing books are asked to accept responsibility for (a)
safe-keeping of books while on loan to the school, including books
issued to members of staff for school use; (b) return of books when due;
(c) payment for books lost or damaged beyond fair wear and tear; (d)
payment of freight and postal charges from school to School Library
Service office.

Books are made available to special institutions controlled by the
Education Department. Primary pupils of the Correspondence School are
provided with individual postal service from district offices. Child
welfare institutions, training centres, health camps, and other special
groups are given service according to their needs. Teachers' training
colleges, young people's groups, kindergartens, and nursery play centre
supervisors are also helped. Visits to School Library Service offices by
teachers in training are arranged wherever possible.

Assistance to several Pacific Island schools has been continued from the
Auckland office by means of extended loans. Under this system the
schools receive an original bulk loan which they check annually,
reporting losses and returning damaged and worn books for replacement,
wherever possible, by new titles, so that loans will not degenerate into
collections of old books. The schools concerned were listed in last
year's annual report. The desirability of extension of this service is
constantly in review.

During the year members of the staff acted as librarians at the usual
teachers' refresher courses. Appropriate collections of books always
create considerable interest. Discussions at these courses have been
helpful in the selection of books and have brought about an increased
awareness of the uses of books in a wide range of schools.

Below are tables showing details of the School Library Service as at 31
March 1958. The figures for the number of "schools" and "pupils" include
those for primary schools and post-primary departments of district high
schools but do not include those for other post-primary schools as these
do not receive general exchanges of books. (Figures in parentheses are
for the previous year.)

                                            Schools         Pupils
                                           Receiving      (Standard 1
                                           Exchanges      and upwards)

Education Board schools                 2,004 (1,973)   252,469 (241,148)
Departmental schools and institutions     211   (216)    13,996  (14,270)
Private schools                           275   (260)    31,852  (28,175)

      Totals                            2,490 (2,449)   298,317 (283,593)


                                               Year Ended 31 March
      Books Supplied                              1958       1957
In exchanges to--
  All schools, Standard 1 to Form II            676,637    648,816
  District high schools, Form III to Form VI     34,452     32,439
  Public libraries, children's departments       34,639     30,926
  Public libraries, young people's sections      22,724     22,307

      Total for exchanges                       768,452    734,488

On request and in loan collections, including
indefinite loans--
  Primary                                       263,374    244,175
  Post-primary                                   72,956     78,358

      Totals                                  1,104,782  1,057,021

_Book Stock_--Additions to stock were 70,228 fiction and 48,789
non-fiction. Withdrawals were 47,645 fiction and 11,834 non-fiction. The
stock now stands at 1,091,189, of which 656,911 are fiction and 434,278
are non-fiction. One thousand four hundred and sixty-nine new titles
were added during the year.




SECTION III--LIBRARY SCHOOL


1957 PROFESSIONAL COURSE

At the end of November nine diplomas and five certificates were awarded
to 14 students who completed the course. For health reasons one student
accepted under the Colombo Plan returned to his own country at the end
of the first term. Of the successful students two returned to the
libraries in which they had been employed before attending the school,
three were appointed librarians of smaller public libraries, four joined
the staffs of city public libraries, two are now members of the School
Library Service staff, and one the librarian of the Central Military
District. The two holders of UNESCO Fellowships are consolidating their
training by carrying out practical work in the Delhi Public Library for
three months.

1958 PROFESSIONAL COURSE

This course began on 4 March with 17 New Zealand students and the three
Indonesian students who have been working in libraries in New Zealand
since February 1957.

Four students have a master's and nine a bachelor's degree in arts, one
a bachelor's degree in music, and two are holders of the New Zealand
Library Association's Certificate.

NEW ZEALAND LIBRARY ASSOCIATION TRAINING COURSE

Part II of this course was held at the Library School from 14 January to
15 February. Twenty-two students attended and all were recommended for
the award of the Association's certificate.

1957 SHORT COURSE

A short course for librarians and library assistants mainly from smaller
public libraries was held from 12 to 31 August. There were 21 students
from the following public libraries: Birkenhead, Blenheim, Dargaville,
Devonport, Hawera, Howick, Huntly, Inglewood, Kaiapoi, Kaikohe, Kaitaia,
Martinborough, Mataura, Nelson Institute, Otaki, Palmerston, Rangiora,
Taumarunui, Upper Hutt, Waiuku, Warkworth, and a field librarian from
the Country Library Service, Hamilton.

In addition to lectures and practical exercises, several hours were set
aside for the informal discussion of problems and special questions
raised by the students. Senior members of National Library Service
headquarters joined the staff of the school in these discussions.

Limits imposed by the size of the school made it necessary to defer
acceptance of some students eligible for this course.

A short course on similar lines will be offered again in August this
year to librarians or library assistants of small public libraries who
are not able to take advantage of other means of training.

As in previous years we wish to acknowledge the valuable contribution
made to these courses by visiting lecturers and the libraries which lend
us books.





SECTION IV--NATIONAL LIBRARY CENTRE


The National Library Centre, in addition to acting as the division
responsible for the headquarters work of the Service, has continued to
promote the cooperative use of library resources. Staff at headquarters
are still working under very difficult conditions and there is a
continuing and pressing need both for administrative working space and
adequate housing for the book collections.

_Inter-library Loan_--All inter-library loan requests for books and
periodicals the location of which is not known are sent to the National
Centre. Items which are not found in the Union Catalogue of non-fiction
books, the _Union List of Serials_, or other bibliographical sources are
listed in the weekly publication _Book Resources_, which is sent to 39
libraries for checking.

                                              1956-57          1957-58
                                          Number     %     Number      %

Interloan cards received                  7,197  100.0     7,640   100.0
Supplied from National Library Service    4,312   59.9     4,411    57.7
Supplied from other Wellington libraries    171    2.4       139     1.8
Supplied from Union Catalogue records       949   13.2     1,055    13.8
Supplied from _Union List of Serials_       101    1.4       173     2.3
Not supplied for various reasons            641    8.9       664     8.7
Listed on _Book Resources_                1,023   14.2     1,198    15.7

Four hundred and seventy-five titles not found in any library were
ordered for national stock.

The number of requests received by the centre represents probably less
than half the total volume of traffic among New Zealand libraries, the
proportion of direct interloan being higher in the special and
university libraries. Interloan was devised and introduced among
libraries by the New Zealand Library Association and in its operation
the responsibility of the National Library Service is not merely to act
as a clearing house but to provide all the material it reasonably can to
make the system effective. Other libraries participate reciprocally, or
lend so that they may the more freely borrow. The contribution, as has
always been expected, is a varying one and one or two libraries may
consider that they have a substantial and unrealisable credit balance in
their favour. The point beyond which certain libraries may feel they
cannot go in the common interest has not so far been determined
administratively but it may be necessary to consider this. If so, it is
better that it be done quantitatively on the basis of a common library
policy rather than that the present procedure should become an
embarrassment or be administered capriciously or conservatively.

_Central Bureau for Library Book Imports_--After the introduction of
import control in January the Government approved that the facilities of
the bureau should be extended to meet the situation and assure libraries
of their essential supplies. The bureau was set up in 1940 as a
responsibility of the Country Library Service as a result of discussions
between the Government and the Library Association. Because libraries
undertook to avoid unnecessary duplication and develop cooperative ways
of recording and using their holdings, the 50 per cent cut in book
imports made in 1939 was restored and the necessary machinery
established to safeguard the country's supply of essential publications.

The situation now is that recommendations for licences are made to the
Comptroller of Customs in two categories: firstly, block licence in
annual or six-monthly lots to cover a full licensing period, on behalf
of public libraries serving a population of 20,000 and over, university
libraries, and a few special libraries; secondly, individual
recommendations on behalf of smaller libraries which are made on the
basis of orders sent in when making application. Book-sellers are
expected to give libraries a proportionate share of their 1956
transactions on which their current licence would be computed.

Block licence recommendations, normally made at the end of the year--and
for some years only for anticipated imports from scheduled countries,
chiefly the dollar area--were held over until the present calendar year
and statistically will be included in the figures for the 1958 licensing
period.

_Libraries of Government Departments_--A total of L45,357 was spent on
behalf of Government Departments financed from the Consolidated Fund and
purchasing through the National Library Service. Of this total, L25,344
was for standing orders, chiefly periodical subscriptions. The value,
nationally, of a range of periodicals wider than that which is now
received by all the libraries would scarcely be disputed, but the degree
of duplication between and particularly within Departments continues to
cause concern.

_Book Resources Committee of the New Zealand Library Association_--The
Book Resources Committee of which the Librarian, National Centre, is
Secretary, has continued to act as the national planning and advisory
body in the cooperative acquisition, recording, and use of publications.
In June and July of this year Dr K. D. Metcalf, Librarian Emeritus of
Harvard, at the joint invitation of the United States Educational
Foundation in New Zealand and the New Zealand Government, will visit New
Zealand. Dr Metcalf will visit the main centres and will have
discussions with the committee and the Government on policy matters.

_Union Catalogue_--During the year 26,033 new titles were added
including 2,928 from the microfilmed record of library catalogues. The
catalogue now includes over 400,000 entries.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SECTION

_Union List of Serials_--The typing and printing of the sixth
(cumulative) supplement to the _Union List of Serials_ has commenced and
publication is anticipated early in 1959.

_Index to New Zealand Periodicals_--The 1956 issue of the index, the
first for which the National Library Service has accepted the
responsibility of publication, was printed by photo-offset and
distributed. The 1957 issue is being prepared in the same way. The
possibility of simplifying production by printing direct from the typed
cards is being explored.

_General_--Printed catalogue cards for 247 New Zealand books and
pamphlets were issued during the year. Work on the national
bibliography, from 1890 to 1950, has continued and it is hoped to
commence the typing of a preliminary check list of holdings at the end
of the year.


BY AUTHORITY:
R. E. OWEN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND--1958
_Price 1 s._                          96098-58 G





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Report of the National Library Service
for the Year Ended 31 March 1958, by G. T. Alley and National Library Service (New Zealand)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATIONAL LIBRARY SERVICE ***

***** This file should be named 19780.txt or 19780.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/7/8/19780/

Produced by Jonathan Ah Kit, Mark C. Orton, Ralph Janke,
New Zealand Parliamentary Library and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
