The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of a Dewdrop, by J. R. Macduff

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of a Dewdrop

Author: J. R. Macduff

Release Date: November 14, 2006 [EBook #19809]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF A DEWDROP ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Janet Blenkinship
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









The Story of
A DEWDROP.


[Illustration]


THE
STORY
OF A
DEWDROP

J. R. MACDUFF D D

WITH
FOUR COLOURED ILLUSTRATIONS


LONDON MARCUS WARD & CO BELFAST

1881




FOREWORDS.

    To Charlie.


    A Dewdrop is a small affair; and the world would not be the least
    interested, nor a bit the wiser, by knowing how I come
    affectionately to dedicate the story I have written about it to
    _you_. I may tell you it was one line of eleven words, read one
    night from a musty old volume of last century, which suggested it.

    Everybody must have their play-hours and moments of recreation. I
    think I have gone back to other and more serious work all the better
    after writing a page or two of what follows. I am happy thus to have
    had my little holiday along with you in this ideal region of quaint
    conceits.

    Shall we hope that others may share our pleasure?

    Let us try.




_List of_
ILLUSTRATIONS.


_The Procession of the Queen of the Morning_ (p. 41), _Frontispiece._

_The Bird-talk and its surroundings,_                         14

_The Nightingale and the Dewdrop,_                            19

_The Ascent of the Million Army,_                             53




_The Story of_
A DEWDROP.




CHAPTER THE FIRST.


Three birds of very favourable
repute in these regions
met together one evening--a
Thrush, a Lark, and a Nightingale.
And all for what purpose, think you?
It was a queer one--to hold a solemn
conference about a DEWDROP!

Yes, it must be allowed it was an
original thought which brought these
three feathered friends thus into council;
and a pretty talk to be sure they had
about it.

They selected, as an appropriate time
for preliminaries, the close of a bright
day in early summer; just when things
in outer nature were looking their best.
The snowdrop and crocus had long ago
hid their faces to make way for more
ambitious rivals. That always pleasant
season was a great way past, when you
see the drowsy plants (after being
tucked up--it may have been for weeks--in
a white snowy coverlet), first
roused from their sound winter sleep,
yawning and stretching themselves, and
rubbing their little eyes, and looking;
wonderingly about them, saying--"What!
is it now time to wake up
and dress?" The tree foliage was
approaching, if it had not already
reached, perfection; all the mosses,
too, looked so green and fresh; and
how prettily the various ferns were
uncoiling themselves among the rocks
and shady nooks by the stream;
while on this particular occasion
the very Sun seemed to have coaxed
his setting beams into the production
of most gorgeous colouring. Belts of
golden cloud were streaking the western
sky; such long trails of them, that it
was impossible to say whether the great
ball of fire, which gave them their
glory, had actually gone down behind
the horizon, or was just about to do so.
At all events, it was unmistakably
_sundown_: though the scene was far
removed from northern latitudes, it
might be designated by the familiar
Scotch "gloamin'." The groves, and
dells, and hedgerows, which had kept
up a goodly concert the livelong day,
were now silent. Their winged tenants
had, one after another, slunk to their
nests, with very tired throats. They
had left, apparently, all, or nearly all
the music to the aforesaid brook in the
dell. A stone's-throw higher up the
valley, this latter, fed by recent rains,
rattled in gleeful style over a bed of
white and grey pebbles--the tiny
limpid waves chasing one another as
if they were playing at hide-and-seek
amid the sedges, king-cups, and rushes.
But it had now reached a quieter spot
where, however, it still kept up a gentle,
soothing evensong, a lullaby peculiar
to itself, as if it wanted to hush the
little birds asleep in their varied leafy
cradles. The very cattle, that had
been seen lying lazily out of the heat
under the beech-trees, had ceased their
lowings. In fact, Nature had rung
her curfew bell, and the sentry stars
were coming out, one by one, to keep
their night-watch.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let me first, however, say a word
about this Dewdrop, which had awakened
so much curiosity as to gather
three representative members of the
bird-world together.

It was a great puzzle, this Dewdrop
was. It was a puzzle where it came
from; what it had come about; and a
still greater puzzle, what it was made
of. It was evidently a visitor from
some unknown land. Very quietly,
too, it had travelled to its adopted
country. These birds, in succession
(with the curiosity birds generally have),
had endeavoured by stealth to track its
dainty fairy footsteps, and learn its
past history. But it was to no
purpose. However, there it was; not
perhaps making its appearance every
night, but almost every night. And,
then, it invariably managed to perch
itself so daintily on the tip of a rose-leaf.
All three birds agreed that it had
substantiated its claim in this, to be
decidedly a lover of the beautiful.
The leaf, moreover, which it made its
resting-place, was not only pretty in
itself, of a subdued delicate green, but
it hung right over a full-blown rose,
with a mass of pink leaves. The
Dewdrop quite seemed as if it had said
to its own little personality regarding
this round coral ball (or cup, if you
prefer to call it so)--"Well, I shall
have a good look at you at all events,
from my cozy couch, the last thing
at night, and the first thing in the
morning."

[Illustration]

I somehow really believe the rose
must have heard this complimentary
speech, or at all events, by some
instinctive way, have correctly surmised
what the Dewdrop was thinking about;
for, in the last fading, glimmering
light, it covered up its face so coyly
with both hands, and blushed a deeper
and deeper crimson.

       *       *       *       *       *

But to return to the birds. It was
just outside a copsy retreat that these
three winged acquaintances met. The
Thrush, with his brown plumage and
yellow spotted neck, being the biggest,
and, if anything, the more talkative of
the three, began the conversation.

The consultation was a long and
animated one, too long indeed to
report in full, besides there being a
considerable amount of superfluous talk,
what in bird-language is called chattering;
but I can give the close of it.

"Well," said the Thrush, summing
up the discussion, "I must now be off
to bed--at all events after providing
something suitable in the way of
supper for my wife and family, and
seeing them made tolerably comfortable
for the night. And so too must you,"
he added, with a quizzical look to the
Lark, whose left eye was beginning to
droop, as he stood, with one leg up, in
the significant fashion our woodland
friends indulge in when they indicate
that they are tired. "We shall leave
to you, Bird of the night"--were his last
words, as he addressed the Nightingale--"we
shall leave to you the first
interview with this little sparkling
thing from fairyland, or whatever other
land it has quitted. We shall defer
_our_ visit till to-morrow."

So away the two brown-winged companions
sped, I know not exactly where.
But, though both in a great hurry to get
home, they judiciously deemed, as I
have just observed, that they might
do a trifle of purveying business on
the way, by picking up a few seeds; or
if a manageable slug or grub presented
itself, so much the better. I had not
the curiosity to follow them; but I
believe they each contrived to carry
home a dainty supper; the one to the
hole of a big ash-tree, the other to its
nest in the furrow beside some tufts of
golden gorse. It may be interesting,
however, to know, by way of completing
their domestic history, that both had
promising young households--the one
of three, and the other of four--to
support; and the wee downy children
had arrived too at a very ravenous age,
with any capacity for food, which
indeed amounted, at times, on the part
alike of father and mother, to a trial of
temper.

The Nightingale, now left all alone
for the discharge of a somewhat novel
duty, seemed at first to feel his
responsibility: perhaps a feeling allied
to nervousness in the human being.
But he was a knowing little fellow too;
and resolved to proceed in the most
alluring as well as discreet way to his
task. Being fully acquainted with the
position of the rose-leaf, he took wing,
and settled himself on the branch of a
birch close by. Without any possible
warning, he forthwith began (it was the
best way of getting over these nervous
sensations) to pipe one of his very best
and most enchanting songs. He had
somewhat unwarrantably indulged the
expectation that he would get an
immediate response from the Dewdrop.
He had however, in this, to exercise
the virtue of patience.

[Illustration]

"Answer me, pretty Dewdrop," he
said in his most bewitching trill.

But the Dewdrop was silent. It
appeared to pay not the slightest
attention.

Another chirrup and mellifluous
note, and then, coming to a lower and
still nearer spray of the birch-tree,
quite within whispering distance:

"Pretty little noiseless thing," continued
the Nightingale, "what are
you? Where were you born? Have
you any father or mother? or are you
an orphan? My two brother birds
spoke of your brightness and lustre.
My eyes are tolerably good; but I
confess I can see none of these things
about you; you seem rather somehow
to appear sad, though I trust I am
wrong."

"I have reason to be sad," at last
replied the Dewdrop, in the quietest,
mildest, silveriest voice imaginable,
and trembling with an emotion real or
pretended. "You call me a Dewdrop,
but in truth I am not, I am a teardrop;
a teardrop which fell from the sky."

"A teardrop from the sky!" said
the Nightingale, in undisguised astonishment.
"I cannot comprehend you.
Pray tell me what you mean?"

"It is true, despite of your surprise,"
said the other. "The Sky always
weeps at the loss of the Sun; and no
wonder. I tell you again, believe it
or not as you please, I am one of the
tears it shed to-night. You need not,
however, grieve for me. I shall be all
right" (the tiny voice rising to a
falsetto) "when the Sun appears again.
Indeed, I venture to say, you will
hardly know me then. _That_ I am
sure of."

"Ay!" said the Nightingale, with
a sceptical, incredulous chirp.

"Yes! I always get bright, that I
do, when the Sun shows himself. Look
up to those stars, glittering in the sky.
Do you know how they twinkle so?
I am myself neither scholar nor
philosopher, and have no pretensions
either way. But a confidential friend
once told me, and I quite believe him,
that it is because they are either suns
themselves, or else get light from that
beautiful Sun you saw some time ago
tingeing the sky with red and gold.
_My Sun_," continued the dwarf thing of
mystery, raising its tones, with a sort
of conscious pride. (If it had been
aught else but a beaded drop, I would
have described it standing on tip-toe
as it said this.) It had, however, fairly
exhausted itself with a very unwonted
effort in the shape of a speech, and,
without saying another word, turned
on its side on the leafy bed, shut
both eyes, and went to sleep. The
Nightingale was of course too polite,
civil, and considerate to prolong. So
he simply said, "Good night to you,
little Teardrop, or Dewdrop, whatever
you prefer calling yourself. It is time,
and more than time, for me to be on
the wing. I have one or two domestic
anxieties which, in the first place, I
must see to; and, after that, I have an
engagement among these old hawthorns
to serenade till morning."

"Good night, kind bird," replied the
Dewdrop, turning in politeness half
round on its pillow; "thank you for
thinking of me in my loneliness."
And away the songster flew, first to his
home, and then, after some outstanding
duties and civilities, over to his thicket
among the May blossoms. The extreme
beauty of the night seemed to
dispel all care, and to have a decidedly
inspiring effect on his nerves. I cannot
tell whether he had really any such
ambitious thought, but it almost
seemed, from the gush of song, an
attempt was made that every star in
the heavens might at all events hear, if
they could not appreciate his melodies.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER THE SECOND.


It was now morning. The
mist still slept drowsily in the
valley; in some places so
dense, that the smoke of the early fires
in the hamlet could scarcely pierce it.
Already our friend the Thrush had completed
both toilet and breakfast, and had
issued forth on his round of daily work
and pleasure; as active and busy as
the thrush family always are. When
he first rose from bed, he was not
exactly in the very best of humours;
for he had, what was always a cross to
him when it occurred (though that was
rarely), a disturbed night. Shall I tell
you how his rest came thus to be
invaded? Why, the Nightingale, on
his way from the rose-leaf, had, perhaps
somewhat inconsiderately, tapped at
his door, to inform him that all he
could get out of the Dewdrop was
(a very incomprehensible sentiment to
a sleepy bird), that he was a tear wept
by the Sky when it lost the Sun; and
he was bound in all sincerity to add,
that it seemed rather a dull and uninteresting
tear to boot.

"I know better," growled the Thrush.
(I have used the word "growl," because
I can find no better to describe the
reality.) Growling, I am well aware, is a
very uncommon demonstration of feeling
in the case of a warbler. At all
events, if it was not a growl, it was the
nearest approach his beak could make
to one, as he turned on the pillow
which had been thus rudely disturbed.
After, however, dozing for a few more
hours, breakfast over, and his family
seen to, off he sped with all his former
cheerfulness and activity, till he found
himself perched on a branch of the
very tallest elm-tree he could pick out,
and one, too, right above where the
rose and the dewdrop were. Dear
me! how he piped, and chirruped, and
throstled! I thought the Nightingale
had done wonders in that way; but it
was nothing to the Thrush. He doubtless
was under the impression that the
Dewdrop was sound asleep, and needed
no ordinary efforts in the way of
rousing. I am sure if one could have
dived under the yellow feathers, the
little throat must have been purple.

After these musical preliminaries,
our new friend (Songster No. 2) ventured
by-and-by to come nearer. But,
in doing so, he could hardly believe
his eyes, specially after what the
Nightingale had told him.

"A teardrop" indeed! There was
not a bit of the tear about it. Where
had been the Nightingale's eyes? It
was something at all events very
like a bright, unmistakable, beautiful
diamond on which the Thrush looked.
How it glistened and sparkled; and
that too with all the prismatic colours!
The spectator could only (what was an
effort to any member of the Thrush
family) gaze in mute wonder.

"What in all the world can you be,
you lovely, silent sleeper on the rose-leaf,
with your round crystal cheeks?
Dewdrop we thought you were; teardrop
you say you are: I cannot think
you are either. If you are not a
diamond set in rubies--stolen, for
anything I know, from yesterday's
rainbow--you look the thing uncommonly
well."

"I am indeed a diamond," answered
the Dewdrop. "Look at me," said the
little gleaming dot, with the air of an
aristocrat; "do you not say I am fit for
a monarch's crown? And it _is_ a
monarch's crown I am presently to be
set in. Every day I meet the Queen
of the Morning.--Stay," it suddenly exclaimed,
"I see her even now advancing
with her rosy feet, 'sowing the earth
with pearls.' See, for yourself, how the
few stars which still linger in the sky,
and which with their glittering torches
lighted her out of the Eastern Gate,
are paling every minute behind her!
She says, of all the jewels in her tiara
there is not one she is fonder of, or
prouder of, than me. Away, away,
little bird," stammered out the Dewdrop,
with some nervous twitchings
presently to be accounted for; "I must
prepare to meet this Queen Aurora.
But," it added in a kind of afterthought,
"the procession will soon be
over; come back shortly and see me, if
you please." The keen diamond eye
twinkled with a humorous, comical
expression when these last words were
uttered; as much as to say, "I shall
manage to cheat you, old fellow,
wont I?"

The Thrush had some small quantum
of poetry in his nature; but he had a
great deal of shrewd common sense
too, and an immense idea of propriety.
Accordingly, he at once took the hint
as to departure; but with guileless
simplicity cherished the resolution of
renewing the intercourse, in an hour or
two at latest, after the royal cavalcade
had swept by.

This interlude was no peculiar hardship
to our erratic friend, who knew he
could spend the time merrily and
profitably among his numerous kinsfolk
in the groves. To tell the truth, he was
not sorry to get away from the court
pageantry, as all such ceremonial and
pomp of circumstance was an abomination
to him, and had always been
so. It was, therefore, with pleasant
anticipations of an early return that,
by a few fleet bounces, he was lost
from sight in the nearest thicket.

Barely, however, had the specified
period elapsed, when he was back again
upon his twig on the tall elm. He
had certainly not exhausted his strength
or conversational music-powers in that
round of morning visits, for he renewed,
then and there, his merriest
notes, quite in the old style; and after
this prelude, by way of making sure
that the course was clear, he flew with
more than wonted alacrity in the
direction of the rose-leaf.

But, can you imagine? To his
wonder, sorrow, and chagrin, lo! when
he looked for it, the leaf was empty!
Its small householder was gone! Not
a trace of either Dewdrop or Diamond
left! There was no need of asking
any questions; he comprehended in a
moment what the roguish twinkle of the
eye meant an hour before. He had,
in a word, been "sold." It was more
than a mere innocent trick played on
him. His feelings and bird-dignity
had, he felt, been a little compromised
by what, had it occurred at night, would
have been called "a moonlight flitting."
It was more like what the big
creatures in the world around him
were in the habit of describing as an
April errand. It was only too evident
that the Queen of the Morning, in
passing by, had picked up the dew
diamond, and had inserted it in her
crown; and that the little thing had
made no demur to the appropriation.

Well, it must be owned that, anyhow
for once, the Thrush was crestfallen.
He almost never knew any ditties but
joyous ones; but on the present occasion,
with no attempt at concealment, he
went away wailing to the thicket, and
outpoured his wounded vanity in something
very like a dirge. He then
buried his beak in rather sulky fashion
under his wing, and went to sleep.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER THE THIRD.


But what is this? It is a
change of scene. Away up in
the morning sky, oh, how blue
it is! and the light fleecy clouds, how they
float in folds of white ether! The Sun
has climbed higher. It is now above
the tallest of the poplars; and the long
shadows cast by trunks and stems and
branches are visibly shortened. And
see! the cattle are again lowing in the
fat meadows, and by degrees beating
a safe retreat from the coming heat
under the forest trees.

High in that bright dome of azure,
there is a delightful frolicsome twitter
heard. It is not the Nightingale; no,
not so clear and mellow as that. Not
the Thrush; no, not so loud or gushing
as that. It is our little friend the
Lark. Oh! how merry he is! more so
than either of the other two. And
what is he about? He seems to be
floating and soaring, sauntering and
curtseying, skimming and dipping, rollicking
and frolicking--now up, now
down--now describing gyrations, now
imitating a pendulum--now trying to be
so steady with his fluttering wings, that
he looks like a star twinkling in the day-time--in
short, playing all sorts of droll
antics, indulging in every imaginable
pirouette and somersault, in all the
world (in his case _above_ the world) like a
school-boy beginning his holidays; certainly
appearing to put himself to a great
deal of unnecessary trouble and exertion.
But he is unmistakably, with his
winning ways, about _something_, and
something to the purpose. But what
that is, no mortal could guess. As the
thing however must be guessed, or
otherwise found out, Gentle Reader,
I shall take you into confidence, and
unriddle the secret.

The Queen of the Morning, as you
already know, or at all events know
now, had come with all her court, and
troupe of gay courtiers. The Young
Hours had unbarred for her the Gates
of Day, and she at once sallied forth.
Beautiful little pages in the shape of
pink clouds, quite like tiny angels
with wings, were holding up her train.
Some of those fairy cherubs seemed, too,
to have censers in their hands, at least
if one could judge from the delicate
wreaths of mist which rose like incense
from them. Others appeared to be
discharging tiny golden arrows from
silver bows; others to paint, with
invisible pencils, in delicate and varying
hues of amber and purple, the fringes
of clouds; while the Queen herself at
times laid her own finger upon the
larger of these, and braided them with
snow and crimson. And then, how
loyal everything seemed to be on the
earth beneath! How each flower that
had been asleep all night instantly
rose on awaking, and, in the most
duteous manner uncovering its head,
prepared to take its place in the royal
procession. The more gorgeous ones
of the garden led the way, with their
velvet tassels, and silken brocades, and
pendants of opal and turquoise; some
apparently carrying chalices filled with
nectar. Then the fields and hedgerows,
in their rough, rustic, plebeian fashion,
with their fustian jackets and smock-frocks,
said--"We shall not be behind
our betters;" so their buttercups and
wood-anemones, speedwell and scarlet
pimpernel, the meadow violet with its
modest blue, the cowslip with its burnished
cells, the daisy with its "golden
eye and white silver eyelashes," all did
fealty to their adored Queen. Some
went down on their knees; others doffed
their caps; others smiled bewitchingly;
others could do nothing but waft sweet
perfumes. There were even bands of
very varied music and musicians, all
assisting with their efforts in swelling
the Queen's Anthem. The brook,
though it had sung all night, and had
need of a little respite, seemed to say--"No,
I shall go warbling on; she shall
have my very best treble of a ripple."
And then there were minor performers
in this nature-choir. The Blackbird
and Redbreast, Goldfinch and Linnet,
and Chaffinch, each took part with
striking effect. Even the Swallow
in his own quiet way twittered, and the
Tomtit chattered, and the Beetle
droned, and the Bee hummed, and the
big Dragon-fly, in armour of brightest
cobalt, whirred; and the Grasshopper,
poor fellow! did his very uttermost,--he
chirruped, he could do no more.
The Butterfly, who could not raise
a single note, came out in his best
plush court-dress of gold, vermilion,
and blue, dainty little silent outrider
that he is, waking up any exceptional
sleepers. He carried, truth to
say, his zeal sometimes too far; as
when I saw him unjustly reproaching
the Foxglove for having bells and not
ringing them, a thing they were never
meant to do. Even the Spider hung
his silver-tissued web from spray to
spray; as if he had weaved a gossamer
mantle, in case his Queen might like to
use it in the chill of early dawn. (_See
Frontispiece_.)

Well, the latter--I mean the Queen--at
last came to a pause, and, with most
radiant grace in her countenance, she
put her hand up to her crown, and took
out the diamond. There was a little
pet of a crimson cloud that happened
to be floating past at the moment.
She laid the lustrous gem on this
roseate pillow; and then, slowly and
gradually, she and all her retainers,
in ghostly shape, vanished clean from
sight.

       *       *       *       *       *

But what, you will say, has all this
to do with our friend the Lark? His
quick little eye had discerned what your
dull sight and mine could not. He had
watched everything I have now described.
How indeed could he miss
seeing that flashing speck of light lying
so daintily on its cushion of state? No
wonder he circles and zigzags, and does
bird-homage to the brightest gem of
the Regalia. Up, down--hither, thither--just
as I have already told, doing
obeisance in every possible and conceivable
way; till at last, poising
himself immediately above, fluttering
with all his might, and settling himself
in the fixed attitude in which the lark
family are such adepts, he mustered up
courage and said--

"Pretty sparkling thing! I know what
you are. You are a rare diamond just
taken from the crown of the Queen of
the Morning. But, I confess, you look,
too, very like the Dewdrop I spied at a
distance, a few hours ago, on the tip of
a rose-leaf."

"What a capital guesser you are,
tiny minstrel," was the reply; "but you
had better leave me with my diamond
name, at all events for the present. I
shall not say whether some scientific
bird-winged philosophers are right or
wrong when they aver that, though the
Queen of the Morning borrowed me, I
am really and truly a jewel from the
crown of the Sun; that when he took
off his royal robes last evening, to lay
his head on his nightly pillow, I
dropped out of his crown, and tumbled
down to the earth. I may tell you, however,
confidentially (just in a whisper,
you know)," added the brilliant speaker,
"that though they call me Diamond, I
like quite as well the name with which
God's beautiful mist baptized me, that
of _Dewdrop_. But I have brief time
(indeed no time) to converse further
with you now. You have seen, a
short while ago, how the Queen of
the Morning vanished. Will you be
astonished when I tell you that I am
about to do the very same myself? I
am going," it continued, "to my Palace
yonder" (an extra gleam, in the absence
of a finger, was its own special way of
pointing upwards). "I have said my
_Palace_--I should rather perhaps say,
my _Home_. We may meet," it added,
"pretty soaring warbler, on the way to
it. But please leave me now."

What I have said of the Thrush was
true also of the Lark. He was a
peculiarly biddable and discreet bird,
and when he got a hint he always took
it. Moreover, the Dewdrop had spoken
so courteously (he thought condescendingly)
to him, he would not for the
world intrude his company longer than
desired. The other evidently wished
to be all alone, to pack up and prepare
for this great and distant journey.

So the Lark plunged down to the
stream among the alders to bathe his
wings and refresh himself. After the
lustrations were duly completed, up
again he rose like an arrow into the
bright, blue sky. Says he to himself,
"I shall certainly be on the sharp out-look
for that ascent of the Dewdrop.
I can at all events be a silent spectator,
if my services cannot otherwise be of
use." And, to be sure, he did not
require to watch long; for, with that
keenness of perception that belonged
to all his ancestors, he found that he
had soared right into the very midst of
a golden mist. Some people say and
believe (though I am not wise enough
in bird-lore to know the truth of it),
that the lark family have eyes almost
like a microscope; things invisible to
us are said to be quite visible, and
indeed conspicuous, to them. At all
events, this was true in the case of the
present representative of that discriminating
race. So that what, if we had
been there, would only have seemed an
aggregation of glistening atoms, were
to him nothing less than a vast army in
visible shape--chariots and charioteers,
knights mounted on steeds with white
trappings and gold and silver bridles;
other horsemen carrying glittering
spears, polished shields, and flashing
swords; others bearing standards of
cloth of gold. I am only telling you
what the Lark saw, or thought he saw;
and a most wonderful army on march
you can very well believe it was.

[Illustration]

Oh, just see how he twitters and
carols, as I have more than once
pictured, and cannot do so too often--shaking
first his little wings, and then
his little throat; the old zigzagging
to and fro--here, there, everywhere--whisking
in this direction, and bouncing
in that direction, restless gymnastic
that he is, in a very whirl and vortex
of excitement!

"You told me, a little while ago,"
said he, mustering up courage, with an
effort, to speak to this wondrous mass
of knight-errantry; "at all events the
Diamond-drop, of which I know you are
the fragments, told me you were going
to some Palace in the sky. Where is
that?"

"It is our _Home_, soaring warbler,"
said the million million little voices,
their spears and helmets flashing brightly
in the radiance, their horses prancing
and pawing the path of light--"It
is Home, Home, Home!" said the
myriads, the very air tremulous with
the shout.

"Yes, but where is that?" repeated
the Lark, determined to come to the
point, and not to be numerically extinguished,
as he darted like lightning
round and round the brilliant host.

"The Sun! the Sun!" one after
another made answer. The Dewdrop
was a tear that fell from the sky because
the Sun was gone. But, as you
have just told us, we are all parts of it--everyone
of us are; and we are on our
way again to the golden entrance to his
Palace.

The army of misty globules rose
and rose, higher and yet higher. They
seemed, too, to get brighter and brighter
in the ascent, the Lark rising with them,
indeed till his little wings were tired.
Then when he felt that he could act as
convoy no farther, down he came at
one long unpausing dart to the furrow
adjoining the wooded dell below, which
was now all streaked with fleckered
light. He thought (and we shall not
quarrel with the fancy) that these
patches of light were nothing else than
the golden arrows he had seen shot from
the bow of the Cherubs--the little
Angels of the Dawn--and that they
were now lying thick in the green
arcade. He just took breath, after the
exhaustion and excitement, alike of
both body and mind, which his aerial
adventure had entailed; and then
hastened straight to the home of the
Nightingale and Thrush, to tell of the
glorious ascent (what the old and learned
creatures of the earth would have called
the apotheosis) of the Dewdrop on
the rose-leaf; its severance into a
million fragments; and how these,
in the shape of a great army, had
marched right within

THE SUN'S GOLDEN GATES!

[Illustration]




_AFTERWORDS._

_An Angel's Whisper._


The Soul--the Spirit of Man--apart
from the Great Sun,
becomes a teardrop. All is
dark to it, when that All-glorious Source
of Light and Love is away. Earth's
sweetest songs cannot cheer it. But
when the morning comes, and the
Sun returns, the teardrop becomes a
Dewdrop--gleaming like a diamond in
that peerless radiance. And at death,
when it _seems_ to be dissolved, and
has apparently vanished from sight,
it is exhaled--not annihilated. It
passes upward to the Golden Gates,
to be lost in the splendour of THE
EVERLASTING LIGHT!

[Illustration]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of a Dewdrop, by J. R. Macduff

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF A DEWDROP ***

***** This file should be named 19809.txt or 19809.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/8/0/19809/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Janet Blenkinship
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
