Project Gutenberg's Three years in France with the Guns:, by C. A. Rose

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Three years in France with the Guns:
       Being Episodes in the life of a Field Battery

Author: C. A. Rose

Release Date: November 14, 2006 [EBook #19814]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE YEARS IN FRANCE ***




Produced by Geetu Melwani, Christine P. Travers, Sigal
Alon and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries)





[Transcriber's note: Obvious printer's errors have been corrected.
The original spelling has been retained.
--The caption of the illustration page 38 was unclear.
--Page 50: "serious of raids" has been replaced by "series of raids"
--Page 76: "must against" has been replaced by "much against"]




                         THREE YEARS IN FRANCE

                             WITH THE GUNS,



                                BEING



                   EPISODES IN THE LIFE OF A FIELD

                               BATTERY.




                                 BY

                           C.A. ROSE, M.C.,

                             LATE OF THE

                        ROYAL FIELD ARTILLERY.




                              Printed By
                   The Allen Lithographic Co., Ltd.,
                              Kirkcaldy




INTRODUCTION.


These brief notes of experiences with the guns for thirty-eight months
in France were primarily penned for my own satisfaction. Friends who
read the manuscript expressed much interest in it, and added the hope
that it might be given a more permanent form. Hence it is that it is
now printed for private circulation.

The story is a simple record of the fortunes of my own Battery and
Brigade, and is intended as a tribute to the good comradeship which
existed, under all conditions, among all ranks.
                                               C.A.R.
EDINBURGH,
    _January, 1919._




CONTENTS.


Chapter I.,    Breaking us in,                 1

   "   II.,    Our First Battle,               8

   "  III.,    "Peace Warfare."               15

   "   IV.,    In "the Salient,"              23

   "    V.,    On the Somme,                  30

   "   VI.,    Messines,                      39

   "  VII.,    Ypres Again,                   47

   " VIII.,    Cambrai,                       60

   "   IX.,    At Arras,                      68

   "    X.,    March the 21st,                73

   "   XI.,    The Turn of the Tide,          78

   "  XII.,    Through the Hindenburg Line,   83

[Illustration: The "Grey Battery" at St. Omer, May 1917]




CHAPTER I.                                                         (p. 001)

Breaking Us In.


On a morning early in August, 1915, the Brigade disembarked at Havre
without mishap to man, horse, or material, and proceeded to a Rest
Camp on the outskirts of the town. We were in France at last! The same
evening the Batteries started to entrain, and every two hours a
complete unit was despatched up the line--to an unknown destination.
The men received refreshments at various Haltes, and the horses were
duly watered and fed, but the journey was, on the whole, long and
tedious. On one occasion only was the monotony broken, and that
unwittingly, by the humour of one of the officers. In the course of
the evening, the train stopped at a small station, and the compartment
in which the officers were settled drew up in front of the Buffet.
Some one asked where we were, and a subaltern, anxious to display his
newly-acquired knowledge of French, replied, "Bouvette," which called
forth no response. Shortly afterwards the train proceeded on its way,
and the occupants of the carriage settled themselves down to sleep.
All passed quietly for the next couple of hours--then the train
stopped once more, and, as luck would have it, again our carriage came
to a standstill directly opposite the buffet of the station. At once a
question was asked as to our whereabouts. The same subaltern, shaking
himself out of a deep slumber, stretched, roused himself, and, peering
out of the window, exclaimed, "Good Lor', still at this beastly hole,
'Bouvette'!" He expressed much surprise at the "unseemly mirth," as he
described it, which followed!!

After detraining, the Battery marched through beautiful country, which
reminded one of the Borders, as it was not unlike the valley of the
Tweed, and we were at once taken to the hearts of the inhabitants  (p. 002)
of the good village of Seningham, which place was destined to be our
home for the next few days. The officers were afforded spacious
accommodation in the house of the Maire, whilst the men had comfortable
billets in the neighbourhood. Time was spent making our unit shipshape
after its travels by land and sea, and the "hairies" obtained as much
grazing as possible, to make them fit for what was in store for them.
It was wonderful how quickly the men adapted themselves to French
ways, and much amusement was caused by their eager, if somewhat
unsuccessful, attempts to master the language of our Allies.

When it became known that the officers were anxious to increase their
knowledge of the language of the country, the maidens of the village
vied with one another to obtain posts as instructresses, and there was
nearly a free fight amongst them for the possession of our worthy
Senior Subaltern, whose taking ways did not fail to catch their
attention!

But, alas! our peaceful warfare was not to be for long! One morning
sudden orders came through to prepare for the line in a couple of
days' time. All was instant bustle, extra grooming was given to the
horses, and finishing touches were put to the howitzers and vehicles.
We were to be given a trial in action to show how we would comport
ourselves before joining the "Feet" of our own Division, the Guards,
who at that time were out at rest. For this purpose we were to be
placed under the orders of the C.R.A. of an Indian Division, to
reinforce the Batteries already in positions and receive instruction
from them.

At last the morning arrived to move off, the column, skirting the town
of St. Omer, took the main road to Hazebrouck, and, as we passed
through the village of Arques, we caught a first glimpse of our future
infantry. They appeared equally keen on seeing their new artillery,
and inspected us with a critical eye. The march was made in easy
stages, and on the morning of the third day the Brigade arrived at
Merville, a quaint old town in Flemish Flanders. After a hasty lunch,
the officers rode ahead, in order to get into touch with the unit we
were to support in the line, and another amusing incident happened _en
route_. One of the Junior Officers owned a sturdy mare, whose
reputation as a charger was apt to be ridiculed by his companions, as
she was notorious for her slow gait. When the party had proceeded some
distance at the trot, "Halting Hilda" was observed, to the astonishment
of everyone, to be gradually taking the lead. This fact called     (p. 003)
forth the remark from her master, "By Jove, she is pulling extraordinarily
hard to day: what can be the matter with the animal?" It was then
discovered that the rider had been at her mercy for the last couple of
miles, the bit clanking merrily from side to side under her great jaw.
In the hurry and excitement of departure, after lunch, the bit had not
been replaced in her mouth!

The afternoon was spent in reconnoitering the gun positions allotted
to us, which were the alternative positions of the units already in
line. As a rule, each battery makes a second or alternative gun
position, in case it should be shelled out of its existing one, so
that no delay takes place in getting into action again. When night
fell there was subdued excitement in the wagon line as the time drew
near to take the guns "in." This was actually the beginning of our
first venture--would we have the luck to get there without being
caught in the enemy's harassing fire? How would we behave under
shell-fire: would we be steady or otherwise? All these and many other
questions flashed through our minds, for a great deal depends, more
than one would believe, on how a new and inexperienced unit receives
its baptism of fire.

At length a start was made, and the Battery moved off, and soon turned
down the long, straight main road leading to La Bassee, the trees on
either side showing signs of shrapnel scars, and even in the darkness
it could be seen that the cottages were, for the most part, in ruins.
It felt distinctly eerie as the small column proceeded silently on its
way without showing lights of any description; the stillness and
darkness broken now and again by the barking of a gun as we drew
nearer the battery zone, and by an occasional Verey Light, which
seemed to reveal us in all our nakedness. That long stretch of road
seemed interminable--were we never going to reach our destination?
However, all remained quiet throughout our progress, and at last we
arrived at the entrance to the gun position, which was to be our home
for the next fortnight. The guns were speedily unlimbered and
man-handled into the pits awaiting their reception, the ammunition was
unloaded from the vehicles, and the teams were returned to the wagon
line.

The following morning the pieces were "layed out" on our particular
zone, and we had time to look round and take stock of our new      (p. 004)
abode, which was a farmhouse standing in the centre of an orchard
adjoining the main road. The building itself was by no means intact,
although, as yet, habitable. It gave us enough shelter of a kind, and
we soon adjusted ourselves to the prevailing conditions, and the
outhouses surrounding it afforded ample accommodation for the
detachments. The gun pits were cunningly concealed in the front
portion of the orchard, special care having been taken against the
prying eyes of hostile aeroplanes. We were fortunate in the choice of
position made for our first time in the line, for two reasons,
firstly, it was an interesting zone--including the village of Neuve
Chapelle now immediately behind our front line--and, secondly, it was
quiet. The country there is extremely flat, with the exception of
Aubers Ridge, which, occupied by the enemy, overlooked us to a certain
extent, although the many trees and woods prevented his having an
uninterrupted view. Our tuition began at once, and we were conducted
to the front line through innumerable communication trenches, which,
at first, reminded one of a maze at an exhibition, the only difference
being that numerous notice-boards directed our movements.

There we were welcomed, with smiling faces, by men of a Ghurka
battalion, their white teeth and flashing eyes showing up their brown
skins. Now and then they would stop sharpening their deadly-looking
kukris, their dearest possession, to allow us to pass along the
trench. Nothing delighted these brave little men more than to be
permitted to go on a silent raid at night, when they wormed themselves
through the wire in "No Man's Land," and did as much damage on the
other side as possible. They have been known to enter the enemy
trenches without a sound, killing everyone within reach, and to return
radiant, quite unscathed. When questioned as to why they had not
brought in any prisoners for identification purposes, they would
merely roll their eyes, shrug their shoulders, and say, "Enemy all
quiet, he asleep," and calmly remove the still warm gore from their
knives! Continuing on our way, we next struck a Highland regiment, the
necessary complement of the one of stout little men just left behind.
It was most interesting, as one had heard so much about the
traditional good comradeship existing, in India, between Ghurka and
Highlander, and here they were still side by side in France. Their
mutual admiration is boundless and unconcealed, and it was most    (p. 005)
amusing to watch the little men aping the ways of the big Highlanders,
who look huge in comparison with them. The Ghurka regiments have their
own pipe bands, and play them as if they, too, had been born and bred
in the mountains and glens of Scotland.

Soon we came to a fire bay, specially well placed to obtain a good
view of the enemy trenches, which had been converted into what is
known as an O.P., _i.e._, an artillery observation post. These O.P.'s
are manned during daylight by the F.O.O. (Forward Observation Officer)
and his signaller assistants. Their job is to keep a close watch on
hostile trenches, watching for any unusual movement or for the
appearance of new constructive works, such as machine gun emplacements
or new saps. The O.P. has numerous wires leading into it, and these
come from all the batteries in immediate support of that part of the
line, which are jointly responsible for its defence. Our own signallers
had been out early, and a wire had already been carefully laid and
labelled from our gun position to the O.P., so we were now ready to
register our howitzers on some definite object behind the enemy lines.
A house, or some such landmark which is shewn on our trench maps, is
usually chosen to calibrate upon. There is little trouble in effecting
this, but, at first, there is some difficulty in following the rounds
as they fall, through a periscope, owing to its small field of vision.
It was, however, imperative to make use of that instrument, in this
case, as an enemy sniper, watchful and on the alert, had already seen
the top of it, and from time to time a bullet passed overhead
unpleasantly close. This served to remind us to be discreet and to run
no risks by exposing ourselves in the slightest degree above the
parapet. Sometimes it is very difficult to restrain one's enthusiasm
when there is an interesting shoot taking place.

The pieces being duly registered, the Battery is now ready for any
emergency, and theoretically we can engage any target in our arc of
fire. It is then essential to learn the country in hostile territory,
and one looks out for likely targets and for points at which one can
inconvenience the enemy by keeping him under constant harassing fire.
This work must necessarily be done from a point of vantage where a
good wide view can be obtained, and, in most cases, a house, tree, or
high piece of ground well behind the lines, is selected for a Rear
O.P.

In an incredibly short space of time every officer learns the      (p. 006)
country off by heart, and can bring any gun to bear on a particular
target at short notice. At first Junior Officers are allowed practice
shoots on targets well behind the enemy lines, and as they gain
confidence and experience, are entrusted with "close shoots," _i.e._,
firing on hostile emplacements, etc., in the front line, a job which
requires extreme caution and accuracy, as "No Man's Land" averages not
more than 200 yards in width in most places. Batteries can always
communicate with Battalion Headquarters in the line, a wire, usually
buried, leading from there to our Brigade Headquarters, and each
Battery has its own private wire to the latter place. In the same way
one can be linked up with nearly every unit in a Division by means of
an Exchange run by the Royal Engineers.

A few days sufficed us to make ourselves quite at home, and officers
went freely about "seeking whom they might devour," visited old
established O.P.'s, and searched for new or better ones. It is a
curious fact that the average subaltern is never fully satisfied with
an O.P., and is always bent on discovering "something better,"
although in few cases is his ambition realised! One officer favours
this O.P., another that, and on this occasion the one which our worthy
Battery Commander had a preference for was a most unpleasant place,
commonly known as "The Doll's House," though why so called no one
could tell. At any rate, it was an abode to be avoided on all possible
occasions, and the subalterns were quite convinced it was the
registering place of all the hostile batteries within range and
vision. At any rate, we daily found less and less of the building,
until one day the staircase was blown away as well as the perch on top
which afforded us our view. Great was the relief when the B.C. at last
declared the O.P. "out of action" until further notice.

Nearly every O.P. has an appropriate name given to it, and so we
repaired to "Stink Farm" after abandoning our old love! We put in most
useful days of practice there, and the knowledge and experience gained
was invaluable. Our thanks were due to the enemy for his consideration
in allowing us to conduct our daily tasks almost unmolested: he showed
himself to be most lethargic and sleepy, and did not waken up unless
we were unusually energetic. Perhaps his chief reason for remaining so
inactive was the absence of any heavy guns on our side. Our largest
piece was a 60 pdr., and he may have thought mere Field Artillery  (p. 007)
beneath his consideration. Nor was he more active in the air; his
planes rarely passed over our lines, and when they did, it was at so
great a height that it was quite impossible for them to gather
information. However, one day, we were extremely fortunate in seeing a
hostile plane, that had ventured to cross over our lines at a lower
altitude, brought down in flames by a direct hit from an "Archie"
battery lying in wait close behind our own position. It is a rare
sight, for, to tell the truth, anti-aircraft batteries are not held in
particularly high respect by anyone except by those of their own ilk,
and on only two other occasions did we ever see the like again.

Our fortnight soon sped by, and we were quite reluctant when the time
came to go "out." We left our neighbours, who had befriended us so
well, with the sincere hope that we would have the good fortune to
meet and lie alongside of them again in the future. This hope,
however, was not destined to be fulfilled. We retraced our steps
through Merville and Aire to the same area from whence we came, to a
village called Nielles, in order to concentrate as a Division, which,
when formed, was designated the Guards Division.

The inhabitants, as usual, extended a warm welcome to us and showed us
every consideration, and we settled down to enjoy the peaceful
surroundings bathed in the warm and pleasant September sunshine, while
the Senior Subaltern availed himself of the opportunity of again
laying siege to the hearts of his former conquests at Seningham close
by. Our own C.R.A. came to visit us here, and the officers were
severally introduced to him. He expressed satisfaction at the report
which came to him from the line, concerning our conduct in action, and
added that the high opinion formed of us at home had in no wise been
diminished, and that our reputation merited the distinction conferred
on us of being selected as the Artillery of the Guards from among the
many units of the new Army.

Thus we waited, confident in the belief that, whatever we were in the
future called upon to do, we would at least put up a good show, and
determined to be a credit to the Division of which we now formed a
part. We had not long to wait, whispers passed round that we would be
up and doing at no distant date, and these rumours proved to be well
founded.




CHAPTER II.                                                        (p. 008)

Our First Battle.


Our marching orders came within the next few days. Each unit was
provided with portable bridges, which were carried under the wagon
bodies, and this, and several other preparations, gave us a good
indication that we were out for business. A couple of days trekking
brought us to the village of Nedonchel, which proved to be another
place of happy memory to our Senior Subaltern. Here we were given a
rough idea of the part we were to play in the coming proceedings. Two
army corps were to attack, on a six mile front, in the neighbourhood
of Loos and, if the assault was successful, the corps in reserve,
which included our Division, was to go through and exploit the victory
to its fullest advantage. We were to take no part in the initial
attack.

Large masses of troops were being moved up behind the battle area,
and, in order to screen our movements from hostile aircraft, the
latter stages of the journey were to be made under cover of darkness,
so the whole of the next day was spent in resting. At nightfall a
diversion was caused by a Cavalry Division passing through the village
on its way up, and a splendid sight it presented, as one famous
regiment followed swiftly on another. It was now almost time for us to
make a start, and the good lady of the house had remained out of bed
to brew us hot coffee and see us off the premises. As we were about to
depart she told us that her old mother, aged 88, who was in the next
room, had expressed the desire to see us for a moment, and so we were
conducted to the old lady's bedside. She was lying telling her beads,
but sat up as we approached and beckoned to each officer in turn, who
advanced, knelt, and received a blessing. The inhabitants knew well
that a big battle was to be fought quite soon, as the little       (p. 009)
village had been the scene of great activity during the past few days
and, although it was a considerable distance from the line, the
preliminary bombardment could be distinctly heard. The low muffled
rumble was incessant, and, to-night, seemed, if anything, more
intense. Shortly after midnight we set off and disappeared into the
darkness, followed by words of good cheer from the villagers and
shouts of "Bon chance, messieurs, bon chance."

Passing through Bruay we arrived a few miles behind the battle front
on the morning of the assault, which was delivered at an early hour,
and soon the news came back that, so far, everything was going well;
the village of Loos had already fallen into our hands. As the day wore
on, however, and the expected orders to advance were not forthcoming,
we suspected that all was not as it should be and our fears were
confirmed soon afterwards by instructions being given to prepare to
bivouac overnight on the ground close by. What actually happened was
this:--The initial attack was successful in capturing and overrunning
the enemy's front line trenches over the whole area, but, on advancing
to the second trench system a great deal of wire was found to have
been left unbroken or untouched by our artillery, and this held the
infantry up at vital places. The attack, however, was pressed with
great courage and determination, and in some places the flood of men
swept on, but, unfortunately, in others, little or no progress was
made. The line, consequently, soon presented a crooked, irregular
shape, which made the situation difficult and obscure. The enemy,
moreover, had anticipated the attack and had large reinforcements at
hand which were at once thrown in, and after a ding-dong struggle
throughout the day the advance came to an abrupt standstill. Two
Divisions from the Reserve Corps were then sent in, and, on the
following afternoon, the Guards attacked and helped to a large extent
in straightening out a considerable portion of the line. It was not
until nightfall of the third day that we entered the battle and took
up a position immediately north of Vermelles Station in the back
garden of a row of damaged villas. On our way "in," a couple of
cavalry regiments, which had been holding Loos for the last two days
and which had just been relieved, passed us. There passed also the
remnant of one of the Scottish Divisions which had fought so valiantly
and paid so heavy a price. Footsore, weary, and caked with mud from
top to toe, with every sign of what they had been through upon     (p. 010)
them, and heavily laden with "souvenirs" in addition to their full
kit, the men could scarcely crawl along. However, just as one battalion
came abreast of us, in such condition, the pipes tuned up and at once
every head was erect and not a man was out of step as they swung past
us; such is the moral force of the bagpipes. It was one of those
moments in which a lump rises in the throat and a thrill runs down the
spine.

In our new position we speedily learnt what we could do and what we
could not do. For instance, the signallers were able to introduce
electric light into our abode by tapping a live wire which ran
outside, from one fosse to the next, for we were now in the Lens coal
district with mines dotted about here and there. On the other hand, we
soon learnt to refrain from sleeping or showing lights in the second
storey of our billet which was evidently under direct observation by
the enemy, who did not take long to acquaint us with the fact.

There was always a good deal of firing to be done each day, for,
although the battle may be said to have finished after four or five
days, there were several side-shows before the line was adjusted to
our liking, and the enemy's fire was almost continuous. This bothered
the F.O.O. parties considerably, and communication was difficult to
maintain for more than a short time between the front line and
Battery. The wire was frequently broken in numerous places, and this
kept signallers and linesmen working at high pressure to repair the
damage. The O.P.'s were moderately good, with the exception of one in
"Gun Trench," where our men held a portion, then came a sand bagged
wall occupied on the other side by our opponents which they were able
to enter by a *T*-shaped communication trench, then another sand-bagged
wall with our infantry beyond. Neither side could shell this trench
for fear of injury to their own party, but this did not prevent a
lively exchange of bombs, intermingled with various forms and sizes of
"Minnies," which were hurled at frequent intervals. Sniping was also
rampant, and periscopes, no matter how small, survived not longer than
a few minutes. It was from this delightful spot that one of the
subalterns arrived at the Battery one evening with his head swathed in
bandages like a Sultan's turban. He had been trying conclusions with a
"Minnie," and, as this was in the days before the introduction of the
steel helmet, the latter had easily come out on top. When the wound
was ascertained to be nothing like as serious as the size of the
bandage seemed to indicate, he was removed to the wagon line amid  (p. 011)
jeers from his brother officers, and a few days' rest sufficed to
bring him back to duty again.

Now, in one portion of the zone which we were covering, "No Man's
Land" extended some 1500 yards in depth, and midway, lying in the
valley, were what appeared to be two derelict enemy guns partially
camouflaged This aroused the curiosity of the Staff, who called for
volunteers to go out and make an investigation and report as to the
condition of the sights, etc. Our B.C. gallantly offered his services,
in spite of the fact that he was over six feet in height, and
presented a most conspicuous figure, and would not be deterred. He set
off crawling through the long grass on his perilous journey, and there
was a huge grin on his face when he returned. After his report went in
we ascertained that the two pieces were nothing more than cleverly
constructed dummies formed from cart wheels, telegraph poles and
trunks of trees, but it was not until he almost came up to them that
he made the discovery.

The detachments meanwhile had settled down, making improvements to
their billets and strengthening the gun pits, and were already proving
themselves seasoned warriors. On one occasion a nasty accident
happened, due to the explosion of a howitzer, caused, as was
afterwards proved, by a faulty shell. The complete gun crew, with the
exception of the No. 1 in charge, was wounded. Three of their number
were temporarily buried by the earth thrown up by the explosion, and
it was probably due to that fact that no one was killed. The pit
naturally fell to bits and the debris was indescribable, but the
Sergeant managed to disentangle himself, and, standing stiffly to
attention, reported to the officer on duty, "No. 2 gun out of action,
sir!" No time was lost in digging out the injured men, and it was only
found necessary to evacuate three of the number to the nearest
dressing station--the remainder flatly refusing to go. The layer, in
particular, deserved great credit for his grit, for, in spite of
having been buried, and having scarcely a hair left on his head and
devoid of eyebrows, not to mention the shock to his nervous system, he
was again serving his gun 24 hours later, on the arrival of the new
piece. Some idea of the force of the explosion can be gathered from
the fact that the barrel was found, in two pieces, some 150 yards
away, having been blown over a railway embankment, while the       (p. 012)
breech block, which weighs about a cwt., was discovered, after a 12
hours' search, embedded in the ground six feet below the pit. At this
period a considerable number of "prematures" were taking place, and,
on one occasion, we ascribed this wounding of two gunners to this
cause, but afterwards found out our mistake. An S.O.S. went up after
dark, and, at the time of firing No. 3 gun, the layer and another
gunner were both badly hit by what appeared to be a "premature" just
outside the bore of the piece. Throughout this period we were firing
nothing but high explosive shells. Great therefore was our surprise
when, three weeks later, letters arrived from both men, who were in
hospital, to say that in each case shrapnel bullets had been extracted
from them! What had actually occurred was this: At the same time that
the trigger was pulled and the shell discharged, a "pip squeak" must
have burst in front of the mouth of the gun pit, driving the bullets
through the entrance.

Day after day passed in much the same way, neither side attempting to
make an attack on any large scale, but on the morning of the 8th
October, it was observed that the hostile shelling was not normal, and
had increased in extent along the whole recently captured area.
Preparations were therefore rapidly made to meet any eventuality, and,
as the day advanced and his bombardment gained in strength, it was
apparent to everyone that the enemy contemplated an attack. At noon
orders were received to be ready, at any time, to lay down a
destructive barrage on a certain zone. The Staff had happily
anticipated the point of attack accurately, and, by the time the enemy
concentrated his final burst of fire on his objectives, every gun in
the neighbourhood which could bear, was trained on the vital spot
ready to open out. When at last the time arrived, the bombardment
ceased abruptly, and the enemy's infantry advanced to the assault wave
upon wave, for the most part in mass formation and with arms linked
together. Emerging from a wood, they had a considerable distance to
cover across open ground before approaching our trenches, so both our
infantry and artillery fire was at first withheld. This gave
encouragement to the enemy, and, as his bombardment had been pretty
severe, he expected more or less of a "walk over," and did not reckon
on what was to follow. When he had advanced to within 200 yards    (p. 013)
of our lines, suddenly rapid fire spurted out from our rifles and
machine guns, and guns of every description spat H.E. and shrapnel,
and his ranks were literally mown down. Then a curtain was put down
behind--a solid wall of fire--which made it practically impossible for
the troops to retire, and their plight was beyond all hope. While they
were cogitating whether to come on or go back, they were slaughtered
in heaps--raked by the deadly machine guns. Very few indeed survived
to tell the tale, but one prisoner claimed to be most indignant with
the whole proceedings, and expressed his opinion that we did not "play
the game" by withholding our fire, and that they imagined they had
only to walk into our trenches and take possession of them. This
proved to be the last big hostile counter-attack attempted, and indeed
both sides were content to remain in their own trenches. We made a
smaller attack the next week, but it was also unsuccessful, and little
or no ground was gained. The enemy artillery devoted themselves
principally to counter battery work, and several British batteries,
which were ill concealed, had a most unpleasant time. Free use was
made of lachrymatory shell, our first taste of it. One clear,
moonlight night the battery was firing at a slow rate, and apparently
the enemy saw our flashes, for he speedily turned a 4.2 battery on to
us, his shells landing just short of each gun pit. No casualties
resulted, but a shell entered the window of one detachment's billet
and exploded, completely wrecking the room and destroying the men's
equipment. Soon afterwards instructions were issued to change
positions, and this was effected without loss or mishap. The new
position was more favourably placed, some little way in front of the
Fosse at Annequin, and had been constructed by the French. We were now
covering the Hohenzollern Redoubt of evil memory. Another O.P. was
constructed on the railway embankment on the La Bassee-Vermelles line,
which lent itself favourably to the construction of a shaft for
protection, the soil, for the most part, being chalk, as indeed it was
in all the surrounding neighbourhood. It was our misfortune at this
position to say farewell to our Battery Commander, who left us to take
up a Staff appointment with the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force, and
all ranks were sorry to lose a leader who had thus far shared all
their joys and sorrows. At the same time we were fortunate in      (p. 014)
securing in his successor one who quickly and tactfully took up the
reins of office, and the Battery continued to run on equally smooth
lines.

It now became quite evident that operations would not resume the
nature of a battle, and it was no surprise to receive intimation that
the Division would shortly retire from the conflict. Nobody was sorry
at the prospect of going out, although useful lessons had been learnt
and considerable experience had undoubtedly been gained.

The weather was beginning to break, and towards the end of the first
week in November we withdrew to the village of Sailly, preparatory to
marching into the nest area for which we were bound.




CHAPTER III.                                                       (p. 015)

"Peace Warfare."


When it became known that our destination was to be the sector
immediately adjoining the one we had already been in, facing Aubers
Ridge, our delight knew no bounds, for all were well aware that that
locality was considered a "cushy" spot which augured well for the
coming winter.

No delay was made in leaving Sailly, and, proceeding by way of Bethune
and St. Venant, we arrived at a small hamlet midway between the latter
town and Merville. The Battery remained in rest for a few days, while
a couple of "subs." with a working party commenced construction on the
new position selected by the B.C. This entailed a considerable amount
of labour, for timber and all other material had to be carted from the
R.E. dump at La Gorgue some distance away. With an eye to comfort as
well as concealment, it was decided to dig the pits in an orchard,
along some old assembly trenches which had been used by troops before
the battle of Neuve Chapelle. Close by was a cluster of cottages and
outhouses in a wonderful state of preservation.

By the end of the week the guns were pulled in, although there still
remained a lot to do on the position. The house in which the officers
quartered themselves was intact, with the exception of a few slates on
the roof and several broken window panes. Moreover, there was a little
furniture left and there were some fine open fireplaces, so we had
every reason to be satisfied. Within a short space of time the gun
pits were completed and camouflaged in keeping with the nature of the
ground, and great assistance was rendered us during this undertaking
by an airman who flew over the position from time to time and pointed
out the various deficiencies. At last when he reported that the
position could not be seen from a height of 2000 feet we           (p. 016)
concluded, rightly, that nothing was to be feared in that direction.
Thus we settled down to a period commonly known as "Peace Warfare."
This may be summed up as a time when one experiences the maximum
amount of pleasure that is possible under war conditions, with the
minimum amount of discomfort. The enemy were completely deceived as to
our whereabouts, and took us to be in another vacant position some way
down the road, which was liberally shelled by them whenever fire was
opened by us, and we used to encourage this procedure by occasionally
ceasing in order to lead him into the belief that he was doing us
damage. At all events, the position was never shelled the whole time
we were in possession of it--a somewhat unique experience for a
battery in France.

The infantry were also kept busy at the commencement of this period,
as we had relieved another Indian Division, and on this sector the
parapet had been built for the most part by Ghurkas, who, however
stout fellows they may be at heart, have not the stature of Guardsmen.
The result was the latter found their heads and shoulders showing well
above the parapet, and this necessitated the immediate heightening of
the same some two to three feet.

The O.P. duties were divided equally between the subalterns, each
doing a third daily. The wagon lines were situated east of La Gorgue
within easy reach, and frequent visits were paid to them, although no
officer remained there permanently.

During our stay here the Battery came under the direct orders of the
C.R.A. and was attached to no group in particular. Various tasks were
alloted to us, and these were, as a rule, most interesting and
instructive. To further increase our knowledge the B.C. gave the
majority of these shoots to the Junior Officers, briefly explaining
the orders and then leaving us to our own devices by departing for the
rest of the day to the wagon lines on the pretext that he had a
birthday to celebrate. He had many of them. This plan was much to our
liking, and tremendous keenness was displayed by all. Great pains were
taken to carry out everything to the letter, and the signallers also
carried out their part with equal spirit. The gun detachments at this
time rose to a high pitch of proficiency and could get 10 rounds a
minute out of the howitzers, which, considering the double load and
triple movement, was by no means a bad performance.

A fine level field ran alongside of the position, and it was       (p. 017)
speedily made use of as a recreation ground. Goal posts were erected,
and often a hot contest at football would be interrupted by the shrill
blast of a whistle summoning the men hastily to action. Their task
completed, they would calmly return and finish the game.

All kinds of mutual understandings existed between the opposing sides
in this area, which we soon learnt and respected. For instance, the
village of Aubers lay behind the enemy lines approximately at the same
distance that Laventie did on our side. Both were used as Brigade
Headquarters and filled with troops. Neither town was shelled unless
the enemy accidentally dropped a shell into it, when instant
retaliation was forthcoming. On one occasion the placid calm of
Laventie was rudely shaken through the instrumentality of a young
officer in one of our sister brigades who, unconscious of what he was
doing, planted several shells into Aubers. The consequence was the
following conversation took place over the telephone between
Headquarters and the offending subaltern.

"Hullo! Is that Ack Battery?"

"Yes, sir. Just a moment, sir. I'll put you through to the mess, sir."

"Right you are, but look sharp about it, please. Yes. Hullo! Is that
an officer? Well, I say, have you been firing just now?"

"Yes, sir. So-and-so is doing a practice shoot from the O.P."

"Put me on to him at once."

"Yes, sir."

A brief interval follows, in which various mutterings are overheard by
the signaller in the exchange, who smiles to himself as he continues
to listen.

"Hullo! hullo!! Damn these young officers! Will they never learn to
answer quickly? Slow, slow is not the word for it. Will have to go
round and shake them up a bit. This is absurd. Hullo! there. Hullo! Is
he never going to come? Exchange, can't you get him?"

"Just a moment, sir."

"Hullo! hullo!!"

"Yes, sir. So-and-so speaking."

"What the devil are you firing at, young sir?"

"Well, sir, I was given permission to fire a few rounds----"

"Where?"                                                           (p. 018)

"At the cross roads, sir."

"Seen any of them fall?"

"Not as yet, sir."

"Well, for God's sake stop firing at once, sir. Why, man, your shells
are dropping in Aubers, and they are retaliating like the very devil.
There goes another, just outside."

"Very sorry, sir. Couldn't make out where the shells were falling."

"Well, report to me as soon as you get back, remember. Have no time to
listen to an explanation now."

"Very good, sir. Good-bye, sir."

An animated discussion now takes place in the telephone exchange, and
the unanimous opinion is that poor So-and-so is "for it" and will
perhaps even get the sack, and who will succeed to the Right Section
if he leaves the Battery?

In these days a walk along the front line was a delight, and nothing
gave the F.O.O. greater pleasure than to take his morning
constitutional from one end of our area to the other and to peer over
the side at frequent intervals by means of a periscope. Sniping was
sometimes indulged in, but a target rarely presented itself for the
simple reason that the enemy was hardly ever in his front line
trenches during daylight. From one O.P. we could often see one or two
men running along the trenches with lighted torches kindling fires and
causing smoke in order to lead us into the belief that the trenches
were powerfully manned.

Now, about this time, a number of hostile batteries, whose positions
could not be located, gave us a certain amount of trouble, but a
successful ruse was carried out which enabled us to discover them.
Operations were undertaken in order to force the enemy to show his
hand, and every indication was made by us that we were about to
institute a raid. Wire cutting was done by one battery, and others
registered strong points in rear behind the prescribed area. Then at
dusk, known as flesh time, when batteries are most likely to give
their positions away, all the O.P.'s were manned, spotting apparatus
made ready, and our barrage was put down on this sector. The infantry
had been provided with dummy figures, which they held aloft on poles,
and in the semi-darkness this gave the impression that they were
preparing to quit the trenches and go over the top, while high
overhead hovered a number of our aeroplanes waiting to assist. The
plan worked admirably, and in a few minutes the enemy's counter    (p. 019)
preparation commenced. As the result of our efforts his positions were
pin-pointed and dealt with by our 60-pdrs. the next day, after which
we were not bothered by them to such a great extent.

Soon after this episode there came upon the scene what were commonly
known as "Cook's Tourists." These were officers whose units were still
at home, and who were sent out to gain experience by being attached to
batteries for a short period. At times the tourist laid himself open
to being the victim of many practical jokes, and this certainly
contributed to the liveliness of the mess. A certain officer was
escorted down to the front line trenches one day, and, as usual, the
party was armed with periscopes. All of a sudden he emitted a cry of
delight, as, gazing through the instrument, he told us of how crowds
of the enemy were walking along a road. Could we not get our guns on
to them quickly? This seemed an incredible occurrence, as, in this
sector, not a single German had been seen for days on end. The mystery
was speedily solved, however. By some means or other, he had been
holding the periscope so that it faced the opposite direction, and
what he actually saw was a party of our own men walking leisurely
along the road some way behind our lines. Needless to say, this
officer came in for a considerable amount of chaff, and, in course of
time, was solemnly presented with a paper medal, suitably inscribed,
on which reversed periscopes figured prominently.

The festive season was now drawing near, which necessitated the
gathering of provisions, for the men were to celebrate the 25th of
December by having a special dinner, and presently leave was opened to
our unit and the first lucky ones departed for "Blighty." Some sort of
gift was due the enemy on this occasion, and it took the shape of a
sharp five minutes' bombardment, from every gun in the area, on the
stroke of midnight on Xmas Eve. In spite of this gruelling, the enemy
next morning showed signs of wishing to fraternise with our men in the
front line, but strict orders had been issued in advance that this was
not to be countenanced. The Germans showed themselves freely above the
parapet, and one could see that they had been dressed up smartly for
the occasion, probably in order to impress us with their appearance.
However, there was "nothing doing." Little or no sniping took place,
but the artillery went through their usual routine, in fact rather
increased their fire that day. The men's dinner was a great        (p. 020)
success, and all seemed pleased with their fare--pork and potatoes,
vegetables, plum pudding and fruit, with plenty of beer or stout to
wash it down. The Officers' Mess was lively also, and our first 'Xmas,
under war conditions, was voted most successful. Next day the Padre
turned up, and a service was held in one of the barns, but, in the
middle of the address, on "Peace on earth, goodwill towards men,"
there was a sudden call for "action." A rush was made to the guns,
and, after a few minutes' argument with the enemy, we returned and
finished listening to the discourse. Somehow or other one could not
help feeling that the two happenings were incongruous!

We had a notion that perhaps the enemy would make an attempt to
retaliate on us at New Year for our little joke on 'Xmas Eve, and this
proved to be correct. He made rather a feeble demonstration, and it
was speedily squashed, as we were awaiting it. It was an extraordinary
thing, but we always found our foe very slow in the uptake: it
generally took him quite a week to think out some measure of
retaliation, and when it came, it consisted, as a rule, in copying
what we had done to him. We could usually count on that and
consequently guard against it.

One day instructions came through calling for a report on a new
charge, for reducing the flashes when night firing, which was supposed
to be in our possession. Our worthy Senior Subaltern was at that time
in command, so he decided to have the trial the same evening and put
in his report at once. The remaining officers were to "stand by" at
the guns and first fire a salvo with the ordinary charge and then one
with the new one, while he stood some distance in front to wait the
results. All went well and the salvoes were duly fired, although, at
the battery end, there did not appear to be any difference between
them, which fact was unanimously agreed upon. However, that was not
the opinion of the Senior Subaltern, who waxed eloquent on the "soft,
velvety colour" of the new charge. This was all set down presently, in
a lengthy dispatch covering, at least, two columns of "foolscap," and
sent to the Brigade. Nothing further was heard for several days, then
a telephone message came through which brought a smile to the face of
everyone in the mess except the officer concerned. It ran as
follows:--"Reference my B214 of the 9th inst. Report on flash      (p. 021)
reducing charges is herewith cancelled. The production of same has not
yet been issued to batteries in the field A.A.A." Both salvoes had
been of the same nature!

Our Right Section Commander had a mania for spy hunting, and it was
true that spies were known to infest the neighbourhood and had
sometimes actually been caught. On every available occasion this
officer would set out to scour the countryside in quest of a suspect.
One day this led to the waste of much energy on his part. Having
followed hard on the scent of a suspicious character, from one end of
our area to the other, the quarry suddenly doubled back along the La
Bassee road and disappeared into a house. Our friend entered also, and
found himself in a Brigade Headquarters, confronted by the "spy," who
greeted him warmly, and asked him what service he could render him, at
the same time calling for tea. He had shadowed none other than the
chief Intelligence Officer of the Division the whole afternoon! There
was nothing for it but to own up and apologise as best he could, to
the vast amusement of the Staff Officer. After this incident, we were
spared further wild-goose chases by this enthusiast, and the keenness
hitherto shown by him for these quests somewhat abated.

A good deal of excitement was caused, at this time, by the arrival of
some heavy artillery in our neighbourhood, so much talk had come to
our ears concerning them. The guns were duly placed in position, and
on the afternoon on which they were to open fire a large turn out of
F.O.O.'s collected in the O.P.'s to watch the enemy get a surprise.
They did considerable damage, but, at the same time, were largely
responsible for stirring up a veritable wasp's nest of hostile heavies
which had been lying dormant for ages, and consequently our front
again became active.

While our F.O.O. was proceeding one day from the O.P. to the front
line, he was caught in one of those bursts of hate and separated from
the telephonists who accompanied him. On the conclusion of the shoot,
a search was made for him, but he was nowhere to be found. They returned
to the Battery and reported the circumstance to the B.C., who, much
concerned, speedily organised a search-party, and set out for the
scene of action. After a couple of hours weary tramping, they came
upon a Company Headquarters in the front line, and there, comfortably
ensconced in an easy-chair, with a large whisky-and-soda by his    (p. 022)
side and a cigarette in his mouth, sat the missing officer. Much
indignation was expressed and explanations followed, but, in future,
it was only in the last extremity that search parties were instituted!

Thus the days sped by, until it came to the minds of those in
authority that the Division had vegetated quite long enough in this
area, and, at the beginning of February, we were pulled out and
transferred to another sphere of activity.

Everyone regretted leaving this peaceful spot, and the period we spent
there was always looked back upon as the brightest and happiest time
of our sojourn in France.




CHAPTER IV.                                                        (p. 023)

In "The Salient."


It soon became known that we were bound for Ypres. This town will,
without doubt, be the Mecca in France of the British soldier for all
time. This place, above all others, was always mentioned with a voice
of reverence and awe, and is hallowed by the presence of the gallant
dead who helped in its defence. It was truly the most ill-favoured
sector on the whole of the front held by our armies.

Proceeding by way of Hazebrouck and Cassel, we entered the area
immediately behind the Salient and took up our quarters near the
village of Arneke, for we were not yet due for our spell of duty in
the line. At this time the weather was most unpropitious, and rendered
training in any shape or form out of the question. The ground was
covered with snow to the depth of several inches, and the roads were,
for the most part, frost-bound. A Divisional Artillery Horse Show was
organised, however, and great keenness was displayed by all the
batteries, who spent most of their time horse coping until the day of
the event, which was held at Zeggers Capelle. Our Right Section
Commander, with a team of fine little blacks, managed to secure the
second prize in the principal event.

Several days afterwards we relieved the Division who were holding the
left centre of the Salient, and took up our position on the northern
extremity of Ypres itself, close to the Dead End of the Canal, a short
distance from "Salvation Corner." Here a short description of the
position is imperative, in order to give some idea of the awkward
nature of this sector and of the conditions attaching thereto. The
distance between the jaws of the Salient was some five miles
across--from the banks of the Yser Canal at Boesinghe on the north to
the neighbourhood of St. Eloi on the south, while the ground held by
us extended about two-and-a half miles east of Ypres in a semi-circle.
Nearly everywhere the enemy was established on rising ground and   (p. 024)
overlooked our territory, and, with few exceptions, all that was
visible to us was his first line system. The enemy was thus enabled to
detect any movement behind our line, while we were more or less
"blind."

Owing to the confined space through which an entrance into the Salient
could be effected, great difficulty was experienced in the matter of
transport, as there was only one main artery, namely, the
Ypres-Poperinghe road. Every evening at dusk this thoroughfare was
crowded with all manner of vehicles, an endless stream, coming and
going throughout the night, and from Vlamertinghe onwards the road was
subjected to constant shelling, and was enfiladed from either side.
Piles of wreckage were always to be seen on the following morning,
which told the tale of the previous night's work, and this long,
straight piece of road holds more sentiment for the British soldier
than any other.

It was soon quite evident that the enemy was acquainted with our
location, and it was imperative to prepare an alternative position. A
site was chosen across the road, in the garden of a private villa,
well sheltered by shrubs and trees. As soon as the work was completed
and a communication trench constructed, covered with turf and plants,
we commenced moving the guns. This was done without interference from
the enemy until the last gun was in the act of being placed in
position, when, as luck would have it, a shrapnel shell burst in front
of the party, mortally wounding one layer and injuring another. Our
B.C., also, who was assisting, received a bullet through his arm, and
was forced to leave us. This was the second mishap we had suffered
during the course of the first few days, as the Right Section
Commander had already been lost to us. Having an insatiable thirst for
knowledge, this Officer had left the O.P. with his telephonist in
order to explore the front line, which, as everyone who knows the
Salient will readily own, was somewhat difficult to recognise in
places, especially by a newcomer. Suffering as he did from acute
absent-mindedness, it was not surprising that this zealous officer
awakened suddenly from his day-dreams to discover that something was
wrong, and found himself standing with his companion waist high in a
shallow disused trench, which, on further investigation, appeared
uncommonly like "No Man's Land!" After a brief consultation, they
decided to retrace their steps. Alas! all too late: a hostile sniper,
reserving his fire in the hope that they would continue to walk    (p. 025)
into the enemy trenches, on seeing them turn about, and thus being
baulked of his prize and the prospect of a fortnight's leave in his
own country, fired a bullet which passed through the thighs of both
men one after the other. A party of our infantry, unable to attract
their attention and put them right in time, had witnessed this little
drama, and proceeded, at great personal risk and at the expense of at
least one of their number being wounded, to extricate the two
unfortunates and convey them to the nearest dressing station. It was
not until a late hour that night that word came to us at the Mess that
the missing party had been passed through the prison at Ypres, on
their way to a C.C.S. Now, our Battery Commander, after great trouble,
had lately gained possession of an improved type of periscope, which
he had been persuaded to lend the F.O.O. on that day, and, on receipt
of this news, his first thought was for the safety of his precious
instrument. The fact that two valuable casualties had resulted did not
seem to weigh with him in the least compared with its loss, and he was
not to be consoled until it was ascertained that the periscope was in
safe keeping. Only then could he be persuaded to make enquiries as to
the nature of their wounds and express his sorrow at their misfortune.

The Infantry found the trenches in an appalling state, and forthwith
proceeded to repair them, but the enemy would not allow this to go on
long, and, after a few days' work had been spent on them, a couple of
hours' bombardment would suffice to demolish anything that had been
done. As it was a case of labour lost, all attempts at building on a
large scale were soon abandoned.

Many interesting excursions were made in and around the town. There
was a certain amount of splendour about the ruined place. The high
battered remains of the Cloth Hall Tower stood up in proud defiance in
the centre of the stricken city, while the ancient ramparts
surrounding it gloried in their battle scars and showed a dauntless
front to the enemy.

A good deal of annoyance was caused in getting about from place to
place through the uncongenial presence of a couple of hostile high
velocity guns which were commonly known as "Quick Dick" and "Silent
Sue," his consort. They were so named on account of the rapidity with
which the shells arrived, and there was little or no warning of their
coming. Their chief object was to harass the neighbourhood, for    (p. 026)
they appeared to have no definite target but just dropped a shell
here and there, trapping the unwary and doing considerable damage, as
well as effectively raising a certain amount of "wind"!

As conditions suited the enemy admirably, many raids were made by him,
and, on one occasion, he launched four simultaneously, one on each
sector of the Salient, after a sharp and heavy bombardment. He
attacked us between Wieltje and Potijge, but was unsuccessful in his
endeavour to obtain an identification. The attempt was frustrated, and
the only result was that he left a number of prisoners in our hands.

About the middle of May, the Division came out and returned to the
area behind Poperinghe. There was an unexpected treat in store for the
Brigade, for it was shortly sent down to the coast for a change of
air. A two days' march brought the Battery to Cap Gris Nez, while the
other batteries were distributed along the small villages between
Calais and Boulogne. It was a real holiday for us, and a better part
of the year could not have been chosen. All that was expected of us
was to exercise the "hairies," which we did by taking the guns a walk
along the hard sand in the early mornings.

A large field was secured, and for several hours daily the horses were
put out to grass, and, if ever animals showed signs of joy, they
certainly did, and their antics were most amusing to witness. It was
expected that some difficulty would be experienced in catching them
again, but, after the first day, a trumpet call was all that was
required. On hearing the sound, they would throw up their heads, and
then slowly wander towards the entrance, where the drivers awaited and
secured them.

The main feature of the day was, undoubtedly, the bathing parade,
enjoyed equally by man and beast. The horses knew at once what was in
store for them when they were led down to the beach. The men stripped,
and, mounting the eager horses, a wild dash was made for the water,
and quite a number of the animals proved themselves excellent
swimmers, many remaining a considerable time in deep water. On leaving
the sea, they would gallop along the sands, showing every sign of
contentment, and we were glad that, at last, they were receiving some
reward for their patient devotion and faithful service, for we were
all fond of our four-legged comrades.

Amusements were instituted for the men--all manner of sports by    (p. 027)
day and concerts in the evenings. The officers lived out of doors,
attracted by the cliffs, from which Dover was visible on most clear
days, and everyone voted this peaceful place the next best thing to
home leave.

It was, therefore, with much regret that, at the end of twelve days,
we retraced our steps to Arneke, where we were to remain for the
latter portion of the rest.

We had no sooner arrived at this place than the enemy started making
himself unpleasant in the southern portion of the Salient, and,
attacking the Canadians from Hooge as far as St. Eloi, succeeded in
driving them back some distance before he was finally held up. It was
quite imperative to retake the ground lost, as he had captured
important points of observation overlooking the Salient. A counter
attack was set on foot, and we were suddenly called upon to help in
the preliminary bombardment and cover the assaulting troops, which
included a Brigade of Guards. Just before setting off, our B.C.
rejoined us once more, and at two hours' notice we made a beeline for
the scene of our future activity. At dusk we entered the ruins of
Ypres, and, without delay, proceeded to dig ourselves "in," behind a
convent, not far from the south side of the Cloth Hall.

Owing to the number of extra batteries assembled for the operations,
we found ourselves without a billet until the genial Commander of a
Pioneer Battalion, affectionately known to the entire Dominion Forces
as "Big Jim," and credited with innumerable deeds of "daring do," took
pity upon us, and invited us to share his hearth and home. This offer
we gratefully accepted, and accommodation was also provided for the
detachment, and all were made most comfortable.

The bombardment continued for three days, and it became clear, from
the enemy's counter preparations, that he was not going to give up his
newly acquired gains without a struggle. A most stubborn resistance
was offered, and the infantry were forced to fight hard for every foot
of ground that was eventually recovered. The bombardment grew in
intensity as the zero hour approached. Shortly after midnight, the men
went over, and, by breakfast time, had gained all that was required of
them, except at one or two points, which were taken without much
trouble later.

By the time affairs had settled down normally again, the Division was
due in the line, so the Battery pulled out for one night, before   (p. 028)
transferring to our new zone, which was in the most northerly sector,
adjoining the one in which we had already been, and which had an even
worse reputation for unpleasantness.

After crossing the Yser Canal, the ground gradually rises towards
Pilkem Ridge, and the enemy was ensconced thereon in a kind of
stronghold known as the High Command Redoubt. Our trenches lay beneath
them, which gave us the feeling of being in a cup encircled round the
brim by our foes. During this particular tour, the Battery was split
up for the purpose of forming two forward sections, and the greater
part of the firing was done by the left section, whose position was
well inside the Salient. Its chief object was to harass a certain
portion of a hostile trench which was taken in enfilade by it! In
order to accomplish this successfully, the guns were placed in an old
disused position in a field, near La Brique, on the backward slope of
a hill, and the low gun-pits were completely covered with tufts of
growing grass. The centre pits were occupied by the two pieces and the
outside ones were speedily converted into habitations for the men.

When the trenches were not being subjected to hostile shelling, the
enemy devoted most of his time in endeavouring to destroy the numerous
O.P.'s dotted about here and there. These were constructed for the
most part of reinforced concrete, but the particular one used by us,
called "Frascatis," had not yet been discovered, so we were free to
carry out shoots to our heart's content.

A favourite diversion was sniping with one of our pieces, which was a
particularly accurate one, and several points of observation and
snipers' posts were carefully registered. Then we would lie in wait,
observe some movement, and let fly one round only. This method
exasperated and annoyed the enemy exceedingly.

One of the enemy's principal forms of amusement was to blow parts of
our front parapet away and train a machine gun on the space left
vacant, and snipe at any unsuspecting person who happened to pass
along. On many occasions we were able to bring assistance to the
harassed infantrymen, by spotting the offending snipers, and by, in
turn, sniping at them with our "How." till we finally silenced them.

At dusk the enemy invariably harassed all roads of communication, and
dropped innumerable shells of large calibre into the stricken      (p. 029)
city; and we made a habit of sitting at the entrance to the little
shack, used as the officers' mess, smoking our evening pipes,
interested spectators, while the shells screamed overhead, and
alighted somewhere in the town, sending up columns of brick dust.

All the batteries in the line were now busy constructing new battery
positions, while fresh O.P.'s were also erected, and it was thought
that these preparations were preparatory to making an attack to enable
us to improve our position by the capture of Pilkem Ridge, but,
although the work was completed, nothing further developed.

Soon there were whispers of an impending gigantic attack away down in
the south, and for several days before the opening of it our shelling
was considerably increased, while the infantry made a series of raids.
This was done throughout the whole length of the front, in order to
keep the enemy from guessing the exact point of eruption, and we had a
warm time in consequence. For a long time after the battle had
commenced, we continued making demonstrations, which undoubtedly
helped to prevent the removal of many reserves from the locality.

But we were not content to remain here. There was a great scrap taking
place elsewhere, and were we going to be left completely out of it, to
eat our heads off, in Flanders? It seemed very unlikely that the
Division would not be called upon on such an occasion, and great was
the joy when one day orders came through that we were soon to proceed
to the scene of action. Within two days we pulled out to our old
resting place, where preparations were completed for our transference
to the battle area.

Our first acquaintance with the dreaded Salient was at an end, and,
although the time spent there was always strenuous and difficult, we
were not what could be called uncomfortable, and our casualties
happily did not exceed expectations.




CHAPTER V.                                                         (p. 030)

On the Somme.


At the beginning of August, the Division detrained in the
neighbourhood of Doullens, and, proceeding in a southeasterly
direction, the Brigade established itself near the small village of
Couin. In a few days' time we went "in," and the Battery took up a
position on the southern outskirts of Hebuterne, overlooking the enemy
stronghold at Serre. This portion of the front was now in a normal
state once more, as, on the opening day of the great battle, the
British assault from Hamel, northward to Gommecourt, had met with no
success, and the attack was not further pressed. The enemy was content
to remain quiet, and most of the firing was carried out by us. A
considerable number of hostile "Minnies" made conditions somewhat
unpleasant for the infantry in the trenches, and during the night the
battery position was subjected to indirect machine-gun fire, which
necessitated a certain amount of caution in moving about. The O.P.'s
were well placed, and afforded us an excellent view, for we overlooked
the enemy's lines, and could see some distance beyond them. We were
now on the fringe of the battle, and away half right, on clear days,
we could see the struggle progressing, as a considerable dent had
already been made. The sight was a very grand one, especially after
dark. The Verey Lights and various S.O.S. rockets, which were
frequently sent up by our opponents, made a fine spectacular display,
far finer than any firework exhibition we had ever witnessed in our
own country in pre-war days.

Gradually the Division was side-slipped to the south, and our next
position was close to the station of Mailly. We did not remain there
long, however, as the time had now arrived for us to put in an
appearance in the battle itself. We spent one night close to       (p. 031)
Amiens, and availed ourselves of the opportunity to hold a dinner
there, which was attended by all the original officers in the
Brigade--a last night of fun and merriment before the long, stiff
fight ahead of us, for who knew how many would survive the ordeal. The
next day brought us to Vaux, on the River Somme, and, in the first
week in September, we found ourselves immersed in the battle. We took
up our first position in the lately captured second line German
system, facing Montauban and covering Guillemont, which had just been
taken by an Irish Division.

Very stiff lighting was in progress on this sector, as we were now
nearing the summit of the Ridge, the possession of which would be
invaluable, as the enemy's territory would be laid bare to us, and he
would lose his observation over us. It was not surprising, therefore,
that he fought with the courage of despair and initiated
counter-attack upon counter-attack, all of which we had to meet with
great determination. The weather was extremely hot, which added much
to the discomfort: and, as progress had been very slow for some time,
it was impossible to clear up the battlefield, and the stench was
almost insupportable. At length the village of Guinchy was captured,
and, with our men installed on the further side of the slope, the
fighting for position came to an end. We were now entering on the
third stage of the great battle, which had commenced more than two
months previously. An attack, on a large scale, was planned, the
object being to drive the enemy down the slope of the hill into the
low-lying country beyond. Field batteries were moved up into forward
positions, in order to assist the infantry, by placing a creeping
barrage--a new and most successful invention, afterwards employed on
all occasions--in front of the advancing waves of men: and the
"heavies," of which, for the first time, we possessed a preponderance,
pounded the enemy communications far behind his lines.

The assault was delivered over a wide area, early in the morning of the
15th of September, but in no way did it come up to expectations--in
fact, it might almost be counted a reverse. Some divisions did well,
and took their objectives, but others were completely held up, at
certain strong points, which necessitated the withdrawal of the
remainder, in order to keep the line uniform. The Guards met with
instant success, and took their final objectives, only to discover
that the Division on each side of them had made little progress    (p. 032)
and could get no further. They were reluctantly forced to return, and
it was while doing so that heavy casualties were inflicted on them, as
they were raked with fire from the sides as well as in front. During
the withdrawal, a party of machine-gunners occupied a trench, and
attempted to screen the retirement of the main body of troops, by
holding the enemy at bay. In order to use this machine-gun to the best
advantage, the piece was placed on top of the parapet, exposed to the
full view of the oncoming hordes, but our men never wavered in serving
it, and, as soon as one gunner dropped at his post, another instantly
took the vacant place, although it meant certain death within a few
moments.

Next day they were pulled out to refit, and, as they marched back to
rest, a very touching sight was witnessed. A certain battalion, a mere
remnant, swung along, headed by its band. All the officers had become
casualties, and the Battalion Sergeant-Major was in command, but as
many of the dead officers as could be recovered were brought back on
stretchers and placed each in his proper position. Headed by the body
of their late Commander, the column proceeded on its way, the men
marching at attention, and, although covered with mud and
blood-stained, they might have been proceeding down the Mall. Such is
the discipline of the Guards, and every tribute of respect was paid
them by the troops through whom they passed.

The next battle was timed for the 25th inst., and our infantry came
back to the line a couple of days before that date. There was much
suppressed excitement and curiosity, for the mysterious Tanks were to
participate on this occasion for the first time, and it was thought
that the secret had been so well kept that they would come as a
complete surprise to the enemy. This proved to be the case, and the
attack was a great success. What was known as the Flers line was
everywhere penetrated, and all gains were held. The Tanks did splendid
work. They advanced well ahead of the infantry, and battered down
barbed wire, overran trenches, smashed machine-gun emplacements,
killing the gun crews, and even waddled as far as the village of
Gueudecourt. There they effected much execution and caused great panic
among the enemy reserves, which were concentrating for the inevitable
counter attack.

Thus the battle continued, sometimes breaking out into fierce fights
and at other times reduced to isolated scraps, but all the time    (p. 033)
the enemy was being gradually and relentlessly pushed down into
the valley, and the villages of Morval, Les Boeufs, and Gueudecourt
fell into our hands.

It was almost uncanny the way in which villages would completely
disappear. For instance, at the time when these hamlets first came
within our vision, on our reaching the crest of the hill, they appeared
almost intact, but a few days rendered them unrecognisable--they had
become merely so many heaps of rubble. There are many places on the
Somme which have literally not one brick standing on top of another,
and one would never imagine for a moment that a prosperous little
village had ever existed there.

Many changes of battery positions were made, and, whenever possible,
we burrowed down into the ground, as the enemy's heavy pieces were out
after our blood. The great concentration of guns and the few suitable
localities for placing them in action added to our difficulties, and
we were thus rendered an easy target for the hostile counter
batteries. Innumerable brigades were huddled close together, in what
was known as the Death Valley, for the simple reason that there was no
other suitable spot wherein to place them, and heavy casualties
resulted. We had the good fortune, however, to be somewhat isolated
from the others, and occupied a forward position, where the guns were
hidden in an old German communication trench. The enemy never found
it, but subjected us, now and again, to a general burst of harassing
fire: his main volume of hate passed us by far overhead.

And, meanwhile, what of our friend the F.O.O.? In those days his lot
was by no means an enviable one, and it was a task of no mean
magnitude to keep communications going between the trenches and the
guns. However, it had to be done, or at least attempted, and the
following is a brief account of a typical day in the life of a gunner
subaltern.

Orders would be given that a certain hostile trench was to be
subjected to a severe, annihilating bombardment, and this necessitated
the laying out of a wire to a part of our front line, from which the
shoot could be registered, as the target could not be observed from
any other locality than the trench immediately opposite it. The F.O.O.
rises early in the morning, and sets out with his little squad of
telephonists and linesmen. He requires to post a signalman and
linesman at frequent intervals, called Relay Stations, in order    (p. 034)
to preserve communication, as the wire is being continually broken by
hostile gun-fire. Progress, in a case like this, is necessarily slow,
and he has to pick his way among the shell-holes, seeking as much
protection, for the line, as circumstances will permit. The signallers
follow in his footsteps, staggering along under the weight of a large
reel of wire. All goes well until they reach the summit of a ridge,
when, suddenly, a barrage from a "whizz bang" battery is placed right
down on top of the party. There is nothing for it but to remain
crouched in a friendly shell-hole, which affords a little protection,
until the storm blows over or to risk the chances of being hit in the
open. The journey is then resumed, and much relief is felt when at
last the ground over a nasty dip is traversed without mishap, as this
is known to be a favourite target for hostile gunners. A muddy,
unkempt communication-trench is now entered, and the party proceed, up
a slope, towards the support system, and eventually arrive at their
destination--a post in the front line overlooking its objective.
Difficulty is experienced in preserving the wire from the unguarded
feet of infantrymen, who look askance at the party as it passes,
cursing the idiosyncrasies of each fire bay. The instrument is
connected with the end of the wire, and all hold their breath in order
to hear the answering buzz which tells them that they are through to
the battery. Several futile buzzes may be made by the telephonist, and
then, no response being forthcoming, a linesman is sent down the wire
towards the first relay station. A break in the wire is discovered and
speedily mended, the next attempt is successful, and the battery is
called to action.

During registration the wire often breaks, and serious delays occur,
but, at length, the last gun is duly pronounced O.K. by the officer.
Just in the nick of time, too! for the enemy commences a sharp
retaliation on the portion of the trench occupied by the little party.
Refuge is sought in an old enemy shaft close by, and there it awaits
the time for the "show" to commence. Several other batteries also take
part in the shoot, and it is quite impossible to pick out the shells
which belong to each one as they fall. Complete success crowns the
effort, but on the particular day here described the F.O.O. and party
failed to see the end of the bout, as they were subjected to very
heavy fire, and were all blown down the mouth of the shaft by the
explosion of a shell. Luckily, though badly shaken, all escaped
without injury.

Meanwhile the wire has been broken in many places and is beyond    (p. 035)
repair, but it has already served its purpose, and, when fire has died
down, the party starts on the return journey. On arriving at the first
relay station, the telephonist on duty is found dead at his post, the
receiver still clutched in his hand and held to his ear. A nasty gash
in the forehead reveals the place where he has been hit and instantly
killed. His companion is nowhere to be found, although bloodstains
denote that he has at least been wounded, and, on investigation, it is
ascertained that the linesman has been hit, picked up by passing
comrades, and taken to an aid-post. The journey is resumed, the party
carrying the dead with them, and presently another hostile barrage is
encountered. Again the men lie low until it ceases, and then pick up
the remaining linesmen, and return to the battery utterly exhausted.
Many questions are asked, and it frequently happens that the F.O.O. is
cursed by his Battery Commander for not keeping the wire going, and
even the Brigade joins in the chorus. The young officer pays little
heed, and inwardly reflects that they should be extremely thankful
that communication was established at all, and that those of the party
who returned did so in safety. So, in spite of everything, he consumes
a hearty dinner and retires to bed, sleeping the sleep of the just,
and soon becomes oblivious of all his little worries and sombre
surroundings.

Towards the middle of October the weather broke, and conditions became
intolerable. The roads, which had been partially repaired, were still
soft and broken, and developed into quagmires--mud and water to a
depth of two and three feet made vehicular traffic almost out of the
question. All ammunition had to be transported to the guns by means of
horses carrying pack saddles, a slow and tedious method, which took a
lot out of men and beasts alike. As yet no decca-ville railways had
been constructed as far as battery positions. Very heavy work thus
fell on those at the wagon lines, who were kept busy most of the day
and night. Although the distance to the gun position was under five
miles there and back, the journey rarely took less than ten hours to
accomplish. If a horse fell down in this sticky mud, heavily laden as
it was, attempts at rescue proved unavailing, except on rare
occasions, even with the aid of drag-ropes, and the unfortunate animal
had to be "dispatched." Was it a sense of humour that prompted those
in authority to send the subalterns, in turn, to the wagon lines for a
"rest"? Anyhow, it was considered anything but that by the poor    (p. 036)
unfortunates who went, and right glad they were when the time came
round for their next period of duty with the guns!

As the weather rapidly became worse, operations came to a standstill,
and all proceeded to dig themselves in for the coming winter. Every
endeavour was made to make our quarters water-proof, as well as
shell-proof, and some attempts at mining were commenced, but the
condition of the ground was all against such an undertaking, and the
work was abandoned. Then whispers spread abroad that we were to be
relieved for a short rest, and, after ten weeks of incessant fighting,
we were withdrawn from the line and marched to a little village named
Hangest, a few miles west of Amiens. There we were glad to find
ourselves installed in billets with a roof covering us once more. A
week of leisure helped greatly to restore our spirits, and again we
set out for the line. Our destination this time was Combles, and we
took over a battery position from the French, who politely made us
acquainted with our new surroundings. Our allies, who had been
fighting side-by-side with us on our right flank throughout the great
battle, were then withdrawn, and the British front was extended to the
south as far as the banks of the River Somme. Evidence was speedily
forthcoming to convince us of the severe nature of the recent fight.
The ground was strewn with wreckage and material of all descriptions,
and many hostile guns were found abandoned or lying where they had
been put out of action by the irresistible dash of the Poilus.

The country, in this part, was undulating, and better suited to the
concealment of battery positions, and nowhere was the enemy able to
overlook our territory. Our area included the defence of the joint
villages of Sailly-Saillisel, situated on commanding ground, which the
French had recently bravely stormed. Combles, too, which lay in a
basin shaped hollow, was interesting as having been the centre of
supplies for the southern portion of the German Army operating in the
battle, and much booty was discovered in the huge catacombs which ran
underneath the town.

'Xmas passed in much the same way as in the previous year. A smart
bombardment was carried out in the morning in order to advise the enemy
that anything in the way of fraternising would not be countenanced by us.
At mid-day the men partook of their 'Xmas fare, which had been     (p. 037)
fetched from Amiens, and a short service was conducted by the Padre in
one of the gun-pits. A slight disturbance took place at dusk, when the
S.O.S. went up from the front line and all batteries immediately
opened out. It seemed a rather extraordinary occurrence, as the
evening was unusually quiet, and, presently, it was discovered to have
arisen through an error, due to the fact that the enemy had put up a
coloured light in between two ordinary Verey lights which constituted
our own S.O.S.

About this time the enemy caused considerable annoyance to a certain
Battalion Headquarters, situated in a quarry close behind the lines,
by occasionally dropping a shell right into it, the position having
probably been discovered by his aircraft. Retaliation tactics were
adopted, which consisted of subjecting the hostile trenches to a sharp
half-hour's bombardment from eight batteries, firing a total of 2,000
rounds. The enemy was well known to be very thick-skinned, but these
measures met with instant success, and it was only necessary to remind
him once again that we were not to be trifled with in this way.

After the New Year, a severe spell of frost set in, with an occasional
heavy fall of snow, and we were somewhat annoyed when orders came
through to sideslip our position further south, as we had made our
quarters fairly comfortable by this time, and expected to remain
undisturbed throughout the winter. The new position was situated
behind the ruined village of Rancourt, facing St. Pierre Vaast wood,
and was one of the worst and most disagreeable localities it was ever
our lot to occupy, as we were, more or less, water-logged the whole of
our time there. Much difficulty was experienced by both friend and foe
in entering their respective front line, so much so that, by common
consent, sniping by rifle fire was discontinued until parapets were
constructed and made fit for occupation. However, sniping was still
indulged in by the artillery, and no parties of any size were
permitted to go about freely near the front line under observation.
Affairs continued thus until the middle of February, when it became
apparent that something unusual was taking place in enemy territory,
and great explosions were heard, after which volumes of smoke were
seen to rise in large columns. These, as was afterwards proved, were
due to preparations being made by the enemy to evacuate the low-lying
country, into which they had reluctantly been forced, as the result of
the battle of the Somme, prior to falling back upon the great      (p. 038)
prepared defences known as the Hindenburg Line.

Instantly every one was on the alert for further signs of evacuation,
and one morning a patrol reported that the enemy had vacated their
front line. Further patrols were at once pushed out, through St.
Pierre Vaast wood, in order to maintain contact with the retreating
foe. Every precaution had to be taken, as it was soon discovered that
many forms of booby-traps had been cunningly laid by him in his wake,
and progress was necessarily slow. Added to this, there was great
difficulty in manoeuvring the guns over the innumerable trenches
which existed in the neighbourhood, and the pieces sank up to their
axles in the clogging mud, and were only extricated after hours of
labour. The enemy retired slowly and most methodically, destroying
everything of value and wantonly reducing the small villages and
hamlets to mere shells, by means of incendiary bombs. The inhabitants
also were removed beforehand, and, when the troops advanced, they
might have been traversing a wilderness, so complete was the ruin and
desolation on all sides.

The time had now arrived for the Brigade to have a much-needed rest
and also to refit, so, at the end of March, we were withdrawn from the
contest. Marching westward, we arrived at the village of Morlancourt
in the first week of April, well content at the prospect of returning
to civilization for a protracted period.

[Illustration: Division from Brigade R.F.A. Guards Division.]




CHAPTER VI.                                                        (p. 039)

Messines.


It was not long before those in authority discovered that the
neighbourhood of Morlancourt was peculiarly favourable for the
carrying out of manoeuvres, with the result that a period of
"intensive training" set in. Drill orders took place four days a week,
and batteries were specially trained in the methods of open warfare,
while many hours were devoted to tactical schemes.

At this time units were reorganised, all batteries were increased to
six guns, and there was plenty of work to keep everyone busy. The
narrator of these rambling notes, after a period of two years' service
with the Brigade, here transferred his allegiance to the sister
howitzer battery of the Division, known as "The Grey Battery," from
the fact that all the horses were of that colour. Sentiment ran strong
for his "old love" and those he was obliged to leave, but he was
already well acquainted with both officers and men of his new unit,
and soon settled down happily amongst them.

All guns were carefully calibrated on a range due west of Peronne, and
the "hairies" picked up rapidly in condition, owing to the good care
and attention that was bestowed upon them. The big battles of Vimy
Ridge and Arras were now in full swing, and it seemed unlikely that we
would be called upon to take any part in them so late in the day.

Many forms of amusement were created for the men, and football
matches, both "rugger" and "soccer," were freely indulged in between
batteries and brigades, while the full regimental band of one of the
Guards' regiments was kindly lent to the Divisional Artillery. It gave
many a fine entertainment in the evenings.

Time thus sped by at an amazing rate, and various visits of inspection
paid us by officers from the C.R.A. up to the Army Commander made  (p. 040)
it very apparent that we were undoubtedly being "fattened up"--but for
what? The question was more than we could answer, but speculations
were rife as to our possible destination, for we knew that the Somme
would see us no more--in the meantime, at all events.

Six weeks had come and gone, and yet we remained inactive in this
peaceful village; then sudden orders were issued for us to be ready to
entrain at short notice, and, in the second week of May, the Battery
glided out of the station at Meulte prepared for anything. A long and
circuitous route was taken _via_ Amiens, Abbeville, Etaples, Boulogne,
Calais, St. Omer, and at length we arrived at Arques, near which we
remained, in billets, for some considerable time. It was while we were
there that we learnt that it was the intention of the British
Commander to gain possession of the great Messines Ridge, which
towered over our lines, and was a stronghold of inestimable value to
the enemy.

As long as he held this ridge, which was the keystone of his armies in
Flanders, he was immune from any vulnerable attack on our part, and
was free to launch any offensive operation from it by using it as a
stepping-off place. Added to this, the northern end of the heights
afforded him an uninterrupted view of the southern portion of the
Ypres salient, which was a source of great annoyance to our forces on
that part of the front. It was vital, therefore, for the future
operations of the British Armies, that this important ridge should be
captured and kept in our hands.

Preparations were accordingly set on foot, and artillery of all
calibre was silently concentrated from all parts, and proceeded to dig
itself in for the coming fray. For a long time this sector had been
free from any serious operations, and was considered a kind of resting
place for exhausted troops, but soon the peace and quiet of the
neighbourhood was to receive a rude awakening, when the tide of battle
broke out upon it once more.

Proceeding through Hazebrouck and Bailleul, the Brigade arrived at its
wagon lines, a short distance west of Neuve Eglise, and immediately
each battery sent work parties to the scene of action, in order to
construct emplacements and make its position habitable. The spot
allotted to our battery was in a little hollow close to the cut roads,
near the small ruined village of Wulverghen. Our front line was placed
on the top of an undulating rise, with the ridge itself beyond.

Our principal business was to avoid attracting the attention of    (p. 041)
the enemy to our preparations, and in this we were aided by the
fact that there was a considerable amount of cover beside us, in the
form of trees and undergrowth, the foliage of which was now in full
leaf.

Row upon row of batteries were placed in position behind hedges, or
artificially concealed, the barrels of the pieces peeping out from all
imaginable lurking places. The Divisional Artillery was situated in
the most advanced position, the 18 pr. batteries ranging from within
600 to 1,000 yards of the front line, with the howitzer batteries
immediately behind them. On account of our proximity to the enemy, the
two brigades had orders to remain silent until the day of the show,
and we were only allowed to fire enough rounds to enable us to
carefully register the pieces, and this was completed without giving
away any of the positions.

All ammunition was conveyed to the guns by night, and was distributed
in small quantities near to them. Before long the enemy became alive
to the fact that we were contemplating some move, and consequently
increased his devastating fire by night, with the result that many
dumps in the vicinity were exploded by him. He was bound to hit
something, the countryside was so packed with all manner of
ammunition. He had no idea, however, of the magnitude of our coming
effort, and firmly believed his position to be impregnable, and that
it was beyond our power to free ourselves from his grip.

He contented himself with drenching our little valley with chemical
shell whenever conditions were favourable, but so accustomed were the
men to their gas masks that no serious consequences resulted, although
it was distinctly unpleasant to have to pass each night enveloped in
these stuffy contrivances, especially as the weather remained hot and
oppressive.

The Battery had more than their average share of good fortune
throughout these operations, and it is worthy of putting on record
that the unit did not sustain a single casualty to either man or
horse. This was all the more remarkable as the engineers had
constructed a wide plank road, which passed through the centre of our
position, and could not be concealed from our foes, who lavishly
besprinkled it with shrapnel after dark. Many casualties were caused
to the transport, and the Officers' Mess virtually became an aid-post,
where every assistance was rendered the wounded men.

Our sister howitzer battery was lined up alongside of us, and,     (p. 042)
when the two positions were first inspected, much chaff ensued as to
which had the better place, and the men of our battery were certainly
all of the opinion that, had the selection devolved upon them, we
would unanimously have plumped for the other one. They had no
landmarks likely to attract hostile fire, and thus occasion them the
unpleasant sensation of living on top of a volcano, while we were
slap-bang in the middle of a conspicuous cross road, with a constant
stream of traffic coming and going through: yet, so strange and fickle
are the fortunes of war that, while we escaped unharmed, our comrades
next door suffered a heavy gruelling.

The preliminary bombardment commenced, and continued throughout five
days, but, in order to deceive the enemy as to our weight of
artillery, not more than fifty per cent. of the guns in the line were
allowed to take part at one time. A row of O.P.'s had been constructed
on Hill 65, which overlooked the valley and town of Messines. A fine
sight was witnessed as that stronghold was gradually reduced to a mere
shell by our heavies, which effected extraordinarily good work in
smashing the elaborate structures of the enemy's defence.

The preparations were all that could be desired, and everything was
carefully worked out to the minutest detail: not a stone was left
unturned to render the operations a complete success. The labour and
expense was well rewarded too, for surely no battle ever ran so
smoothly from first to last, and it will always be looked back upon by
the British soldier as a model of triumphant organisation. The battle
only lasted a single day, but in that time the formidable network of
trenches was neatly and clearly shorn off, and the enemy, who relied
so much on the security of these positions, found himself suddenly
pushed down the slope into unsuitable ground, where he could no longer
be a menace to us.

The "feet" of our Division were not in the line, being held in
reserve, and, as it turned out, they were not called upon at all at
this juncture, so well did the course of the battle progress. We were
covering the infantry of an English Division, and, on the evening
previous to the attack, the troops passed us noiselessly and in
perfect order on their way to their various points of assembly. All
were in excellent spirits, which augured well for the next day, and a
feeling of calm confidence appeared to prevail amongst them. A     (p. 043)
stream of gas and tear shells was maintained by the foe throughout
the night, but it was mostly directed on the zone which contained the
battery positions, consequently the infantry was caused little
inconvenience.

Early the following morning, shortly before dawn, the attack was
heralded by the explosion of the mines, which had been in course of
preparation for months beforehand. This was the sign for the guns to
open out, and the assault was launched from north of St. Eloi in the
Salient to the neighbourhood of Ploegsterte in the south, the men
following close in the wake of the now familiar and popular creeping
barrage.

The force of the explosions was terrific, and the vibration was felt
far and wide; even strong concrete "pill-boxes" were swung to and fro,
and the occupants were tossed from side to side as if they were on
board ship in a rough sea. Some indication of the colossal nature of
these upheavals may be gauged from the fact that the craters were, in
some cases, more than 200 ft. in diameter, and that the earth thrown
up obliterated every hostile trench in the vicinity, completely
burying the unfortunate garrisons who manned them.

At the same moment the sky was lit up by all manner of S.O.S. lights
and the innumerable flashes from our guns, which were now showing
their maximum strength for the first time. They belched forth
concentrated death, the roar reached such a deafening crescendo that
conversation was entirely out of the question--indeed it was
impossible to hear one's own voice. However, the scene was truly
impressive, and the grandeur was beyond anything hitherto seen.

As daylight crept in, the infantry were observed to be making rapid
progress, although, here and there, stiff opposition was encountered.
Soon the summit of the ridge was gained, and the men swept on and
disappeared over the crest, leaving the mopping-up parties to complete
their work. The Tanks bravely waddled up after them, in a vain effort
to keep up, for the attacking infantry went so fast, in the first
stages, that they easily outstripped those ponderous giants and left
them far behind.

Meanwhile the field batteries which had been in position farthest in
the rear, and so were already out of range, limbered up and dashed
into action in front of our Brigade. As soon as the next row was also
out of action, they too galloped past and took up their place      (p. 044)
again in "No Man's Land," while the Engineers worked at their highest
pressure to pull down trenches and prepare the way for the gunners.
Thus we were able to give the fullest possible support to the infantry,
and the fire never ceased, while the men always found the creeping
barrage laid down in front of them.

Early on in the fray prisoners came dribbling back in a more or less
dazed condition, and, as they passed the array of guns, they paused
and gazed in evident wonder at the huge concentration--probably
realising how fortunate they were in escaping the fate of so many of
their comrades.

Now, the enemy, although he knew an attack was imminent, had failed to
anticipate the correct zero day, with the result that, on several
portions of this front, various reliefs were in process of taking
place at the actual time of the assault. The consequence was his
defence was thrown into a state of confusion, while the extra numbers
in the trench offered a double prey for the bayonets of our men, who
were not slow in seizing the chances thus afforded them.

The whole of the first objectives were quickly in our possession, as
well as the villages of Messines and Wytscheate, and there was a
slight pause to give a breathing space to the infantry, and to allow
time for the field guns to take up their allotted positions beyond the
recently captured enemy trenches, before entering upon the second and
final stage of the battle. When the creeping barrage, which had
remained stationary during this period, went forward once more, the
infantry encountered stronger opposition, but by this time the Tanks
were well up in support, and were instrumental in breaking up the
machine-gun nests and thus enabling the men to proceed up to schedule
time.

The enemy lost a number of field artillery pieces, but had taken the
precaution to withdraw most of the heavy ones several days before,
when our bombardment commenced. His shooting, therefore, was rather
wild and erratic, as he evidently had not had sufficient time to
register his guns properly in the new positions. The result was that,
fortunately for us, most of his energy was misplaced, and, for a
battle of this magnitude, the casualties were not as heavy as might
have been expected.

By early afternoon the final objectives were everywhere in our     (p. 045)
hands, and the work of consolidating the fruitful gains that the
last few hours had yielded was immediately begun.

Several counter-attacks were attempted by the enemy, but were not
pushed with much vigour, and no success was secured in that direction:
our infantry remained firm and could not be dislodged.

Trenches were swiftly constructed, the work proceeding without
intermission, and by evening the men were, more or less, securely "dug
in," except in a few places where the line was slightly irregular, and
which was afterwards rectified by means of a small operation.

By the time the battle had finished we found ourselves the farthest
back Brigade in the line, the immense number of batteries which, at
the beginning, had been in our rear were now well in front of us, and
on this sector the Divisional Artillery were the only two Brigades who
did not move forward during the course of the fight. Moreover, by this
time we were firing almost at extreme range close to the enemy's new
front line, which gives some idea of the distance our men covered.

The day had been an exhausting one for the gunners, and, in order to
give some indication of the work and labour they had been called upon
to do, our battery alone fired over 4000 rounds of ammunition. This
was by no means a bad performance when one takes into consideration
that each shell weighs 35 lbs., and necessitated a goodly amount of
manhandling, but the men all had their "peckers well up," and
displayed much determination throughout.

For a few days following the battle there were a number of small
isolated scraps for positions, and one or two enemy counter-attacks,
before the new front settled down into something like normal
conditions again. Decca-ville and light railways were pushed up
smartly by the R.O.D., and the Engineers constructed new roads, while
Labour Battalions were busily employed repairing the old ones and
clearing up the litter of the battlefield.

Ever since we came into action it had been no secret that our stay in
this area would be of short duration, and that we were only to be
employed in the battle itself, and were only to remain as long as our
services were really required. It was no surprise when, five days  (p. 046)
later, orders came through for us to withdraw from the line. We pulled
out back to our wagon line, and from there proceeded through Bailleul
to the little hamlet of Borre, a few miles east of Hazebrouck, where
we remained pending removal to our next destination. We all had the
feeling that our recent tour had been a great success, and were well
satisfied with the part we had taken in the operations, for this was
the first occasion on which we had witnessed a battle go smoothly,
without a hitch from start to finish, and was a great contrast to any
previous one in which we had participated.

A few days in rest sufficed to put the Brigade shipshape once more,
and we were now ready for the next bout. No delay was made in
transferring us to another neighbourhood, and we set out in a
northerly direction, which boded little good, for we knew that
unpleasant events were developing in that quarter.




CHAPTER VII.                                                       (p. 047)

Ypres Again.


In the middle of June the Division arrived in the neighbourhood of
Ypres, and at once took over from the Belgians from just below
Boesinghe northwards. We were thus back on familiar ground, as we had
occupied the next sector to the south in the previous year. Although
we were not actually in the Salient itself, we were situated at the
northern re-entrant to it. The Yser Canal constituted "No Man's Land,"
the eastern bank of which was held by the enemy and the western by
ourselves.

The battery positions on this occasion were placed a considerable
distance behind, mainly around the village of Elverdinghe, as the
enemy had close observation and overlooked us from Pilkem Ridge. We
did not take long to discover that our opponents were well acquainted
with the situation of our new homes, for the majority of the batteries
were subjected at once to an avalanche of shells as soon as they
opened fire in order to register the guns. It became imperative for us
to build alternative positions or go elsewhere, while other sections
moved forward and undertook most of the firing. We had not been
settled more than a few days when the enemy suddenly conceived a
violent attraction for the house occupied by the officers' mess, and,
after several direct hits had been made on it, we decided that the
place was becoming too hot, and searched round for a more suitable
abode. We packed up, made a hasty flight, and secured accommodation in
a house which was strengthened by concrete, but even there we had to
be wary, especially at night, for we were very close to a road fork,
beloved by the enemy gunners.

The majority of the O.P.'s were also obvious to the keen eyes of the
foe, who paid them much attention on every possible occasion, and it
was just as well for the occupants that they had been strongly     (p. 048)
constructed with steel girders and concrete. On one occasion an
officer, doing a night O.P. duty, along with his telephonist, was
subjected to a full hour's bombardment by two hostile batteries, which
fired salvoes regularly every minute. Next morning there was nothing
left of the house except the skeleton, with the O.P. structure
standing out defiant in bold relief in the midst of it.

These then were the conditions on this sector at the time of our
taking it over, and it will be seen that the enemy did more or less
what he chose, and was undoubtedly top dog as far as gunnery was
concerned. However, this was not to remain long so, as almost
immediately preparations were set on foot for the coming offensive,
which had already been decided upon.

A host of new O.P.'s were erected, new roads and light railways
constructed, while large working parties prepared fresh gun pits in
advanced positions, and all were carefully camouflaged where they were
exposed to enemy view. Every day new units arrived, and the country
appeared to be overrun with troops. Most of the forward work had to be
done during the night, and, as each position was completed, the guns
were silently concentrated. While this was in progress, the Divisional
Artillery only were maintained for the defence of the line, as it was
not advisable that the enemy should know until the last possible
moment that anything unusual was afoot. The scheme was a much more
ambitious one than that in which we had recently taken a part, and, if
everything went forward according to plan, it meant that we would be
on the go for a considerable time, and there even appeared to be a
chance of getting a taste of the long-talked-of open warfare.

About this time a most amusing episode was witnessed by one of our
Subalterns who was doing a liaison with the infantry at a battalion
headquarters. This place was situated most unpleasantly, and was well
known to the enemy, consequently accommodation had to be sought
underground as much as possible. While the F.O.O. and his companion,
the Intelligence Officer, were performing their ablutions early one
morning outside the mouth of the cellar, a Brigadier with his Staff
suddenly appeared on the scene to pay a visit to the Commander. The
two Staff Officers remained outside, and opened conversation with  (p. 049)
them. The Intelligence Officer, being something of a wag, brandished
his shaving brush in one hand and with the other jocularly shoved the
Staff Captain down the steps into their retreat, and asked him what he
thought of the bedchamber. The other officer, although much amused,
stood aghast, and, after the visitors had departed, he asked his
companion to whom he had been speaking. He replied that he did not
know, for, although the Captain's features appeared familiar, he could
not "place" him, though he was a jolly sort of chap anyhow. On being
told that it was none other than the Prince of Wales that he had been
familiarly digging in the ribs for the past quarter of an hour, he was
incredulous, and exclaimed, "And to think I nearly killed the
youngster down these stairs!"

At length preparations were completed, and the two Brigades of the
Divisional Artillery took up new advanced positions alongside the
reinforcing batteries already in line, while the heavies were thickly
aligned close in the rear. The preliminary bombardment broke out about
the middle of July, and at first it was keenly resented by the enemy,
who perceived that we were gradually wrestling the initiative from
him, but when, day after day, our fire continued unabated, he
apparently resigned himself to his fate. Hurricane shoots by field
batteries soon began to make a difference in the appearance of his
trenches, and the heavies, by means of aerial registration, demolished
his strongholds far back over the crest, and destroyed many of his
battery positions. Several thick woods were facing us across the
canal, and these grew thinner, and yet more thin, disclosing cunningly
concealed pill-boxes, which were then dealt with by the heavies, until
at last only a few stumps remained to indicate that a wood had ever
existed there. The enemy's alarm grew daily, and soon our aeroplanes
reported that the hostile batteries were being withdrawn further out
of danger, and that work was proceeding feverishly upon new defences
far behind his lines. By this time we had complete control of the air,
and the heavens were alive with our aircraft, though the enemy tried
his best to equalise matters by bringing along his famous "travelling
circus" to the scene of action, and many thrilling fights were
witnessed. The batteries were subjected to much chemical shelling
during the night, and the enemy were known to bring forward special
guns under cover of darkness for this purpose, and to withdraw     (p. 050)
them out of range again before daybreak.

It was during this period that he introduced the new mustard gas for
the first time, and it must be admitted that he surprised and
inflicted considerable casualties on us at first by this latest
specimen in his assortment of poison.

Our initial attack had to be postponed for several days, as the
French, who came in immediately on our left, were delayed in putting
in their appearance, consequently they had many hours' bombardment to
make up, but, when it did commence, it was no uncertain one, and the
noise was terrific. In the meantime our bombardment was continued
also, though in a lesser degree, and the destruction of the enemy's
lines was, as far as we were able to judge, thorough and complete.

This delay proved a blessing in disguise to the Guards, who were to
deliver the assault on our sector. The problem of effecting a crossing
of the canal was a most serious and difficult one, and it had been
arranged to send the men over on floating mats, as a good deal of
water still remained in parts of the bed. In others so much mud and
slime were encountered, while carrying out a series of raids, that it
was almost impossible to cross without some such assistance, and it
will be readily understood that it was imperative to waste no time in
this manoeuvre, especially as the foe was awaiting them on the further
bank. Whether it was that the enemy could not maintain communications
between his front line and the rear, on account of our intense
bombardment, or whether, as has been suggested, he suspected a
repetition of Messines, and that we had mined underneath the canal
bed, at all events three days before the attack he evacuated the canal
bank and retired just over the crest of the hill some 800 yards
beyond. This movement, however, had not been carried out unperceived
by our valiant airmen, who, flying at a low altitude, returned and
reported the situation. Immediately strong patrols crossed the canal
and pushed up the slope on the other side, in order to remain in
contact with the enemy and gauge his whereabouts. A series of posts
were thus established 500 to 600 yards east of the canal, and orders
were given to hold them at all costs, so that on the day of the battle
our infantry could start off from there without having any serious
obstacle in their way. Many men crossed the canal by means of hastily
constructed foot bridges or floating rafts made of biscuit and petrol
tins ingeniously lashed together.

On this occasion we will follow the fortunes of the F.O.O.'s       (p. 051)
detailed to accompany the infantry on their journey over the top on
the first day of the battle. The party consisted of two officers and
fourteen signallers and linesmen from the Brigade, who, during the
past fortnight, had received full instructions as to their duties.
Every detail had been carefully worked out beforehand: the men had
been divided into several groups, each armed with telephones, reels of
wire, flags, and Lucas lamps, all these things being necessary for the
provision of each relay station. One of the officers was to accompany
the attacking waves of infantry with his staff, consisting of a
telephonist, linesman, and signaller, while the duty of the other was
to work in conjunction with him and to maintain, as far as possible,
uninterrupted communication with the Brigade after laying down the
wire. The morning before the battle, the wire was laid out over the
canal as far as the series of outposts, in order to save time on the
following day. The same evening, at sunset, the party set out, after
receiving wishes for the best of good luck from those who had been
fortunate enough to escape being detailed for this arduous task.
Officers and men proceeded to their appointed places in the front
line, or rather in what had once been an enemy support trench, though
now it was scarcely recognisable as such, owing to the effects of our
bombardment, there to remain for the night and await coming events.

Now, in consequence of the enemy's premature retirement over the
crest, he lost most of his observation on us, but he was aware we had
effected a crossing and held posts on his side of the canal. He
therefore lavishly besprinkled this area with all manner of high
explosive shells--one here, one there: never two in the same
place--and the members of the party began to wonder whether they would
survive to witness the fortunes of the battle. It always appears to be
a matter of conjecture as to what are the real feelings of an F.O.O.
about to take the plunge, so perhaps it might be of interest in this
case to acquaint ourselves with them. As he lies out there with his
men, where are his thoughts? Are they of his home, his parents, wife,
or children? Will he ever see their dear faces again? No--! all that
agony has been fought out over and over again long ago, during the
previous fortnight or so, since he has been detailed for this
particular job. Then, what does he think about? If the truth be told,
he is rapidly running over in his mind all the little things which
may perhaps, at the last moment, have been omitted or forgotten.   (p. 052)
He questions Gunner "So-and-so" to make certain that that extra piece
of wire has been brought along, and asks what the h--l Gunner
"Somebody else" is doing standing there without a "tin-hat" on, and
enquires of the Bombardier if he has adjusted the Lucas lamp properly,
which has been giving some trouble previously. These and a
hundred-and-one other such questions flash through his brain as he
lies on the ground with his little party, all vigorously puffing pipes
or cigarettes. The hours go by very slowly, and conversation on any
old topic is attempted from time to time, sleep being entirely out of
the question, as everyone is much too excited for anything of that
nature. Meanwhile the bombardment continues without intermission, and
the night becomes intensely cold and eerie. Will the darkness never
pass and let us get started on the job?

Soon after midnight the infantry, who are to make the assault, arrive
at their places of assembly, full of quips and jests, a sure sign that
they are cheery and in good form for the coming fray. Rum is served
out, and the men lie down in little bunches, either to snatch a few
minutes' sleep or else to resume their constant arguments and
bickerings on every subject under the sun except anything connected
with the war. Zero hour at last draws near, and everyone grows more
restless, for this period is much the most trying time to endure, and
all topics of conversation have long since been exhausted. Then a
short, sharp order passes down the line, and the answering shouts
announce that all are present and ready--the "quarter to zero" has
arrived. Another crisp order comes along, and there are a series of
ominous clicks as each man adjusts his bayonet to the rifle, then the
men line up in perfect extended order, ready for the word to go. A
faint grey appears in the sky to the east, but only the next man is
visible to his neighbour, as the darkness is still upon us. The
F.O.O.'s and party are also up and ready, final instructions being
rapidly given to the signallers, who nod assent that everything is
prepared and understood. Then suddenly the guns bark out afresh, and a
creeping barrage drops down like a curtain in front of the men, who
follow after it at an easy walk. Fortune attends the little party, as
the wire has only been cut in three places, and these are speedily
repaired; and, as soon as the second wave of men is clear of the
trench, the line is laid out as rapidly as possible behind them. The
ground is difficult to traverse, being full of deep craters, so    (p. 053)
the party progresses more slowly than the infantry, and presently
the third wave gains on and passes it by. At first the enemy puts down
a nasty barrage, just beyond our stepping-off place, but most of his
heavy stuff falls on the canal bank, and, as the majority of the
troops have already crossed, the damage is not severe. By this time
the party has gained the top of the crest, and, after establishing a
relay station in a pill-box lately occupied by their opponents, the
remainder proceed on their way. Many are the temptations to dawdle,
instead of getting on with the work, so much of interest is taking
place around them, including the amusing, and at that time not too
frequent, sight of scores of the enemy, with uplifted hands, emerging
from pill boxes, where they must have been packed like sardines.

An auxiliary wire tapped into the main F.O.O. line is led to another
pill-box, now to be used as a new infantry headquarters for the time
being, and the party comes under the fire of a hostile machine gun
emplacement, which necessitates their lying in a shell-hole for a
while. On arrival there, the "mopping up" party is found still at
work, but it soon completes its grim task. The officer who has
proceeded with the infantry now sends his first message through to the
effect that the first objectives are taken, the wire fortunately
holding out well at the moment, every sound being clear and distinct.
The Lucas lamp is then fixed on top of the relay station, and
communications established in case the wire goes, but the morning
dawns in mist, and signalling by this method is unsatisfactory.

After a short pause, the infantry proceed on the second stage of their
adventure, the F.O.O. and party following up and laying out wire close
behind them. More messages are sent through to Brigade, and the wire
breaks on several occasions, but is speedily dealt with by the
linesmen, who are kept busy patrolling up and down the line.
Meanwhile, items of extreme interest are taking place around the
pill-pox of the Central Relay Station. Numerous batches of prisoners
are drifting back, for the most part unattended, composed entirely of
youths of nineteen and twenty years of age, the Guards having refused
to kill these babies, only "despatching" the older men, for the
Division up against them was very mixed, and may best be described as
a "dud" lot, and it did not put up much of a fight. The lads all look
weary and mud-stained, although there is an expression of relief   (p. 054)
on their faces, as they steadily munch the bread that has been
good-naturedly handed to them by their captors, for they have been
starving for the past three days or so, no food having reached them on
account of the terrific bombardment. An aid-post is hastily placed in
a huge shell-hole close by, and the wounded straggle back; those who
are but slightly hit and can walk help each other along, while the
others are carried on stretchers. Here, a man, ghastly wounded, minus
one leg and with the other almost severed, lies on a stretcher, calmly
puffing at a cigarette given him by the bearers, and attempts to raise
himself on his elbow that he may gaze at the curious scenes taking
place around him. Others just stagger along, their pinched faces
showing signs of suppressed pain, yet all have a quip or a jest on
their lips as they smoke the inevitable cigarette. The sight is truly
a wonderful one! The courage and calm that these wounded display in
the midst of their sufferings is beyond words, but they are
"Greatheart's all." Reinforcements are passing all this time on their
way up to the battle line, ready to throw themselves into the conflict
when their time arrives.

Again the infantry move forward to the third and final objective,
under cover of the friendly barrage, and, by the time they arrive at
their allotted destination, an advance of some three miles from the
canal bank has been effected since morning. The wire is linked up, and
the F.O.O. selects a good point of vantage, and makes himself and his
staff as comfortable as possible, and then proceeds to gather as much
information as he can obtain to send back over the line. The infantry
are now busy digging themselves in, and are being subjected to heavy
shell-fire, but they stubbornly resist all efforts to dislodge them.
By this time the batteries have all limbered up and advanced to new
positions, mostly out in the open, and an order comes over the
telephone from the B.C.'s for the F.O.O. to register the guns afresh:
so he at once picks up some dependable landmark, and with much
difficulty observes the rounds as they fall, and thus gives the
necessary corrections.

Then the wires break on account of the shelling, and some time is lost
before communications are again established. The enemy has now
recovered somewhat from the initial shock of the attack, and displays
much determination to recover lost ground--counter attacks are
launched without success. The F.O.O. now has an important message to
convey, but, when the telephonist endeavours to send it through,   (p. 055)
there is no answering buzz. Thereupon the linesman is despatched as a
runner, and, on reaching the first relay station, he transfers the
written message to another linesman, who immediately sets out for the
next relief, and so on, until the message duly arrives at
headquarters.

Thus the day wears on: sometimes direct communication is possible, and
at others the wire is "dished," but, on the whole, a good deal of
information is passed through. The relay posts are constantly shelled,
and the bombardier in charge is wounded, while one runner was killed
in his gallant endeavour to pass through a heavy barrage with an
important communication. In the evening the party, much exhausted with
the strenuous and never ending work of the day, is relieved by a fresh
group of officers and signallers, who take over from them, and the
little party wind their way homewards profoundly thankful to find
themselves back with their unit safe and sound.

The situation, at the end of the opening day of the battle, was
roughly this:--In the north all had gone well, and most of the
objectives aimed at were successfully taken, but, such stiff
resistance was met with further south, that the assaulting troops were
held up after they had gained only about half of those allotted to
them, and, although they fought stubbornly and determinedly, they were
unable to make further ground. Thus the left wing was forced to mark
time while the troops on the right made a series of attacks in order
to straighten out the line, otherwise the army to the north would have
found itself enclosed in a nasty salient. The artillery, over the
whole battle front, also encountered great difficulty in advancing the
guns, the ground was so ploughed up by the effects of the long
preliminary bombardment. Even the horse gunners, who were detailed to
move up in immediate support of the infantry, were unable to proceed
further than a few hundred yards on the other side of the canal. Huge
craters, placed lip to lip, met them in all directions, and an advance
was found to be out of the question till new tracks were prepared and
the road cleared of debris. This naturally took some time to
accomplish, and, meanwhile, all the field batteries were advanced as
close to the canal bank as possible, but even then they were much too
far behind, and were firing at almost extreme range.

No serious attack could be delivered, therefore, for some ten      (p. 056)
days, until sufficient time had elapsed to enable the gunners to
occupy new positions some way across the canal, and, on this occasion,
Langemarke fell into our hands, as well as the line of the Broombeke.
Progress remained slow further south, consequently our front became
stationary. Now, it so happened that most of our batteries were in
extremely awkward positions, as we had expected to be moved forward at
any time. They were right out in the open, devoid of any cover, and,
for the most part, placed in shell holes which had been hastily
converted into pits. Here we were subjected to the most "gruelling"
time that was ever our lot to endure, and the battle developed into a
gigantic duel between batteries, in which our position was no worse
than the others. We lived in shell holes, scantily covered with
corrugated iron and a layer or two of sand-bags, scarcely splinter
proof, nor had we any means of making ourselves more secure. The
enemy's heavy counter batteries swept and searched over the slope
where the majority of our batteries were congregated, and never before
or after were they seen to reach such a pitch of efficiency.

Never a day passed without casualties, and often a number of gunners
were buried as the result of an explosion, and had to be hastily dug
out, and early on we lost one of our subaltern officers, who was borne
away to the dressing station with no less than a dozen wounds on him.
It was with great difficulty that the battery was kept in action
sometimes, and, though we soon shifted our position to a flank, this
did not relieve the situation. A 60 pdr. battery not far behind us
developed the fatal habit of becoming particularly active during
"flash time," and, as its flash was notoriously conspicuous, it was
not surprising that its location was promptly pin-pointed by the
enemy, who proceeded to knock it out: and this they succeeded in doing
without much delay. During this particular contest we always got the
short rounds, and, as they were not peas that were coming over, but 8"
and 11" shells, the atmosphere was unpleasant, to say the least of it!

We considered ourselves lucky if we could keep 50 per cent. of the
guns in action at the same time, while every nerve was strained to dig
out the remainder, and it was a very heartless job, as a gun had no
sooner been recovered and set up in position than it was knocked   (p. 057)
out again almost immediately. One morning, after a wild night of
shelling by the enemy, on going to ascertain the damage, we found one
gun with its barrel buried deep in the ground, the trail standing
perpendicular pointing towards the sky; another completely turned over
on its back pointing in the opposite direction, while a third had been
blown right out of the shell hole in which it had been placed, and
hurled a considerable distance away. Casualties to our establishment
mounted at a most alarming rate, and one night our B.C. was mortally
wounded by a high explosive shell, and, although such assistance as it
was possible to give was rendered, he did not survive long after
reaching the casualty clearing station. His loss was much felt, not
only by reason of his own cheerful personality, but also on account of
the way in which he inspired all those under him to do their utmost,
especially in times of stress and danger, when he always proved
himself a true leader. The Captain now succeeded to the command of the
battery, and the Senior Subaltern became second-in-command. It soon
became evident that we could not carry on much longer under these
conditions, and in the last week of September we were pulled out to
refit, and remained near the village of Herszeele for a few days
before again entering the fray.

Meanwhile a subaltern with a working party was busily occupied
preparing new emplacements for our reception, and on the day of their
completion he was wounded while riding his bicycle back to his billet:
thus we lost yet another officer. But, try as we would, it was
impossible to escape the vigilant eye of the enemy, who engaged
battery positions one after another, and the number of guns knocked
out was prodigious. Through a lucky chance it had been decided to take
the guns "in" at dawn, instead of during the night, and by reason of
this we escaped a most violent hostile bombardment which was directed
against the position, and which damaged at least two of the pits and
completely destroyed several dug-outs which the work party had
recently striven so hard to build. We set to work and repaired most of
the damage, and, whether or not it was the enemy thought he had
disposed of us thereby, at all events he did not repeat the
performance beyond subjecting us to the ordinary night harassing fire.

Another attack was impending, which again necessitated the forward (p. 058)
movement of all batteries, and this time we were more fortunate in the
selection of a site, and had several German pill-boxes in which to
live and take refuge. Owing to the congestion on the one and only good
road in the neighbourhood and the hostile shelling thereof, it was a
matter of luck to find ourselves safely installed behind Abri Wood,
and we immediately set out preparing for the new fight. Unfortunately,
the weather again came to the assistance of our foe, and a spell of
rain and wind made conditions extremely difficult for both infantry
and gunners. However, the battle was proceeded with, and the result
was an advance over the mud and slime of the river Broombeke as far as
the outskirts of Houthoulst Forest, a distance of about two miles; our
French allies, on the left, keeping in step with us throughout this
operation. Then the inevitable forward move of the batteries was
resumed, and this time we occupied positions down the further slope of
the hill immediately across the rivulet of the Steenbeke. In
consequence of torrents of rain, which continued daily, the low-lying
ground became flooded, and it was all we could do to prevent the guns
sinking in the sodden earth, and they frequently disappeared in the
mud up to their axles. Dry accommodation was nowhere to be found
except in a great pill-box, which we added to and strengthened, and it
was popularly called the "Rabbit Hutch," for the obvious reason that
it held the majority of the four batteries of the Brigade.

Now, our last attack had advanced us considerably further than the men
on the right, who throughout the past month had encountered very stiff
opposition, so we had perforce to remain stationary and mark time,
while the battle continued to the south. On several occasions we
rendered assistance by putting up what is commonly known as a "Chinese
barrage," _i.e._, the artillery carries out the ordinary programme
preceding an attack, but no action follows on the part of the
infantry. Conditions were equally disagreeable at the wagon lines,
which speedily developed into quagmires, and it was almost impossible
to walk about the lines unless attired in waders, and, even then,
there was always the possibility of completely disappearing in the
mud. Over and above that, the wagon lines were subjected every now and
then to the attentions of a high velocity gun, as well as frequent (p. 059)
visits from hostile night bombing machines, which were following the
example set by our airmen and were endeavouring to pay us back in our
own coin. Much damage was done in and around the neighbourhood, but
our lines escaped exceedingly lightly. The question of ammunition
supply became acute, and the use of pack saddles was again
necessitated, and, because of the great distance between wagon lines
and gun position, the round journey sometimes took eighteen hours to
accomplish, and naturally the strain eventually told greatly upon both
men and horses.

The battery positions were not long in being located by the enemy, who
expended great quantities of ammunition in his attempts to destroy
them: and he made much use of chemical and mustard shell, which in
time saturated the low-lying ground on which the guns were placed. In
this way he effectively gassed the B.C., a subaltern, and several of
the men, who were all despatched to the wagon line, and the Captain
assumed command for the time being and brought up reliefs with him. By
this time the Battery was again in a very bad way, and a rest was
promised on several occasions, only to be held up time and again with
the exhortation to hold out yet a little while longer. Winter was
rapidly approaching, and it was necessary to adjust our line before
fighting came to a standstill: and a considerable distance had yet to
be traversed before the goal--Passchendaele and the ridge on which it
was situated--could be reached.

The battery, meanwhile, waited on in patience. All the remaining
officers were affected by the mustard gas, as well as the majority of
the gunners, and a sorry sight we presented when, in the first week in
November, an incoming battery took over from us. We then proceeded to
the new wagon lines, near Proven, in an utterly exhausted condition.




CHAPTER VIII.                                                      (p. 060)

Cambrai.


Everyone thought that our long-expected rest was now forthcoming, so
it was a great surprise when we were ordered to hold ourselves in
readiness for a long march.

What did it all mean? Were we marching into our new area and having
our rest there or were we to be pitchforked into another scrap?

No indication of our destination was given, and everything seemed most
mysterious: and, when the Brigade arrived in the neighbourhood of
Merville, there did not appear to be any sign of a definite halt. At
all events the journey was being performed in easy stages, as if we
were filling in time, and we were always making further south, till,
passing behind Bethune, the vicinity of Arras was reached. Here news
of the surprise attack at Cambrai first reached our ears, the secret
of which had been kept so well, and, heading in the direction of
Bapaume, we were acquainted with the fact that we were again "for it."

Now, the initial attack, which came as a complete surprise to the
enemy, had met with instant success, and, with the aid of a
considerable number of Tanks, the great Hindenburg line had been
breeched over a distance of from 6 to 8 miles, with the result that
the fall of Cambrai a centre of great importance to the Germans
appeared imminent.

However, after the first couple of days, the attack was not pressed
home as it might have been, for some reason or other, and the fight
came to an abrupt standstill, leaving our troops in a particularly
baggy salient. These were the conditions that prevailed when the
Division gradually moved nearer the scene of action.

In the beginning of the fourth week of November, we entered the
battle, taking over from a famous Scottish Division which had fought
with great distinction on the opening days.

The battery was placed in action to the north of Flesquieres,      (p. 061)
well inside the salient facing Bourlon Wood, in a position only
recently completed by the enemy and which had not even been occupied
by him. There was plenty of accommodation for everyone in the deep
mined dug-outs prepared by him some thirty to forty feet below the
ground, and the officers' quarters were spacious and lavishly
constructed.

From this point the domes and the spires of the city of Cambrai could
be clearly distinguished; indeed, they appeared such a short distance
away, it looked as if a saunter would carry us into the heart of the
town.

It was most interesting and instructive studying the elaborate system
of the Hindenburg defences. First, there were three separate belts of
closely-entwined barbed wire, each being some thirty yards wide, and
behind them came a deep, narrow forefield trench that was only
intended to be lightly manned. Communication trenches led back to the
main Hindenburg trench some distance behind, in most cases being out
of immediate view from our lately occupied positions.

This trench was both deep and wide, being some twelve feet across and
duck-boarded throughout, raised on wooden stakes to prevent the water
reaching the level of the pathway. At short intervals shafts led down
to the spacious dug-outs beneath, which were all connected and linked
up with one another. In fact, practically speaking, one could walk
from one end of the line to the other below the surface of the ground.

Skilfully concealed, at frequent intervals, were emplacements for both
trench-mortars and machine-guns, all heavily concreted and covered on
top with turf.

The enemy must have thought himself very secure in this vast
stronghold, but in a way this very fact contributed, in a great
measure, to his undoing; for, it is common knowledge that the more one
frequents deep dug-outs the less inclination there is to emerge from
them when a scrap is taking place.

Finally, some 500 yards in the rear, a support line ran along, which,
though not constructed with the same strength, was formidable enough
in itself.

To judge by the indescribable mess, and by the mass of material left
littered about, the enemy must indeed have beat a hasty retreat. The
dug-outs were filthy to the last degree, and there was no sign of any
system of sanitation having been used by these people, who         (p. 062)
considered their "Kultur" to be superlative, and who desired to impose
it on the rest of mankind. All through the campaign, whenever one had
the opportunity of inspecting hostile trenches and billets, one always
found the same thing, filth and lack of sanitation.

Now, for some little time our hold on Bourlon Wood had been
precarious, so a further attack was initiated, and the Guards went in
to straighten the line. They swept through the Wood, taking the
villages of Bourlon and Fontaine, but a gigantic counter attack
pressed them back again owing to reinforcements being late in arriving
to render assistance. They were so badly mauled and cut up that it was
necessary to withdraw them from the line to refit, and infantry from
an "Old Contemptible" Division took their place. Bourlon Wood became
so saturated with gas that, after a great tussle, neither side was
able to tenant it any longer, and so withdrew, leaving a screen of
outposts to prevent any surprise attack.

This was the situation when dawn broke on the 30th of November, a day
which proved to be one of ups and downs for us, and caused many
misgivings to arise in the old country. The object of the enemy was to
pinch either side of the jaws, and, if his attack on the north had met
with equal success with that on the south, there would have been
little hope for the troops in the salient, who undoubtedly would have
been surrounded and cut off. However, as events turned out, our men
held out and remained firm. Moreover, it was afterwards discovered
from captured documents that the enemy's scheme was a large and
ambitious one. Not only was it his intention to retake the whole of
our recent gains, but to press on further through Havrincourt Wood,
and establish himself on a line beyond it.

The Germans employed the same tactics as we used on the opening day of
the battle--there was no preliminary bombardment, and their troops
advanced under cover of a heavy mist and preceded by a creeping
barrage. They put an overwhelming number of troops into the fight, the
odds against our men being something like three to one, but our
infantry in the north fought valiantly, although they were forced to
give ground step by step in the initial stages. As the day wore on and
the mist rose, we were able to see the hostile infantry advancing in
masses, but they were paying a heavy toll at the hands of our machine
gunners, who cut many a line in their ranks.

The situation became tense when the enemy succeeded in driving     (p. 063)
our men across the Bapaume-Cambrai road, and were seen to be
approaching Anneux and Graincourt. The 18 prs. batteries which were
lying alongside of us dragged their guns out of their pits on to the
crest in front, and proceeded to rake the enemy, firing as rapidly as
they were able, through open sights, the gunners stripped to the
waist, toiling and sweating in their endeavour to stop the oncoming
tide. The fight swayed backward and forward throughout the whole day,
but finally the enemy was held in check without gaining further
ground, and he incurred very heavy casualties.

In the south the situation was very obscure, and somehow or other the
enemy broke a gap in the defences between La Vacquerie and
Gouzeaucourt, capturing the latter place as well as the village of
Gonnelieu, and commenced streaming through. He had advanced a
considerable distance before the importance of his move was fully
realised, consequently most extraordinary incidents occurred, stories
of which are now familiar to everyone. Battery positions were rapidly
overrun, and even wagon lines were captured, while Labour companies,
working on the roads far behind the front, on looking up, discovered
the foe almost on top of them.

There were no reserves in immediate support, and affairs were taking
on a most serious complexion. Something had to be done and that right
speedily! Therefore the Guards, who had only two days previously been
withdrawn from the fight, were again called upon. They were lying in
rest around Bertincourt, Ytres and Ruyaulcourt, and were hurriedly
conveyed in 'buses and motor lorries to Metz, where they formed up and
set out on their big counter-attack, supported by our sister Brigade
and another gunner unit which chanced to have been pulled out on the
previous night. Now, the enemy troops appeared to be as much surprised
at their success as we were, and continued advancing in a bewildered
kind of fashion, astonished at the little or entire lack of opposition
with which they met. Suddenly, however, they came face to face with
the full strength of the best disciplined troops in the world,
whereupon they paused, staggered, and at length commenced to fall
back, in confusion and disorder, with the result that the day was
saved just in the nick of time, and most of the ground was recovered,
in addition to some 50 guns.

Meanwhile the wagon lines were situated in the village of          (p. 064)
Ribecourt, right inside the salient, and, although it was known that a
scrap was taking place, no one had any idea as to its stupendous
nature. The fact that the village lay in a valley, surrounded by
hills, prevented much noise of the conflict reaching those in it.
However, shortly after breakfast, it became apparent that something
was amiss, and the place became subjected to a heavy bombardment. The
horses and vehicles were evacuated as quickly as possible, without
suffering undue casualties, and collected on the hillside a short
distance away, facing Bourlon Wood, where they "stood to" awaiting
further orders.

Hostile aeroplanes put in an appearance, flying daringly low hither
and thither across the salient, endeavouring to pick up as much
information as possible, and sometimes dropping bombs. Many a tussle
took place between them and our airmen, who did not allow them
undisputed sway for long.

At noon instructions came through to be prepared to withdraw the guns
at any moment, but in the end this was found unnecessary. Even at this
time we were unaware that the enemy had penetrated our line to the
south, and the first indication we had that something unusual was
taking place, was the arrival of some reinforcements, who hurried
along the top of the hillside behind us, and took up positions facing
in the opposite direction! A short time elapsed, and then we were
astonished and horrified to see a creeping barrage roll along, top the
crest, and gradually draw nearer us from the rear. Fortunately, it
stopped before actually reaching us, for by this time the enemy had
attained his furthest point of penetration, and the counter attack had
already been launched. Throughout the rest of the day the wagon line
"stood to" ready for any emergency, and at dusk the limbers were sent
up to the position, and the guns were withdrawn the same night and
placed in action in the railway cutting immediately behind the ridge
to the south of Flesquieres.

It became evident, after the experiences of the previous day, that, as
long as we remained in this awkward salient, we would undoubtedly be
exposed to further attacks at the hands of the enemy. The Germans
meanwhile had concentrated huge forces in the vicinity, so a
continuation of our advance was now out of the question, and a
modification of our front was decided upon. The infantry           (p. 065)
constructed a new line running north of Flesquieres Ridge, and, as
soon as it was completed, our troops fell back on it under cover of
darkness, unperceived and therefore unmolested by the enemy, who only
made the discovery on the following day, and then cautiously followed
up until they came in contact with us once more. The salient presented
a curious aspect at night to those inside it, and we seemed to be
almost surrounded by Verey lights, as indeed we were, except where the
narrow neck led out towards Metz.

The enemy did not, as was expected, attempt any further operations on
a large scale, but contented himself with making things very
uncomfortable for us. In spite of our withdrawal, the line was still
saggy to a large extent, and he could bring his guns to bear on any
part of the salient and enfilade it. He also paid much attention to
bombing, and his planes came over at dawn and dusk and caused a good
deal of damage. The wagon lines came in for their share of
unpleasantness, and in the course of a fortnight we were forced to
quit no less than three positions in turn. The battery was specially
handicapped by the colour of its horses, and was evidently easily
spotted by hostile aircraft, for we had more than our share of ill
fortune at this period. To take the worst case that befell us, one
night the wagon line lost 35 horses. A covey of enemy planes had been
over at daybreak, and apparently made a mental note of our location,
as they returned the same evening and dropped several bombs, though,
strange to say, no damage was effected. However, towards midnight, a
4.2 battery suddenly opened fire with instantaneous fuse action, and
many casualties were inflicted before the horses could be removed,
owing to difficulties in the pitch darkness.

The most wonderful fact in the whole proceedings was that, although
there was little or no cover for the men, who were ensconced in
bivouacs, except a few who were in an old disused trench close by,
only a couple of them were hit. The officers were rudely awakened by
large splinters entering their tent, and only just missing their heads
as they lay on their valises, while the sergeants had a most
miraculous escape. They had formed a Mess in a bay of the trench, the
sides supported and heightened by some of the Q.M.S.'s stores, and
covered on top by a large tarpaulin. A shell dropped practically on
top of them, fortunately detonating instantly against several      (p. 066)
boxes of iron rations, which undoubtedly contributed to saving their
lives. An officer arrived on the scene immediately afterwards, and
found them all lying unconscious as the result of the explosion, but
they soon revived and took a stout part in rescuing the horses. The
construction was completely wrecked, and the clothes they wore were
stripped into ribbons, but only one of them had a scratch on him.

No delay was made in attending to the wounded horses, and in conveying
the remainder to a place of safety. The drivers were all splendidly
cool and collected under the trying circumstances, but many of the
poor beasts were beyond human aid, and had to be destroyed.

The scene next morning was a gruesome one, and it was a most pathetic
sight to watch the drivers, with tears running down their cheeks,
bidding a last farewell to their lost charges before burial, for the
men become exceedingly attached to their four-legged comrades,
especially when they have had charge of them for a considerable time.
No time was lost in selecting a new locality, as it was considered
wise to get out of the salient altogether, and thus avoid the risk of
incurring further unnecessary casualties; so the wagon lines were
removed to the vicinity of Ruyaulcourt.

A spell of hard frost set in, with an occasional fall of snow, which
added to our difficulties as well as to our discomforts, for it must
be remembered that both battery position and wagon line were occupied
at a moment's notice, and no time could be spent in making any
preparations beforehand for our reception. Affairs were now settling
down for the winter, and nothing unusual was taking place beyond a
good deal of artillery activity on both sides, consequently we were
only awaiting orders to withdraw from the line. These came through in
a few days' time, and the Brigade pulled out in the middle of December
to the ruined village of Beaulencourt, situated south east of Bapaume.
On the following day a long march was undertaken, and we proceeded by
way of Achiet-le-Grand, Ayette, and Beaumetz to the village of
Montennescourt, due west of Arras, a distance of 25 miles.

It says much for the battery that it accomplished this long trail with
no less than 43 horses below establishment, and without any outside
assistance, in spite of the heaviness of the roads. The guns       (p. 067)
were pulled by six-horse teams, and the vehicles and other baggage
wagons by four-horse teams, made up by requisitioning all the
available outriders, yet none of the horses suffered to any great
extent from the extra strain imposed on them.

It was with feelings of great gratification that we learnt that at
last we were going to have our long-delayed rest, and that it would
fall to our lot to spend the coming Christmas-tide and New Year season
in more congenial surroundings than had been the case in the two
previous years. All were prepared to enjoy themselves on this
occasion, as it was felt, on reviewing the past six months, during
which time we had been fighting incessantly in "pukka" battles, in
which we had acquitted ourselves not badly, that we had thoroughly
earned a week or two of complete rest and quiet.




CHAPTER IX.                                                        (p. 068)

At Arras.


The next fortnight was spent under most happy conditions, and all
ranks had an enjoyable time. As Christmas approached, active
preparations were made to excel anything we had ever had before in the
way of festivities, and this was possible now that we were out of
action. Quarter-Master-Sergeants, puffed out with importance, were to
be seen strutting hither and thither, returning with mysterious sacks
and parcels, presumably filled with good cheer.

Plucked geese and turkeys appeared in large numbers, suspended from
the ceilings of billets, and several large barrels arrived on the
scene, and were duly placed under lock and key in the canteen,
awaiting the auspicious day. Much competition took place between
batteries for the possession of the only two live pigs in the village,
which eventually went to the highest bidders, while the remainder
procured their joints in the form of pork from Doullens. One of the
batteries meanwhile grew so attached to its prospective Christmas fare
that it was almost decided to spare his life and adopt him as a
mascot. His fate was sealed, however, when one day it was discovered
that he had disposed of several parcels of food which had,
inadvertently, been placed within his reach by some of the men.

Concerts were arranged, and the village school-room was kindly lent
and artistically decorated for these occasions. The weather was all
that could be desired now that we were safely lodged in billets, and
it was a typical old-fashioned yule-tide, with a plentiful fall of
snow followed by hard frost. The little village was in a sheltered
hollow, and a small rivulet passed through it on its way down the
valley, while the scenery might have been that surrounding any hamlet
in the south of England.

An open air service was conducted by the Padre, for the Brigade, on
'Xmas morning, and the rest of the day was given over to sports and
concerts, and the climax of enjoyment was reached at night when    (p. 069)
the men partook of their dinner. Gramaphones were well to the fore,
but all kinds of musical instruments took part in the gaiety which
followed.

A certain amount of latitude was given the men for a few days after,
in order that they might recover from the orgy, for indeed they had
never had such a gorge since their arrival in France. All were in
excellent spirits, and these were by no means diminished when it
became known that our next area was in front of Arras. It was
recognised to be an enviable part of the line to be situated in,
especially during the winter months. It was also a locality with which
we had not as yet made acquaintance, and it was always interesting to
visit a new portion of the front, as we disliked being too long in the
same surroundings without a change of scene.

The day following New Year, the Division entered on its period of duty
in the sector north of Monchy to the vicinity of Gavrelle, with the
heights of Vimy, which had fallen into our hands in the previous
spring on its left.

The battery position was reached by following the Arras-Plouvain road
along the valley of the river Scarpe, and we took over from a Scottish
Division. The enemy lines were everywhere overlooked, consequently he
wisely refrained from showing much activity.

A magnificent view was obtained from the rear O.P. on the heights
facing Vitry, and, on a clear day, Douai was plainly visible and even
the country far beyond it.

Our front line ran along at the bottom of the slope, having the ruined
piles of Roeux, which was the scene of such furious fighting in the
latter stages of Arras battle, immediately in its rear. Half right, to
the south of the river Scarpe, what remained of the village of Monchy
stood out like a sentinel on the top of the hill. This point afforded
a splendid view in all directions and was the veritable keystone of
the whole position. Four of our pieces were placed in a quarry, a few
yards off the road leading through Fampoux, on its western extremity,
while the other two guns were moved forward, east of the same village,
behind a bank, and carefully camouflaged. As this sector was
extraordinarily quiet and there was not sufficient work to keep
everyone occupied, the Battery Commander decided to commence
construction and endeavour to make our position a model one. Two pits,
which were already in existence, were pulled down and rebuilt,     (p. 070)
and two others were constructed alongside, and all of them were placed
just as near the front bank of the quarry as would permit of the guns
clearing the crest. The whole position was completely camouflaged, as,
it will be readily understood, a quarry made a conspicuous target for
the enemy at any time, and if he suspected the presence of a battery
therein, there would have been little peace or quiet for us. However,
as things turned out, we had evidently made a good job of our work,
and to our surprise, not a single shell dropped in the quarry during
our period of occupation.

Walls were white-washed and ammunition and charge shelves elaborately
painted, the platforms were neatly tiled or bricked with material
taken from the surrounding ruins, and all manner of "eye wash" was
employed in making the pits look well. A communication trench was dug
from one extremity to the other, rivetted and duck-boarded throughout,
and led to the men's quarters. These when completed were palatial, and
put in the shade any headquarter unit in the line.

The near side of the quarry, which consisted of chalk, was easily and
rapidly mined, and, in the course of three weeks, the men had
comfortable quarters. Beds made of wire netting stretched on wooden
frames, a spacious dining hall, telephone pit, cook house, and they
even possessed a moderate sized bath room, which was highly valued and
put to great use. The officers' quarters were no less sumptuously
fitted out. Each had sleeping accommodation, in cellars of the ruined
houses, running along the main street close to the quarry, nicely
lined with wood and canvas to keep the damp out, while the Mess itself
was a work of art.

The latter was built entirely by the officers and their batmen, under
the personal supervision of our energetic B.C.

The floors, walls and roof of the cellar were lined with three inch
timber, and one day a subaltern, who had been out exploring, came back
triumphant, bearing in his arms a huge roll of wall paper found buried
under some rubbish, at a spot which probably denoted the one time
existence of a decorator's shop. The Mess was therefore duly papered,
with frieze complete, and with the addition of easy chairs, book
shelves, a stove and gramaphone, there was nothing left to wish for,
and the place was most cosy and snug. The entrance, too, was the
admiration of everybody, nicely tiled and decorated with fancy
carvings from the utterly destroyed church. Iron girders, beams,   (p. 071)
and countless bricks to the height of several feet rested on top of
our home. It is not to be wondered at, then, that this model position
was frequently visited by high personages, brought hither by our
Brigade-Commander or C.R.A., who appeared almost as proud of the place
as we were ourselves. Moreover, as we were in such close proximity to
the road leading up to the front line, it was only natural that
officers should drop in to this half way house and rest and regale
themselves before resuming their journey, so before long our Mess was
known as "The Pub" throughout the Division.

The forward position was treated in the same fashion, and never before
had both officers and men had such comfortable quarters. Thus we
settled down to a life of ease, such as we had not known since the
Laventie days of two winters ago, and proceeded to thoroughly enjoy
ourselves.

Frequent trips were made into Arras, either on horseback or by river,
for there was a steamboat service, running daily on the Scarpe, which
landed one close to the Officers' Club, a large wooden erection
similar to a Y.M.C.A. hut, run by the Expeditionary Force Canteen.

The town had not been irreparably destroyed, and in most parts the
inhabitants had returned, and were carrying on their usual routine,
while many shops were re-opened and doing good business. The Cathedral
was badly damaged, as well as other prominent buildings, but, on the
whole, the town had escaped wonderfully considering how close the
enemy had been to it for so long. Now, of course, the enemy was over
six miles away, and the city could not be reached by any other than
his high velocity guns, and they seldom troubled to shell the place,
and when they did so, from time to time, the fire was chiefly directed
on the railway station and sidings in the vicinity.

An equally peaceful time fell to the lot of those who were at the
wagon lines. They were situated just off the main Arras-Souchez road,
within easy reach of the former place. Accommodation for Officers and
men was provided by Nissen huts, containing stoves, while the horses
had good covered-in standings, with mud walls surrounding them for
protection against bombing raids.

The transport of ammunition to the guns was easily conducted, as
excellent roads ran the whole way, and every care was taken to     (p. 072)
keep the horses up to condition. The frost did not continue and
in the early months of the year the weather was wonderfully bright and
mild, and many a good gallop could be had in the neighbourhood, as
there was a fine stretch of open ground close to the wagon line.

The horses undoubtedly had a better time than it is usually possible
to give them during the winter months. The war horse is an
extraordinarily intelligent animal and appreciates anything done for
him in the way of comfort. He also becomes very cute and cunning, and
always knows the routine of the day, and can tell his time of feeding
almost to the minute, and, if allowed, would go by himself
automatically to the water troughs and return to his own particular
standing in the stable.

One horse familiarly known by the name of "Shrapnel," owing to several
wounds of that kind which refused to close up, and completely heal,
knew at once when he was "warned" for the line. Now, he disliked going
out at nights, and consequently was in the habit of "scrimp-shanking,"
and proceeded forthwith to go lame. At first he managed to fool
everybody, but on close investigation it was discovered that nothing
at all was the matter with him.

Another fine beast, which at one time must have been ill-treated, when
he came to us had a bad rope gall on his near hind, and was extremely
nervous at being touched. After hours of coaxing he allowed his
section officer and driver to handle him, and, at length, showed great
affection to them both, but woe betide any other member of the
battery, who attempted to go near him, back went his ears and out went
his feet at once!

About the middle of February, a feeling of uneasiness evidently
entered the minds of those in authority. It was known that the enemy
was transferring large numbers of troops, which had been released by
the collapse of Russia, to the Western front. Consequently every unit
got busy at once, the Infantry dug new trench systems in rear of their
existing ones, constructed strong points, and mile upon mile of barbed
wire was laid down.

The gunners prepared new battle and reinforcing positions, in case a
retiral should be necessary, and filled them with ammunition against
all eventualities.

In a little more than a month everything was completed, and during the
third week of March, the troops were warned of an impending great
enemy offensive, and became fully on the alert.




CHAPTER X.                                                         (p. 073)

March the 21st.


The morning of the 20th broke calm and the enemy did nothing to
indicate that anything out of the ordinary was about to take place,
but this did not deceive us, as it was known to our Command that the
blow was going to fall on the following morning. Silence reigned
supreme, except for the ordinary harassing artillery fire, up till
midnight, but shortly afterwards the German guns opened out their
annihilating fire, and drenched our forward system and battery
positions with a severe gas bombardment.

In this area the majority of batteries had, at the last moment, taken
the precaution to change their positions, as these were known to the
enemy, and thus avoided being entirely demolished by the heavy
concentration which poured all manner of shell into those they had
lately vacated.

At dawn, which, unfortunately for us, broke in a thick mist, after a
sustained bombardment of some four to five hours' duration, the enemy
launched his gigantic attack over an area of fifty miles, from
Guenappe, immediately below Monchy in the North, to the neighbourhood
of La Fere in the south. Under cover of the mist, he congregated large
numbers of field guns, which were able to accompany and closely
support the attacking waves, while at some places he employed his new
Tanks. These, however, though rendering some assistance to him, by no
means came up to expectations, and were ponderous and clumsy, in spite
of the fact that he had previously captured several of ours from which
to copy, but they proved to be far behind ours, both in construction
and usefulness.

A "Chinese barrage" was put down by the enemy on our sector, but no
attack developed. The same evening the Division was hurriedly
withdrawn from the line, and heading in a southern direction arrived
in the neighbourhood of Tilloy and prepared for instant action.

In spite of the favourable conditions, our foes made little or no  (p. 074)
ground, throughout the day, on the whole of the Army front, and were
held in our forefield. Further south, much the same thing happened,
although they penetrated further in some places, but nowhere had they
broken through, so the news on the whole was good and reassuring.

The German attack was renewed on the following day, and still the
Northern Army remained firm, but they succeeded in effecting a serious
breech in the Army to the south, where the British had lately taken
over from our French allies. So swift was the enemy's progress at this
point that our troops on either side of this bulge soon became
endangered, and a general retirement was immediately necessary in
order to keep the line straight.

This applied to the Northern Army also, but not to anything like the
same extent. The Division again moved south, and took up positions
behind the Henin Ridge, between the village of that name and St.
Leger, for the purpose of covering the retirement.

The whole line thus became mobile, and, for several days, a stiff
rear-guard action was fought, which resulted in very heavy casualties
being inflicted on the enemy. He was by this time flushed with his
success further south, and attempted to advance as if he were already
the conqueror, which led to his own undoing, as virtually he was only
permitted to gain ground at our time and will. It cannot be denied,
however, that the days were anxious ones and the infantry were kept
very heavily engaged and became much exhausted. However, they made the
most of their opportunities, and had hitherto rarely found such ready
targets, and their machine guns effected great execution on the enemy
ranks as the men came along laden with full packs. A story is told,
and is believed to be true, of one machine gunner that, in the course
of his morning's work, he slaughtered over 200 German's single handed
with his weapon, after which he became a raving lunatic and had to be
forceably removed.

The infantry, too, admitted that they were getting tired of killing
Boches, and the casualties inflicted on our men were a mere nothing as
compared with those suffered by our foes. The gunners were equally
busy dropping into action here and there and falling back as the
circumstances required, until at the end of a week, the line became
more or less stationary. The front line now ran through Mercatel,  (p. 075)
Boisleux and Moyenneville and thence, in a south westerly direction,
towards Serre. Thus the Germans were again almost back on the line
they had held, prior to the big retreat on the Hindenburg line in the
spring of 1917.

It seemed a great pity to vacate the Henin Ridge, for the opposing
sides found themselves facing each other in a hollow, with rising
ground on either side, which made battery positions difficult to
conceal. So many disused trenches, which had previously formed part of
the old German line system, helped to shelter us, to a great extent,
for we were at this point nearly two miles east of the permanent line
of a year ago.

Everyone feverishly sat about digging and constructing new trenches,
and an enormous amount of work was accomplished in a comparatively
short space of time, for it was felt that the enemy had by no means
expended all his strength, and would endeavour, in the near future, to
resume active operations. There could be no doubt that he would be
dissatisfied to remain where he was, especially as, so far, he had
little to shew on this particular part of the front for his gigantic
effort and huge loss of men.

It was no surprise therefore when, at the beginning of the second week
in April, after a short sharp bombardment, the enemy made a strong
attack from Monchy, north to the Vimy Ridge, with the object of
seizing Arras and the heights before mentioned. The result was a
costly failure, as he was everywhere held up in our forefield system,
and the British Divisions opposed to him had the time of their lives.
We were very interested to hear about this battle, as, of course, it
was fought over the sector in which we had lately spent a number of
happy months and where we had done such an amount of work. It was
distinctly gratifying, too, when a wire was received from the Division
who took over from us thanking our Division for the wonderful
defensive construction made by us. It was due to that work that they
were enabled to bring the enemy so quickly to an abrupt standstill.

They had seemingly experienced a veritable field day and thoroughly
enjoyed themselves on that occasion.

After this unsuccessful effort, the enemy evidently gave up the
attempt to gain possession of Arras and Vimy by a frontal attack and
turned his thoughts elsewhere.

Unfortunately, however, in the course of these operations, Monchy  (p. 076)
had to be evacuated by the British, which enabled the Boche to gain
observation on the city which, thereafter, came in for a good amount
of shelling, and again the inhabitants were forced much against their
will to leave the stricken place.

All manner of heavy shell fell in the town, and the damage caused was
considerable, and it was no longer the haven of rest for the troops
which it had been a few months previously. Our wagon lines, meanwhile,
had not escaped undamaged, and were forced to change positions on
several occasions until, at last, comfortable quarters were obtained
in the little village of Bretencourt, where the houses still had roofs
covering them, as the hamlet was just outside the devastated area.
When affairs settled down once more, the battery positions were
gradually advanced, and we dug a new position east of Ficheux, where
the guns were meanwhile situated.

A forward section was established ahead in the railway cutting of the
Arras-Albert line, and we subjected the enemy to as much
unpleasantness as it lay in our power to devise.

We were not, however, any length of time in this sector, and were
removed to the adjoining one immediately to the south.

The line required rectifying in several places, and in a brilliant
minor operation, the village of Ayette was carried and remained firmly
in our hands.

Our new position was situated on the high ground to the north of
Adinfer Wood, immediately behind the village of the same name, but the
neighbourhood was much more peaceful than that which we had recently
quitted, as everywhere we had observation over the enemy, and
naturally he never created trouble under such circumstances.

The wagon lines were again moved, this time much further behind, to
the small village of Gaudiempre, where one might have imagined one was
completely out of the war area, it appeared so quiet.

The place was intact and all were ensconced in snug little billets,
while the horses were well off also, as opportunities for grazing were
afforded round about the neighbourhood.

Then the enemy's second great offensive opened on the Lys, and all
eyes were turned in that direction, but everyone held the opinion
that, sooner or later, he would be brought to a standstill, which
proved to be the case.

In fact, throughout the whole of this trying period, the           (p. 077)
confidence among all ranks was extraordinary. No one had the feeling
that we were going down and under, and it would have done the pessimists
at home a world of good to have caught a glimpse of conditions out in
France and of the cheery optimism that prevailed there. There was even
disappointment, in some quarters, that the enemy had not attempted to
attack us on this front, but he evidently thought discretion was the
better part of valour, for the defences were, by this time, very
strong, and it would have been strange if he had managed to penetrate
to any depth.

About the middle of May, it was the will of those in authority to rest
the Division a while, and although we were not in any urgent need of a
rest, we were not disinclined for it, as the season of the year was
favourable, and we pictured all manner of good times in store.

The Brigade, therefore, withdrew to the wagon lines, marched the
following day to Humbercourt, the village appointed for our resting
place.




CHAPTER XI.                                                        (p. 078)

The Turn of the Tide.


It invariably happened, when the Brigade came out for a period of
rest, that expectations of a real holiday were never fully realized,
and although the time passed pleasantly enough and we were favoured
with fine weather, all ranks were kept pretty busy. Many tactical
schemes were practised, and we had always to hold ourselves in
readiness to render assistance, at short notice, to the troops who
were in the line, for our Command was taking no risks and had not
entirely given up the possibility of a hostile attack on this area.

It must be admitted, however, that in the end everybody enjoyed
rehearsing these schemes, and we would have been well acquainted with
our duties had the emergency arisen. Our resentment, also, at being
called upon to partake of violent exercise so early in the morning,
completely disappeared after a while, the country looked so beautiful
at dawn, and we usually returned in time for breakfast, with
well-whetted appetites, after some three or four hours in the saddle.

Unfortunately, at this time, the scourge known as "Flanders Grippe,"
which had been prevalent throughout the Army, developed in our
Brigade. For a considerable time this epidemic paralysed us, more or
less, as about half our number was down with the disease at the same
time. Although it passes after taking its three days' course, one is
left very weak and groggy for some time, and several of the men were
very seriously ill.

Inevitable inspections by Corps Commanders and minor officials passed
off without incident, but, of course, much labour and "eye-wash" was
expended as is always the case on these occasions. The Divisional
Horse Show, held towards the end of our rest, was undoubtedly the
principal diversion of our time out, as each unit naturally did its
utmost to outshine all others. The battery entered a gun team
complete, consisting of six dapple-grey horses, and we succeeded in
securing the second prize in the gunner's Derby. Curiously enough, (p. 079)
the winners, our sister howitzer battery, won with five, out of six
horses which had been shown, over two years previously at Zeggers
Capelle, in Flanders, and who then carried off second prize in the
competition with a team of blacks. H.R.H. The Duke of Connaught
afterwards inspected the prize-winners, and evinced much interest on
being told that ours was a complete battery of grey horses.

Paris leave opened for both officers and men as a consolation for home
furlough being stopped, and many availed themselves of the opportunity
of having a few days' enjoyment in the "Gay City."

In the first days of June the Division returned to the line and
occupied the sector we had already been in prior to moving to Adinfer.
The area had become very quiet with one or two exceptions, and the
enemy did not subject our infantry to much shelling, and contented
himself with occasionally annoying them with trench mortars. But if,
at any time, he discovered the location of a battery position, that
unit had a most unhappy time. Four of our guns were placed in the
railway cutting, where we had previously had a forward section, and
the remainder were again detached some distance away. Mine shafts,
which were already in existence, were enlarged and the men had plenty
cover on top of them.

Some little time afterwards certain indications pointed to the fact
that the enemy contemplated business once more on this front, and as
our guns were situated awkwardly where it would be impossible to
withdraw them quickly, we were directed to construct a new position
further behind. The work proceeded briskly, and, when completed, four
of the pieces were withdrawn and placed there, the other two remaining
in the railway embankment. The main position was a long way back, and
the guns could only just reach the enemy support trenches,
consequently they were only to be fired in case of a general S.O.S.,
and all the shoots were accomplished by the forward section. Much time
was spent in making our new quarters shipshape, and the ground was
well suited for mining, as it consisted principally of chalk, and
eventually all ranks were comfortably installed in spacious underground
quarters, although, at the moment, they were quite unnecessary, and
many lay out in the open during the warm summer nights. The principal
thing to do now was to make sure that the officers and men did not
stagnate for lack of occupation and to find means to keep them     (p. 080)
hard and fit. Physical exercises were indulged in during the morning,
and sports of all kinds were organised, both at the battery positions
and at the wagon lines--the latter having taken up their quarters at
the village of Baillemont.

A modified kind of base-ball, introduced by an energetic and
enthusiastic Canadian subaltern, became very popular with the men,
while the corps ran a polo-club of sorts for the officers. A fairly
level patch of ground was selected which possessed a certain amount of
grass, and the numerous shell holes were filled in and levelled off by
fatigue parties, with the result that it became moderately good. The
polo ponies, however, left something to be desired, and it was no
uncommon sight to see a young officer appear mounted on a stalwart
wheeler, the best he could do for himself from among the horses in his
section. Possibly the explanation was that he had found a horse which
he could suitably "rein in".

Meanwhile the enemy's third big offensive had come and gone and the
British Commander-in-Chief's famous "back to the wall" order of the
day to his armies. Still we waited, but nothing unusual happened; then
in the middle of July the French were heavily attacked, and once more
the clouds appeared on the horizon. There was great enthusiasm when it
became known that our Allies had counter-attacked, and were driving
the enemy out of the Marne pocket, and when the daily bulletins
arrived there was always a scramble among the men to read them. Then
the British stroke fell south of the river Somme at Villers
Brettonneux, and excellent news, as to our progress, came through,
which raised everyone's hopes to a high degree. Our artillery fire was
increased daily, and affairs became more lively, while flying was in
full swing and continued night and day. Both sides paid much attention
to bombing, and our Airmen freely besprinkled enemy territory with
their bombs by day, whereas the foe rarely attempted raids over our
lines during daylight. However, after dusk, the air was filled with
the planes, as the weather was particularly favourable, and the hum of
the machines coming and going was incessant throughout the whole
night. At times one could scarcely get any sleep for the continual
drone they made, like the hum of gigantic bees around their hives. One
thing certain was that we had almost complete control of the air and
both out-numbered and out-witted the enemy to a marked extent.     (p. 081)
It was most unpleasant to hear the noise of the hostile planes drawing
nearer, for one could not mistake the beat made by the German machines.
The amount of bombing experienced by us was quite bad enough in all
truth, but we used to smile when contemplating what our foes must be
suffering at the hands of our Airmen, as truly it was ten times worse.

During this period the two counter offensives were progressing
favourably in the south, and we suspected that something would be
doing on our front before long, as the din of battle was creeping
further north. It came as no surprise, therefore, when serious
fighting commenced north of the Somme, and the enemy retreated from
Serre and later withdrew in error from Ablainzevelle. As soon as he
discovered his mistake he attempted to retake it, but, by that time,
our men were firmly lodged there and could not be shifted from the
village.

In the middle of August, to everyone's satisfaction, it became known
that we were to be up and doing at no distant date, and preparations
were immediately and silently set on foot. Throughout each night a
continual stream of teams and wagons conveyed thousands of rounds of
ammunition up the line to battery positions, and fresh dumps were
placed in forward localities. New battle positions were constructed in
advanced positions and stocked with shells, and we only awaited the
order to occupy them. Instructions were issued to wagon lines that all
surplus kit and stores were to be left behind, as a strenuous time was
in store for us, and all ranks responded with a will to the hard work
these preparations necessitated. Drivers were elated at the prospect
of a change from their humdrum existence, and their enthusiasm knew no
bounds. New reinforcing batteries appeared like mushrooms during the
night, and lay safely ensconced in their appointed places in readiness
for the coming fray, while the neighbourhood behind the lines bristled
with activity and also with new arrivals. We believed that probably
these preparations were being made in order to take the Henin Ridge in
front, and no one imagined that the coming operations would consist of
more than a local attack with a limited objective, as little or no
information had been given to anyone. It is true that rumours were
abroad, that our opponents were preparing to withdraw during the
coming winter to their defences in the Hindenburg Line, which meant
that we would be left most uncomfortably situated in the wilderness
throughout that season. Little did we dream, however, that this    (p. 082)
was the commencement of a long series of hammer blows, lasting
over several months, and employing millions of men, and destined to be
the last and greatest battle the world has ever seen, ending with the
complete demoralisation of the enemy's forces. The turn of the tide
was at hand at last!




CHAPTER XII.                                                       (p. 083)

Through the Hindenburg Line.


Before the serious work ahead of us could be undertaken, it was
necessary to shear off an awkward little bulge in the enemy's line,
which included the ruined hamlet of Moyenneville. The corps on our
right were to take part in an assault two days previous to the
commencement of our own advance, so it was considered expedient to
accomplish the above task at the same time. Consequently, during the
big attack, delivered in the south on the 21st of August, which
brought our troops level with the Arras-Albert railway line, our small
side-show passed off successfully almost unnoticed. Desperate fighting
had also taken place in the neighbourhood of Morlancourt, just north
of the river Somme, in which the enemy troops had been driven back
after stubborn resistance. They thereupon evacuated the town of
Albert, as the place was getting too hot for them, and retired on
positions to the east of it. Our guns were now moved into their battle
positions, and on the eve of the attack everything was ready and in
order. For once in a way the weather was favourable, and this augured
well for the speedy advancement of the guns, which was essential for
the success of the operations.

At dawn, therefore, on the 23rd inst., without any preliminary
bombardment, but, preceded by a dense creeping barrage and supported
by innumerable tanks, the infantry set out on their long journey. The
men swept on, capturing the villages of Boyelles and Hamelincourt at
an early hour, without meeting much opposition or suffering undue
casualties. The day went well throughout and all objectives were
taken, and by nightfall, the vast machinery in the rear commenced to
move slowly forward. Batteries were advanced and supplied with
ammunition, by their echelons, ready for the next bout, and wagon
lines occupied the positions only just vacated by the guns. The attack
was continued on the following morning, which necessitated the     (p. 084)
moving up of the guns once more, and the same thing continued day
after day. The enemy was slowly and relentlessly pressed back without
a pause or breathing space, and once this gigantic force was set in
motion it was exceedingly difficult to stop it, as our opponents were
soon to find out to their cost.

As the fight proceeded, our comrades on the left joined in, and
gradually the battle spread further north, assuming huge dimensions,
until it reached the river Scarpe. The enemy was caught napping before
Monchy, and the Dominion forces in one bound everywhere overwhelmed
their opponents, not only capturing the village but gaining ground to
the extent of two miles beyond it. By this time, Croisilles and St.
Leger had fallen into our hands, but the enemy made a most determined
stand in front of Ecoust, and a very stiff tussle took place for
several days before we eventually gained possession of it.

Some extraordinary incidents took place during the course of these
operations. The long-hoped for open warfare was upon us at last, and
the gunners' dream of galloping into action and firing with open
sights at close range was an accomplished fact almost before we were
aware of it. On one occasion, the whole Brigade, immediately at the
close of executing a creeping barrage, limbered up, and topping the
crest in front came face to face with the enemy, and dropped into
action alongside our advancing infantry. The enemy machine gunners
were lined up on a ridge some four hundred yards away, but on seeing
us they decamped with all speed, probably believing us to be a
regiment of cavalry. At any rate, if they had stood their ground and
manned their guns, they would have assuredly wiped us off the face of
the map almost before we could have opened fire on them. At the end of
another day's work, our battery position was scarcely two hundred
yards behind our front line, where the infantry had installed
themselves.

The wagon lines were now well over late enemy territory, on the ground
where his batteries had been situated, and the mess was almost beyond
description. In some cases his positions were entirely obliterated,
which spoke volumes for the accuracy of the fire of our heavies,
directed by our gallant airmen, and if it had not been for the
quantities of ammunition and dead horses littered around, it would
have been impossible to have known that positions ever existed there.
Mine shafts had been entirely closed up by the explosion of the great
shells, and a conglomeration of huge craters marked their          (p. 085)
locality. There was no rest for anyone these days, and no men were
called upon to perform more strenuous work than our little drivers,
whose untiring and never failing energy was worthy of the highest
praise and admiration: not only had they to care for their pair of
horses, but were incessantly on the go twixt gun positions, dumps, and
wagon lines under the most trying and difficult circumstances, and, at
the same time, the latter were changing positions frequently. However,
they never faltered or grumbled, and had always a cheery smile on
their faces, even when they returned in the middle of the night dead
beat. For days on end it was impossible to get out of one's clothes,
and sleep was almost an unknown quantity: however, what did it matter
as long as we continued to advance, and in spite of everything--this
was a long way better than the monotonous routine of trench warfare.
Everybody looked upon it in this light, and the excitement and never
ending novelty of the experiences under which we were living, carried
us on through thick and thin.

The corps on our left, meanwhile, had by a superhuman effort
penetrated the great Drocourt-Queant switch of the Hindenburg line,
and firmly maintained their grip on the ground to the east of it, and
all counter attacks made by the enemy, to dislodge them, proved
unavailing. The troops to the south had also effected good progress,
and the ill-fated town of Bapaume had again changed hands and passed
for the last time into the keeping of the Allies. Thus it came about
that the enemy troops, in spite of their very determined resistance in
the neighbourhood of Ecoust and Mory, found themselves in a most
perilous position, as the Dominion forces were now well in their rear,
and were carrying out a turning movement from a northerly direction.
Therefore, they were forced to do something, without further delay,
which resulted in a swift retirement on to the Hindenburg line some
six miles to the rear.

It was a most interesting and instructive chase, and the enemy
retreated so fast that it was with the greatest difficulty that we
could keep up and maintain contact with him. The battery had
reluctantly to abandon a captured German field gun which had been
doing valiant work as the seventh gun for several days against its
late owners, for we had neither time or the means to convey        (p. 086)
surplus equipment along with us. It was the kind of day that one reads
about in "Field Artillery Training" or even endeavours to imitate
while manoeuvring out in rest, but for the first time we were doing
it in reality. The battery dropped into action on innumerable
occasions during the course of the day, and had only time to fire a
few rounds before the enemy had decamped out of range. Then we would
limber up with all speed, the teams waiting the orthodox two hundred
yards in rear and to the flank, and gallop forward and take up a new
position right out in the open, and help the enemy on his way with a
few reminders that we were up and after him, and that he would do well
to hurry.

By evening our foes had snugly entrenched themselves behind the great
Hindenburg barrier, and we again came face to fare with this
formidable obstacle. The line had, meanwhile, been kept in an
excellent state of preservation, and it was quite out of the question
to make a frontal attack on it without first cutting the belts of
broad wire and treating the emplacements to a prolonged bombardment.
Another formidable hindrance in our way and placed between us,
moreover, was the famous Canal Du Nord, which was entirely dry in most
places. It was a considerable breadth across, and could obviously not
be bridged as long as the enemy kept watch over it from the opposite
side, and it varied from forty to seventy feet in depth. Thus, for the
time being, the line settled down stationary until this task could be
accomplished, for it was not the intention of our Command that we
should sit down for the winter before this great fortress, as our
enemies wished and expected us to do.

Our opponents were too busily engaged removing their heavy pieces of
Artillery back to a place of safety to subject us to a great amount of
annoyance, and, as the weather remained good, the work of bringing our
heavies up was accomplished quickly and effectively. The battery took
up a position in our former front line facing Bourlon Wood, with the
ruined village of Mouevres immediately ahead, while the forward
section was placed in part of the Hindenburg line itself, south-east
of Pronville. Wire cutting was undertaken and carried out by all field
batteries, and the heavies pounded enemy emplacements and
communication trenches in the rear.

Bombing by aircraft became intensive on both sides, and the enemy
adopted new tactics by coming over after dark, and, waiting for    (p. 087)
the gun flashes, proceeded to drop bombs on the batteries. A fine
spectacle was witnessed two nights in succession in the form of a
super-Gotha bombing machine brought down in flames. Our small fighting
planes were in the habit of flying at a high altitude, keeping watch
over our lines and lying in wait for these monsters. As soon as one of
them was picked out in the rays of a searchlight, others would
concentrate at once on it, whereupon the archies immediately opened
fire. Then far above a light would twinkle out several times, which
was a sign for the anti-aircraft batteries to cease fire. Everything
remained still for a while, the searchlights always focused on their
prey, which endeavoured to dodge out of the brilliant light, but in
vain, owing to its unwieldiness. Then suddenly from out of the
darkness a little object shot alongside the giant plane and spat
tracer bullets into it, whereupon it instantly caught fire, and slowly
heeling over commenced its downward journey to destruction.

Fierce fighting continued to the south, and by a series of brilliant
operations our troops had everywhere come in contact with the
Hindenburg Line, and commenced pounding its defences for the further
advance. At the beginning of the fourth week in September preparations
were almost complete for the coming assault, which would require all
the energy and fortitude we could display. The Division was
side-slipped down to the neighbourhood of Havrincourt, as it was
familiar ground to us, after our experiences in November and December
of the previous year. The policy at this juncture was, as far as it
could be carried out, to place Divisions in localities with which they
had already become acquainted. Our battle position was situated on the
outskirts of the small hamlet of Demicourt, and we were to cross the
canal a few hours after zero by means of a ramp already prepared and
carefully camouflaged at a point where it passed through our lines. If
all went according to expectations we were to follow a line due east,
and, passing to the north of Havrincourt, take up a position, already
known to us, on the railway cutting south of Flesquieres, although as
yet it was in enemy possession.

The great battle opened on the morning of the 27th inst., under
excellent conditions, and it is now known to everyone how the crossing
of the canal was effected by means of scaling ladders, and, in some
instances, by the use of life-belts.

From first to last the day went smoothly and well, and by          (p. 088)
nightfall the great Hindenburg Line, upon which the enemy depended so
much and in which he had such faith, was everywhere behind us, and we
were through, at last, to open country beyond!

It only remained for the Allies' great Commander-in-Chief to deliver
the final knock-out blow at his own time and discretion.

At this time the writer was reluctantly forced to leave the Battery on
account of ill health, and was sent home, and it is a source of keen
regret to him that on that account he missed the closing weeks of the
great campaign.

It is now a matter of history how our Armies, after hot and incessant
fighting, swept the enemy divisions out of France.

On Armistice Day, the Division was in possession of Maubeuge, and thus
the Guards found themselves on territory which they had occupied in
the early days of the War, prior to the retreat from Mons.

After three and a half years of strenuous warfare, the Battery is now
lying at rest in Cologne, where it keeps its silent "Watch on the
Rhine."




THE END.





End of Project Gutenberg's Three years in France with the Guns:, by C. A. Rose

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE YEARS IN FRANCE ***

***** This file should be named 19814.txt or 19814.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/8/1/19814/

Produced by Geetu Melwani, Christine P. Travers, Sigal
Alon and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
