Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, No. 103, July, 1875. Vol. XVIII., by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Nursery, No. 103, July, 1875. Vol. XVIII.
       A Monthly Magazine for Youngest Readers

Author: Various

Release Date: November 15, 2006 [EBook #19821]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Jacqueline Jeremy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









No. 103. JULY, 1875. Vol. XVIII

THE NURSERY

_A Monthly Magazine_
FOR YOUNGEST READERS.

BOSTON:
JOHN L. SHOREY, 36 BROMFIELD STREET.

AMERICAN NEWS CO., 119 NASSAU ST., NEW YORK.
NEW-ENGLAND NEWS CO., 41 COURT ST., BOSTON.
CENTRAL NEWS CO., PHILADELPHIA.
WESTERN NEWS CO., CHICAGO.

$1.60 a Year, in advance, Postage included. A single copy, 15 cts.




Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1875, by JOHN L.
SHOREY, in the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.




CONTENTS OF NUMBER ONE HUNDRED AND THREE.

                                                             PAGE
THE LOST RABBIT                 By _Aunt Emma's Niece_          1
A TUG EXCURSION                 By _Aunt Nellie_                3
TIT, TAT, TOE!                  By _Olive A. Wadsworth_         5
THE KEEPER PUNISHED             By _Uncle Charles_              7
NEDDY'S SAND-BANK               By _S. B. T._                   9
SURF-BATHING AT CONEY ISLAND    By _F. H. W._                  13
A FUNNY FACT                    By _M. A. C._                  14
AN EXCITING SCENE               By _Mr. Periwinkle_            15
'MAKE A PIE'                    By _Mary's Mamma_              16
A DRAWING LESSON                                               17
A BIG DOG                       By _Bouncer_                   18
THE BUTTERFLY                   By _Marian Douglas_            19
THE YOUNG CRITIC                By _Arthur Selwyn_             20
PLAYING HORSE                   By _A. B. C._                  22
JACK                            By _A._                        25
A LETTER FROM CALIFORNIA        By _Daisy_                     27
THE PARROT WHO PLAYED MASTER    By _Victor Bluthgen_           29
CATSKILL-MOUNTAIN HOUSE         By _Anna Livingston_           31
SLEEPING IN THE SUNSHINE        (_Music by Robert Mills_)      32




EDITOR'S PORTFOLIO.


The present number begins the eighteenth half-yearly volume of "The
Nursery;" and we are happy to inform our friends that the magazine was
never so successful as it is to-day. Thus far, we have entered upon
every new volume with an increased circulation. We look for a still
larger increase in the future; for there are thousands and thousands of
children not yet supplied with the work, for whom no other magazine can
take its place. We have something in preparation for coming numbers
which will make the eyes of our little readers sparkle with delight. Now
is the time for canvassers to go to work with a will.

The illustration by Merrill of the "Three Little Culprits" who were kept
after school to study their spelling-lesson, is one of those happy
touches of nature that every one can appreciate. The poem by Miss
Wadsworth is worthy of the picture.

Children who are trying to learn to draw, will be pleased with the
beautiful subject in our present number. By giving half-an-hour a day to
drawing now, they will acquire a facility and a skill that will not only
be of service to them, but a great pleasure to them, all their lives.

If parents or teachers would like to know of two books by the use of
which teaching may be made a pleasure instead of a task to children,
they cannot do better than order "The Easy Book" and "The Beautiful
Book;" the former containing pieces in prose, and the latter, pieces in
verse, and both of them richly and copiously illustrated with
appropriate pictures. These books are published at "The Nursery" office
by John L. Shorey.

Children who enjoy making paper dolls, will find an advertisement at the
end of this number which is worthy of attention.




[Illustration]

THE LOST RABBIT.


Bunny was a little rabbit, the youngest of a large family. His home
was in an old wood, where the trees were very high, and wild-flowers
grew in great abundance. His mother had given him to understand that
he must not stray away from her, lest he should get lost, and not be
able to find her.

But Bunny, like some young children, was self-willed. He thought his
mother was over-careful; and so, one day, when nobody was watching him,
he slipped away from her, and sat down amid the grass, under two high
beech-trees.

He heard his mother calling him, but took no notice of her call. It was
a warm summer day, and he fell asleep. Soon he was startled by the loud
barking of dogs. He woke up, and, oh, how frightened he was!

Luckily for him, the dogs did not come where he lay crouching; for their
masters were shooting birds, not rabbits. Bunny thought the best thing
he could do now was to scamper back to his mother, his brothers and
sisters as fast as he could.

But it was not quite so easy to find them again. No sooner had he got
into the open path than a troop of boys caught sight of him; and at once
there was a volley of stones from their hands. By rare good luck he was
not hit by the stones. But he had not gone many paces farther, when a
man with a gun shot at him. Happily the man missed his aim, and the shot
went into some bushes.

Having escaped this new danger, Bunny leaped swiftly over the high
grass, till he came to the fallen trunk of a tree. Here he hoped to find
his mother; but, ah! there was no trace of her to be seen. Night came
on; and poor Bunny had to lie down all alone and go to sleep.

The next morning it rained heavily; and Bunny crept into the hollow
trunk of the tree, where he could keep warm and dry. But before noon
the sun came out beautifully; and the little rabbit, being very hungry,
ran out.

The first thing he saw was his mother and the rest of the family eating
their dinner. Oh, how glad he was! His mother did not scold him, but
gave him plenty to eat; and he made up his mind, that he never would
run away again from so good a mother.

      AUNT EMMA'S NIECE.




[Illustration]

A TUG EXCURSION.


It was just after dinner when papa said, "Put on your hats quickly, and
we will go down to the dock, and perhaps we shall find a tug going out."

Ralph had something beside his hat to put on; for, contrary to mamma's
orders, he had taken off his shoes and stockings. But, with good
Maggie's help, that wrong was speedily righted, and we were soon on our
way to the dock.

There we found the stanch tug "Williams" just ready to leave. We jumped
on board. The ropes were cast off; and a few turns of the wheel took us
out on the broad expanse of Lake Michigan.

How delighted we all were with the beautiful picture there spread out
before us!--the broad blue waters, dotted here and there with white
sails; far away to the right, the smoke arising from a huge steamer on
her way from Chicago to Buffalo; and away, away, straight ahead of us,
two white specks, which Captain Charley told us were the vessels he was
going out for.

A look through the glass proved that the "specks" were _really_ vessels,
and huge ones too. While we were looking and talking, what do you
suppose one of the men brought forward for Ralph's amusement?--A dog?
No. A kitty? No. A parrot? No. I think you will have to give it up. A
bear! Just the cunningest little bear any one ever saw.

He was just about the size of a tan-terrier, and so full of play, that
he got himself into all sorts of shapes, and performed all the antics
imaginable. But the most laughable thing was to see him as a tight-rope
performer. I am sure he outdid any circus actor who ever travelled.

Ralph thought it jolly to play with a live bear. As one would suppose,
the bear was a great pet with all on board the tug. He had always been
handled with kindness; and the captain told us he had never yet bitten
any one.

All this time, we are nearing the vessels we are to tow back. See what a
huge cable is thrown out to join the vessels to the tug. Here we go,
homeward bound.

We must not forget to tell of the nice race we had with the steam barge
"Reitz," and how Ralph shouted when we came out ahead; nor about Ralph's
getting hungry, and going down into the cabin, and making friends with
the cook, and coming up with his pockets full of crackers and cookies,
which were so much better than any he ever ate before.

Don't you think just as we do, that we had a jolly time? Ralph says he
should like to live on board the tug; but I think he would want to come
home every night.

      AUNT NELLIE.




[Illustration]

TIT, TAT, TOE!


                 Tit, tat, toe!
                 Three in a row!
The heavy schoolroom clock strikes loud and slow.
                 "Now every little one
                 May go and take his fun,"
The gentle teacher cries, "for the school is done."

                 Tit, tat, toe!
                 All in a row!
Out through the open door the merry children go,
                 Leaving only three,
                 Sad as sad can be,--
Wretched little culprits with their Spellers, as you see!

                 Tit, tat, toe!
                 Three in a row!--
Billy Bumble, Benny Bell, and little Kitty Coe.
                 Little Kitty sighs;
                 Little Benny cries;
And little Billy Bumble pokes his fingers in his eyes.

                 Tit, tat, toe!
                 Three in a row!
That's the game they played upon their slate, you know:
                 The 0's were made by Kate;
                 The crosses, by her mate;
While Billy kept the tally at the bottom of the slate.

                 When their class was heard,
                 They couldn't spell a word:
They put an "i" in burly, and they put a "u" in bird!
                 So, according to the rule,
                 They must study after school,
Or by and by they'll have to sit upon the dunce's stool.

                 Tit, tat, toe!
                 Three in a row!
The teacher's pencil taps on the desk broad and low.
                 "Now come," she says, "and spell;
                 I'm sure you'll do it well;
By the brightening of your faces, I readily can tell."

                 Tit, tat, toe!
                 Three in a row!
Straight to the teacher's desk the willing children go:
                 They say their lesson o'er,
                 Not missing as before,
Then fly away, determined to be idle never more.

                 Tit, tat, toe!
                 Three in a row!
Is a fascinating pastime the little people know;
                 But oh! it never pays
                 To walk in folly's ways;
For pleasure quickly passes, while pain much longer stays.

      OLIVE A. WADSWORTH.




THE KEEPER PUNISHED.


Elephants, when kindly treated, become very much attached to their
keepers, and will obey their orders as readily as good children obey
their parents.

But sometimes the keepers are cruel men, and, instead of managing the
elephants by kindness, will goad them, and treat them badly.

One day a new keeper was set over an elephant named Tippoo, that had
been accustomed to good treatment. This new keeper, if he had been wise,
would have won the elephant's love by kindness.

Instead of that, the man kept thrusting his goad at the elephant, and
hurting him without any good cause. Tippoo bore it patiently for some
time; but at last, with his great trunk seizing his tormentor, he ran
with him down to the river that was near by.

Here, after ducking the man several times in the water, he laid him down
gently on the dry ground, as much as to say, "Now, sir, behave yourself,
and treat me like a gentleman, or I will give you a worse ducking than
that."

Finding that Tippoo was not to be trifled with, the man began to treat
him well, and the elephant soon forgave him, and at last grew quite fond
of him. Love wins love.

      UNCLE CHARLES.

[Illustration: THE KEEPER PUNISHED.]




NEDDY'S SAND-BANK.


On lovely summer afternoons, when the sky is blue, and the sea bluer, I
take my books or work, and go out to sit under a great oak-tree that
stands at the top of a sand-bank, which slopes gently down to a broad,
white, beach.

[Illustration]

This sand-bank is a wonderful place for the children. Every fine day
Neddy takes his box of playthings, and marches off to the sand-bank; and
I think, as I kiss his dear rosy cheeks, what a nice, clean boy he is in
his linen blouse, broad-brimmed hat with blue ribbons, white stockings,
and neat buttoned boots. He returns after a few hours, looking like a
little savage.

"Just fit to go into the wash-tub," Dinah says; and she is right.

What do they play on the sand-bank? I will tell you what they did
yesterday, while I sat under the oak-tree and worked, and listened to
their prattle.

"Let's build cities to-day," said Tommy Abbott. "Oh, yes!" said Jamie
Newton. "I will build Boston," chimed in Neddy: "I don't know much about
other places." After each had selected a city to build, they were silent
for some time.

But by and by Neddy looked up, and called to me, "Oh, do come down here,
mamma, and see my Boston!" So I climbed down the bank to visit his city.
He had scooped a hole in the sand, lined it with clay, filled it with
sea-water, and stocked it with his shining tin fish. Of course I knew at
once this was the pond on Boston Common.

[Illustration]

Jamie Newton, who studies geography, and knows all about great cities
everywhere, made a model Philadelphia, with its long, wide streets.
Jamie's streets were so clean, and so beautifully shaded with sprigs of
evergreen, that Mary Whitman said her grandest doll, Arabella Rosetta,
should take a nice ride through them. So Rosetta was set up in her
carriage, and one tucked the crimson afghan about her dainty feet, while
another opened her _very best_ sky-blue parasol, (for Rosetta is
particular about her complexion), and Mary put on her hat with the blue
plumes, and pink roses, smoothed down her flounces, and said, "Be a good
girl, Rosy. Don't stay out after dark, for the dew will spoil your
clothes."

[Illustration]

By and by it grew late. The sun sank down into the sea; while the moon,
broad and full, rose from behind the hill; and I said, "Come, Neddy, we
must run home to tea."

But Tommy Abbott, who had built a most wonderful Chicago, begged for a
match to burn his city with. So the children gathered a heap of sticks
and dry leaves; and Tommy set fire to the pile, and up and away flamed
the beautiful city. Then we all went up to the hotel together, and very
soon tea was ready; and it was a wonderful thing to see how the children
disposed of bread and milk, baked sweet apples, and gingerbread.

After we went up to our room, I wrote this story, and read it to Neddy.
How his eyes sparkled with delight! "It's just as true as I live, every
word of it," he said as I finished.

[Illustration]

"But, mamma, you forgot little Rose Ellsworth's town. She made a real
hill, and covered it with grass, and dotted it all over with violets;
and Daisy lent her a cow from her 'Noah's Ark;' and we made it stand up
under a tree, and, if it had only whisked its tail, it would have looked
almost alive.

"I think, mamma," he continued, "that Rose is the nicest little girl
here. I've painted her picture in my album."

So I was not surprised, while looking over Neddy's pictures, to see that
he had wasted a great deal of paint in trying to display Rose's pink
cheeks and lovely golden hair: He had painted her cheeks redder than the
reddest cherries you ever saw.

      S. B. T.




[Illustration]

SURF-BATHING AT CONEY ISLAND.


Coney Island, about eight miles from the city of New York, is four and a
half miles long and about half a mile in width. It is quite a resort in
summer for those who want to breathe the briny air of the ocean.

Charles and Laura had long been promised a visit to this famous
bathing-place, and one warm day in June their father drove them down to
the island; for there is a bridge connecting it with the main land.

As they drove along the beach, they saw the bathers in the water, and
Charles was very desirous of having a dip in the salt sea himself; but
he had no bathing-dress, and so he had to give it up.

It is very pleasant on a fine day in summer to stand on the beach, and
watch the waves as they come foaming up. The children were much
entertained at seeing a Newfoundland dog rush into the water after a
stick which his master would throw far out.

They will long remember their pleasant visit to Coney Island; but the
next time they go, they mean to take their bathing-dresses and have a
swim.

      F. H. W.




[Illustration]

A FUNNY FACT.


Taddy Pole and Polly Wogg
Lived together in a bog:
Here you see the very pool
Where they went to swimming-school.

[Illustration]

By and by (it's true, but strange)
O'er them came a wondrous change:
Here you have them on a log,
Each a most decided frog.

      M. A. C.




AN EXCITING SCENE.


Early last spring, Mistress Jenny Wren took possession of the little box
nailed to a tree immediately in front of Mr. Philip's house. She had not
really moved in, when who should peep in but Mr. English-Sparrow.

He was abroad house hunting, and never mistrusted that any one had got
this house before him. He was thinking how well it would suit himself
and mate, when _whir-r-r-r_! _whir-r-r-r_! up came Mrs. Jenny; and
before he could offer a word of excuse, she began with, "Fie, fie! I
took you for a gentleman! What business have you here?"

"My dear madam," began Mr. Sparrow; but Jenny would not hear him. "Out,
out with you, you saucebox, you interloper!" she screamed; and she
dashed at him and pecked him till he beat a speedy retreat.

The next day, however, he came round again; whether to express his
regrets in due form, or to buy her off, I cannot say; but Mrs. Jenny was
unwilling to accept anything but the most humble apology.

One look convinced her that he didn't want her pardon, but her house;
and out she flew at his very eyes, and on she chased as far as Mr.
Philip, who was sitting at the window, could see. But Mr. Sparrow was
seen no more.

I knew Jenny Wren was spirited; but I should hardly have thought that of
her; should you!

      MR. PERIWINKLE.




"MAKE A PIE."


The summer before our Mary was two years old, she and her brother used
to make pies in the sand, cutting them out with the cover of a little
tin pail, always using water to mix them, if they could obtain it.

About this time, Bertie was learning,--

    "Little drops of water, little grains of sand,
    Make the mighty ocean, and the pleasant land."

One day, Mary thought she would say it with him, so she began,--

    "Little drops of water, little grains of sand,
    Make _a pie_."

"Make the mighty ocean, Mary," said her brother.

"No, _make a pie_," said Mary; and she could not be induced to say it
right till months afterwards.

      MARY'S MAMMA.




[Illustration: From SIR EDWIN LANDSEER'S painting. In outline by
MR. HARRISON WEIR, as a drawing lesson. VOL. XVIII.--No. 1]




A BIG DOG.


I am a big dog, and my name is Bouncer. I want to tell you, little boys
and girls, how I spend my time all the day long. In the morning I am
always the first one awake: I take a walk around the house, and see if
every thing is right; then, perhaps, I am let into the house. I look
from one to another to see if all the family are at home; and I am much
pleased when somebody has a good word for me, or when I get a pull from
the baby's hand.

For breakfast, the kitten and I have the leavings from the table; but
there never is half enough for both of us: so I let her clean out the
platter, while I run to see my master off. When I get as far as the
gate, he says, "Go back!" I sit down and watch him till he is out of
sight.

Then there comes the milkman. I know him well; for he comes every
morning and fills the can, and I watch it until it is taken in. Perhaps,
when the door is open, a bone is thrown out to me. I hide it, quickly;
for I see another dog coming. He is a friend of mine. He comes quite
often to see me. We take a run around the house, and have a quiet talk
together; then he takes himself off.

By that time I hear a team coming. I run to see if it is coming to the
house. It is a man with a load of coal. I lie down and watch him.
Perhaps I take a nap; but I sleep with one eye open; and if it is warm,
and the flies trouble me, I have to switch my tail to keep them off.

Toward night, I station myself at the gate to watch for my master. I run
to meet him. He pats me on the head, and says, "Good Bouncer!" I jump up
and wag my tail, and try to let him know how glad I am to see him.

I hope you will be pleased with these extracts from the diary of

      BOUNCER.




[Illustration]

THE BUTTERFLY.


Again, beside the roadside, blows
The pink, sweet-scented brier-rose;
Its purple head the clover raises;
And all the fields are full of daisies;
And in the sunshine flutters by
A little white-winged butterfly.

From flower to flower I watch him go;
He seems a floating flake of snow:
Now to a milkweed bloom he's clinging;
There on a buttercup he's swinging;
And now he makes a little stop
Upon a scented thistle-top.

Could we change places, he and I,
And I should turn a butterfly,
How gayly, then, I'd hover over
The elder-flowers and tufts of clover!
I'd feast on honey all the day,
With nobody to say me nay.

But, could I only honey eat,
'Twould grow as tiresome as sweet:
The pretty flowers would quickly wither;
And, all day flying hither, thither,
My wings would ache: I'm glad that I
Am not that little butterfly.

      MARIAN DOUGLAS.




THE YOUNG CRITIC.

Ernest is five years old; and for three years he has been a subscriber
to "The Nursery," the pictures in which he has enjoyed very much.

Last autumn, his parents took him with them to France. In the great
city of Paris, they had rooms in a boarding-house, where they made
the acquaintance of a young American painter, who had a studio in
the building.

Ernest was such a quiet little fellow, and was so fond of pictures, that
Mr. Norton, the artist, was always glad to see him in his studio; for
Ernest did not trouble him, but would stand looking at the pictures for
a quarter of an hour at a time.

One day, as he stood admiring a painting in which some horses were
represented, he noticed a fault; for Ernest was a judge of horses: he
was himself the owner of one--made of wood. "Look here, Mr. Norton,"
said he, "isn't one of the hind-legs of this horse longer than
the other?"

Mr. Norton left his easel, and came and told Ernest to point out in the
painting what fault he meant. The little fellow did so; and the painter
exclaimed, "Why, you little chip of a critic, you are right as sure as
I'm alive! We must make a painter of you."

[Illustration]

Ernest is not quite old enough yet to decide whether he will make a
painter or a confectioner. The sight of the beautiful candies and cakes
which he has seen in some of the shops, inclines him to the belief that
a confectioner's lot is the more enviable one. He thinks it must be a
charming occupation to make molasses-candy, and be able to eat as much
as he wants. He must live and learn.

      ARTHUR SELWYN.




PLAYING HORSE.


Among Ellen's playthings, there is none that pleases her more than the
bright worsted reins which her aunt bought for her at the May fair.

"Reins!--what does a girl do with reins?" I think I hear somebody ask.
Why, she plays horse with them, to be sure. She has a brother Charles.
He is the horse sometimes; and sometimes he is the driver, and Ellen is
the horse. Either way, it is good fun.

One fine June day, her elder brother, Ned, took part in the play. He
said there should be a span of horses. He and Charles would be the
span, and Ellen should drive. "No," said Ellen, "I would rather be one
of the horses."

[Illustration]

So Nelly and Ned were harnessed together, and Charley took the reins.
"Get up!" said he, and away they went. As they crossed the lawn, they
passed a lawn-mower, and the horse Ned shied badly. If he had not had
such a steady horse as Nell by his side, there might have been an
accident.

As it was, Charles held him in with a tight rein, and the two horses
came trotting back to the starting-point at full speed. If Charles had
had a watch to time them by, I think he would have found that they made
a mile in less than three minutes.

      A. B. C.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

JACK.


Jack was not a handsome dog. His best friends could not call him a
beauty; but as he was a very wise, good dog, we were all very fond
of him.

One afternoon, some of the younger members of the family were sitting on
the piazza, waiting for papa, who was expected home on the five-o'clock
train. Jack was lying beside them.

At last, the whistle sounded in the distance; and the little
four-year-old "flower of the family" said, "Run, Jack, to meet papa at
the station." Jack looked up, listened intently for a moment, and then
lay down again with a sigh of disappointment.

"Oh, what a lazy fellow!" said six-year-old Annie. "If mamma would only
trust us to go to the station, we would not wait, or play sleepy." But
the train passed on, and papa had not come.

In a little while, another whistle sounded; and this time, without a
word of command, Jack sprung off the steps, dashed down the street, and
returned in a few moments, escorting his master.

How did Jack know that the time-table had been changed that day, and a
freight-train had taken the place of his master's train?

Another time, an uncle, who was visiting the family, had occasion to
stay in town until the last train. Jack refused to be shut up, and, at
eleven o'clock at night, went in the dark to the station, and escorted
our guest up to the house.

How did he know what train to meet? and what instinct impelled him to
do his part towards keeping up the courtesy of the family?




[Illustration: ST. PAUL'S CATHEDRAL, LONDON.]




[Illustration]

A LETTER FROM CALIFORNIA.


Here we are in Santa Cruz, in a hotel right on the beach. We had such a
lovely stage-ride over the mountains, and enjoyed the mountain air so
much, that I was almost sorry when we arrived. I wish you could see the
great madrona-trees on the mountains with their dark-red wood and
beautiful green leaves. I do not believe you have any Eastern trees so
beautiful.

On the top of the Santa Cruz mountains, where we stopped to water the
horses, there is a little house, and while we waited there, out from the
house came a man whose face was all scarred and seamed. After we drove
away, the stage-driver told us that the man was a hunter, known as
"Mountain Charley," and that his scars were made by a grisly-bear.

Well, we have now been at Santa Cruz a week, and I have had a good time.
Every morning we go in bathing. It is a funny sight to see everybody
racing down into the waves, and catching hold of a big rope that is
stretched from the shore a good distance into the water. The undertow
here is so strong, that it is not safe to venture away from the rope.

Yesterday we all went to Moore's Beach to have a "clam-bake." We rode in
a big wagon; and the first thing we did, when we got to the beach, was
to pull off our shoes and stockings, and wade in the water. Papa and
Uncle John dug the clams; while the rest of us ran about hunting for
sea-urchins and shells.

As soon as the clams were boiled, we sat down on the beach, and unpacked
the lunch-baskets. Oh, how hungry we were! and how good every thing
tasted.

There was one lady in the party, who sat up high on the rocks, with her
kid gloves on, and her sunshade over her, while the rest of us were
running about with bare feet, and skirts tucked up. But at lunch-time
she came down from her high place, and I saw her eating clams with as
good a relish as any of us.

Next week we are going to Pescadero, and, perhaps, I will write to you
again from there.

      DAISY.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE PARROT WHO PLAYED THE MASTER.

A STORY WITH A MORAL.


The master of the house had gone out on business. As he shut the door,
the parrot, whose place was on a perch in the room, thought to himself,
"Hi! Now I am master in this house, and I'll let people know it."

He thereupon threw his head proudly on one side, and spread himself in
a very pompous manner; then, as he had seen his master do, broke the
finest rose from the bush, and put the stem in his bill; then looked at
his gay-colored coat in the glass, and felt as grand as a born nobleman.

Near by, on the rug, two dogs, Ami and Finette, lay asleep. They were
well-trained, obedient dogs, clean-limbed and civil, expert in many
clever tricks, but not quite a match for the parrot in cleverness
and cunning.

As soon as the latter spied them, he cried out, imitating his master's
tones, "Finette, attention! Ami, make ready!" Whereupon Ami stood up on
his hind-legs, straight as a sentinel; while Finette hurried up,
expecting to have something thrown for him to bring back.

There stood and stood the poor simpletons, steadfastly looking up, while
Master Poll cried sternly all the while, "Ami, make ready! Finette,
attention!" Finette became almost wild with eagerness; and poor Ami
could hardly stand on his hind-legs any longer.

At last the master came home, and put an end to the torture of the
poor dogs.

The moral of my story is this: whenever a simpleton puts on airs and
plays the master, there are always other simpletons ready to obey
his commands.

      VICTOR BLUTHGEN.




[Illustration]




[Illustration]

CATSKILL-MOUNTAIN HOUSE.


My little friend Mabel is passing the summer amid the Catskill
Mountains. These mountains are in the State of New York, on the west
side of the Hudson River.

Round Top and High Peak, two of the highest summits, are about
thirty-eight hundred feet above the level of the sea. They are well
covered with forests, and in autumn, when the leaves begin to change,
they make a very brilliant show.

The Catskill-Mountain House is finely situated on a rocky terrace,
twenty-two hundred feet above the river. It is twelve miles from the
village of Catskill, and is much resorted to in the summer season.

The prospect from this house is quite extensive. Mabel writes me that
the view of the sunrise is grand; the air is cool and bracing; and the
sight of the tops of trees rolling below, like a sea, for miles and
miles, is a thing to remember.

      ANNA LIVINGSTON.




[Illustration]

SLEEPING IN THE SUNSHINE.

[Illustration: Music]

Words by MATTHIAS BARR.      Music by ROBERT MILLS.


1.

    Sleeping in the sunshine,
      Fie, fie, fie!
    While the birds are soar-ing,
      High, high, high!
    While the birds are op'-ning sweet
      And the blossoms at your feet,
    Look a smil-ing face to greet.
      Fie, fie, fie!

2.

    Sleeping in the sunshine,
      Fie, fie, fie!
    While the bee goes humming,
      By, by, by!
    Is there no small task for you,--
      Nought for lit-tle hands to do;
    Shame to sleep the morning through!
      Fie, fie, fie!

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

VIOLET TOILET WATER.

CASHMERE BOUQUET EXTRACT.

CASHMERE BOUQUET Toilet Soap.

       *       *       *       *       *

SEEDS AND BULBS.

ILLUSTRATED SPRING CATALOGUE FOR 1875.

NOW READY.

Sent, with a specimen copy of THE AMERICAN GARDEN, a new Illustrated
Journal of Garden Art, edited by James Hogg, on receipt of ten cents.

BEACH, SON & CO., Seedsmen, 76 Fulton St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

$5 to $20 per day. Agents wanted. All classes of working people of
both sexes, young and old, make more money at work for us, in their
own localities, during their spare moments, or all the time, than at
anything else. We offer employment that will pay handsomely for every
hour's work. Full particulars, terms, &c., sent free. Send us your
address at once. Don't delay. Now is the time. Don't look for work
or business elsewhere, until you have learned what we offer.

G. STINSON & CO., Portland, Maine.

       *       *       *       *       *

AGENTS WANTED.

[Illustration]

Men or women. $34 week. Proof furnished. Business pleasant and
honorable with no risks. A 16 page circular and Valuable Samples
free. A postal-card on which to send your address costs but one
cent. Write at once to F. M. REED, 8TH ST., NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN PRESS. THE Nursery-Primer

A book by which children can teach themselves to read, with but
little help from parent or teacher.

SUPERBLY AND APTLY ILLUSTRATED.

The most beautiful Primer in the market. Containing upwards of a
hundred fine pictures. 96 PAGES of the size of The Nursery. The
word-system of teaching explained and applied.

JOHN L. SHOREY, 36 Bromfield Street, Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

FREE Sample copy of CHEAPEST PAPER IN AMERICA! Eight large pages,
(_Ledger_) size. Monthly; only 50 cents a year. Choice Heading,
Nice Premiums. AGENTS WANTED.

LITERARY REPORTER, Quincy, Mich.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRETTY PAPERS FOR PAPER DOLLS.

Send 15 cents, and get 20 varieties by mail.

C. W. JENCKS & BRO., Providence, R. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BEAUTIFUL ART OF DECALCOMANIA.

20 Transfer Pictures and 1 Beautiful Gem Chromo, with full instructions
and Catalogue containing 2000 valuable articles, including Price List
of Wax Flower Materials, Instructions without a Teacher, etc., sent
for 10 cents. These beautiful pictures consist of Heads, Landscapes,
Flowers, Autumn Leaves, Animals, Birds, Insects, Grotesque and Comic
Figures, etc., and are easily transferred to any article, so as to
imitate the most beautiful oil painting. Also 5 beautiful Gem Chromos
for ten cents, 30 for 50 cents, or a full family portfolio of assorted
varieties for $1.00.

Address, enclosing price, and a three cent stamp,

B. Alexander & Co.,
Agents Wanted. The Trade supplied.
66 Fulton Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

The Mother's Helper! The Baby's Joy!

The Centennial Baby Walking-Table.

This Walking-Table is the best article of the kind ever offered to the
mothers of America. The time saved to be given to other duties, aside
from personal relief to the mother or nurse, will more than pay the
price of the table. Any child that can stand a moment by a chair without
falling, can, by one day's practice, and sometimes at once, walk where
it pleases about the room. It is so constructed that it is impossible
for the child to fall or get injured in any way.

Prices.--Metal, very fine, $5. Black-Walnut, $5. Imitation
Walnut, $3.50.

Sent to any address on receipt of price, or C.O.D. Send for circular.

IRVING D. CLARK, Manufacturer, Gloversville, Fulton Co., New York.




[Illustration]

WHAT SPLENDID TEETH!

Is the exclamation that a perfect, even, and brilliant set of teeth
elicits. Brush the gleaming ivory every day with FRAGRANT SOZODONT!

And thus render its charm imperishable. Keep the ENAMEL SPOTLESS and the
GUMS HEALTHY with SOZODONT, and your teeth, however uneven, will always
be admired. No other dentrifice makes the teeth so WHITE, and yet none
is so entirely FREE from every OBJECTIONABLE INGREDIENT. It neutralizes
all impurities that are destructive to the teeth, and which defile the
BREATH. It has been endorsed by the most eminent Physicians, Dentists
and Divines. Sold by all Druggists.

       *       *       *       *       *

FEEBLE-MINDED YOUTH Private Institution at Barre, Mass. GEO. BROWN,
M.D., Sup't.

       *       *       *       *       *

$25 A DAY guaranteed using our WELL AUGER & DRILLS. $100 a month paid to
good agents. Auger book free. Jilz Auger Co., St. Louis, Mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONSTANTINES PINE TAR SOAP For Toilet, Bath and Nursery, Cures Diseases
of Skin Scalp and Mucous Coating. SOLD BY DRUGGISTS AND GROCERS.

       *       *       *       *       *

AGENTS WANTED, Men or Women, $50 per week. Address AMERICAN GOLD MINING
CO., Laramie City, Wyoming.

LADIES can make $5 a day in their own city or town Address ELLIS M'F'G
CO. Waltham, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

YOUNG AMERICA PRESS.

The most simple, effective, and durable printing press ever made.
Circulars sent free on application to JOSEPH WATSON, 53 Murray St.,
New York, and 73 Cornhill, Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

TO PEOPLE WHO REASON.

It is because TARRANT'S EFFERVESCENT SELTZER APERIENT reduces the heat
of the blood by creating perspiration, as well as through its purgative
operation, that it produces such marvelous effect in ferbile diseases.

SOLD BY ALL DRUGGISTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fathers and Mothers!)
Sons and Daughters! )

In these hard times get the most you can for your money.
Then subscribe at once for

THE DEW DROP,

the _best_ and _cheapest_ paper for the YOUNG, MIDDLE-AGED, and OLD, now
published. Full of splendid Stories, Sketches, Incidents, Anecdotes,
Scientific Articles, and Puzzles. A Brilliant Serial Story now
commencing. Only 40 cents a year, postpaid. Specimen copies 5 cents.

Address "DEW DROP" PUBLISHING CO., P. O. Box 2448. Boston, Mass.

A CARD.--We offer a cash prize of $5.00 for the best--we have not space
to give full particulars, but there are ten articles for competition,
for _each_ of which we shall give $5 cash. A splendid chance for boys
and girls to earn a little pocket money. Send 5 cents for full
particulars and a specimen copy of "THE DEW DROP."




THE NURSERY.

PREMIUM-LIST for 1875.


For three new subscribers, at $1.60 each, we will give any one of the
following articles: a heavily-plated gold pencil-case, a rubber
pencil-case with gold tips, silver fruit-knife, a pen-knife, a beautiful
wallet, any book worth $1.50. For FIVE, at $1.60 each, any one of the
following: globe microscope, silver fruit-knife, silver napkin-ring,
book or books worth $2.50. For SIX, at $1.60 each, we will give any one
of the following: a silver fruit-knife (marked), silver napkin-ring,
pen-knives, scissors, backgammon-board, note-paper and envelopes stamped
with initials, books worth $3.00. For TEN, at $1.60 each, select any one
of the following: morocco travelling-bag, stereoscope with six views,
silver napkin-ring, compound microscope, lady's work-box, sheet-music or
books worth $5.00. For TWENTY, at $1.60 each, select any one of the
following: a fine croquet-set, a powerful opera-glass, a toilet case,
Webster's Dictionary (unabridged), sheet-music or books worth $10.00.

***Any other articles equally easy to transport may be selected as
premiums, their value being in proportion to the number of subscribers
sent. Thus, we will give for three new subscribers, at $1.60 each, a
premium worth $1.50; for four, a premium worth $2.00; for five, a
premium worth $2.50; and so on.

BOOKS for premiums may be selected from any publisher's catalogue; and
we can always supply them at catalogue prices. Under this offer,
subscriptions to any periodical or newspaper are included.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPECIAL OFFERS


BOOKS.--For two new subscribers, at $1.60 each, we will give any
_half-yearly_ volume of THE NURSERY; for THREE, any _yearly_ volume; for
TWO, OXFORD'S JUNIOR SPEAKER; for TWO, THE EASY BOOK; for TWO, THE
BEAUTIFUL BOOK; for THREE, OXFORD'S SENIOR SPEAKER; for THREE, SARGENT'S
ORIGINAL DIALOGUES; for THREE, an elegant edition of SHAKSPEARE,
complete in one volume, full cloth, extra gilt, and gilt-edged; or any
one of the standard BRITISH POETS, in the same style. GLOBES.--For TWO
new subscribers, we will give a beautiful GLOBE three inches in
diameter; for THREE, a GLOBE four inches in diameter; for FIVE, a GLOBE
six inches in diameter. PRANG'S CHROMOS will be given as premiums at the
publisher's prices. Send stamp for a catalogue. GAMES, &c.--For TWO new
subscribers, we will give any one of the following: THE CHECKERED GAME
OF LIFE, ALPHABET AND BUILDING BLOCKS, DISSECTED MAPS, &c., &c. For
THREE new subscribers, any one of the following: JAPANESE BACKGAMMON OR
KAKEBA, ALPHABET AND BUILDING BLOCKS (extra). CROQUET, CHIVALRIE, RING
QUOITS, and any other of the popular games of the day may be obtained on
the most favorable terms, by working for THE NURSERY. Send stamp to us
for descriptive circulars.

       *       *       *       *       *

MARSHALL'S ENGRAVED PORTRAITS OF LINCOLN AND GRANT.

Either of these large and superbly executed steel engravings will be
sent, postpaid, as a premium for three new subscribers at $1.60 each.

[Hand-->] Do not wait to make up the whole list before sending. Send the
subscriptions as you get them, stating that they are to go to your
credit for a premium; and, when your list is completed, select your
premium, and it will be forthcoming.

[Hand-->] _Take notice that our offers of premiums apply only to
subscriptions paid at the full price: viz., $1.60 a year. We do not
offer premiums for subscriptions supplied at club-rates. We offer no
premiums for one subscription only. We offer no premiums in money._

Address, JOHN L. SHOREY, 36 Bromfield St., Boston.




The Nursery.

TERMS--1875.

SUBSCRIPTIONS,--$1.60 a year, in advance. Three copies for $4.30 a year;
four for $5.40; five for $6.50; six for $7.60: seven for $8.70; eight
for $9.80; nine for $10.90; each additional copy for $1.20; twenty
copies for $22.00, always in advance.

POSTAGE is included in the above rates. All magazines are sent postpaid.

A SINGLE NUMBER will be mailed for 15 cents. _One sample number will be
mailed for 10 cents._

VOLUMES begin with January and July. Subscriptions may commence with any
month, but, unless the time is specified, will date from the beginning
of the current volume.

BACK NUMBERS can always be supplied. _The Magazine commenced January,
1867._

BOUND VOLUMES, each containing the numbers for six months, will be sent
by mail, postpaid, for $1.00 per volume; yearly volumes for $1.75.

COVERS, for half-yearly volume, postpaid, 35 cents; covers for yearly
volume, 40 cents.

PRICES OF BINDING.--In the regular half-yearly volume, 40 cents; in one
yearly volume (12 Nos. in one), 50 cents. If the volumes are to be
returned by mail, add 14 cents for the half-yearly, and 22 cents for the
yearly volume, to pay postage.

REMITTANCES may be made at our risk, if made by check, or money-order.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN CLUB WITH OTHER PERIODICALS. (ALL POSTPAID.)

Scribner's Monthly    $4.00, and The Nursery, $4.75
Harper's Monthly       4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Harper's Weekly        4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Harper's Bazar         4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Atlantic Monthly       4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Galaxy                 4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Old and New            4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Lippincott's Magazine  4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Appleton's Journal     4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Living Age             8.00, and The Nursery,  9.00
Phrenological Journ'l  3.10, and The Nursery,  4.00
The Science of Health  2.00, and The Nursery,  3.10
The Sanitarian         3.00, and The Nursery,  4.00
St. Nicholas           3.00, and The Nursery,  4.00
The Household          1.00, and The Nursery,  2.20
Mother's Journal       2.00, and The Nursery,  3.25
Demorest's Monthly     3.10, and The Nursery,  4.25
Amer. Agriculturist    1.50, and The Nursery,  2.70
Leslie's Illustrated   4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Optic's Magazine       3.00, and The Nursery,  4.25
Lady's Journal         4.00, and The Nursery,  4.75
Godey's Lady's Book    3.00, and The Nursery,  4.00
Hearth and Home        3.00, and The Nursery,  4.00
Young People's Mag.    1.50, and The Nursery,  2.70
The Horticulturist     2.10, and The Nursery,  3.20
Ladies Floral Cabinet  1.30, and The Nursery,  2.60

N.B.--When any of these Magazines is desired in club with "The Nursery"
at the above rates, both Magazines must be subscribed for at the _same
time_; but they need not be to the same address. We furnish our own
Magazine, and agree to pay the subscription for the other. Beyond this
we take no responsibility. The publisher of each Magazine is responsible
for its prompt delivery; and complaints must be addressed accordingly.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS

The number of the Magazine with which your subscription _expires_ is
indicated by the number annexed to the address on the printed label.
When no such number appears, it will be understood that the
subscription ends with the current year. NO NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE
NEED BE GIVEN, AS THE MAGAZINE IS NEVER SENT AFTER THE TERM OF
SUBSCRIPTION EXPIRES. Subscribers will oblige us by sending their
renewals promptly. State always that your payment is for a
_renewal_, when such is the fact. In changing the direction, the
_old_ as well as the _new_ address should be given. The sending of
"The Nursery" will be regarded as a sufficient receipt.

[Hand-->] Any one not receiving it will please notify us immediately,
giving date of remittance.

ADDRESS      JOHN L. SHOREY, 36 Bromfield St., Boston, Mass.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery, No. 103, July, 1875. Vol.
XVIII., by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY ***

***** This file should be named 19821.txt or 19821.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/8/2/19821/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Jacqueline Jeremy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
