The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Best Nonsense Verses, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Best Nonsense Verses

Author: Various

Editor: Josephine Dodge Daskam

Release Date: January 15, 2007 [EBook #20353]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEST NONSENSE VERSES ***




Produced by Sigal Alon, Fox in the Stars, Linda Cantoni,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









The Best Nonsense
Verses, Chosen by
Josephine Dodge Daskam


EVANSTON
WILLIAM S. LORD
1902

Copyright 1901
WILLIAM S. LORD




PUBLISHER'S NOTE


The publisher desires to acknowledge the courtesy of authors and
publishers in granting permission to reprint the verses contained in
this book. To Mr. Guy Wetmore Carryl, whose "Fables for the Frivolous"
are published by Messrs. Harper & Brothers; to Mr. Charles E. Carryl,
whose verses appeared originally in _St. Nicholas_; to Mr. Oliver
Herford, whose "Child's Primer of Natural History" is published by
Messrs. Charles Scribner's Sons; to the same author for the selection
from "Alphabet of Celebrities," published by Messrs. Small, Maynard &
Co.; and Messrs. Harper & Brothers, the publishers of du Maurier's "A
Legend of Camelot;" and to Messrs. Little, Brown & Co., who publish an
edition of Lear's Nonsense Books.




CONTENTS


                                                                 Page

Father William                                Lewis Carroll         7

The Walrus and the Carpenter                  Lewis Carroll         9

The Hunting of the Snark, Extracts            Lewis Carroll        14

Jabberwocky                                   Lewis Carroll        19

The Jumblies                                  Edward Lear          21

The Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo                          Edward Lear          25

Nonsense Verses                               Edward Lear          30

Gentle Alice Brown                            W.S. Gilbert         33

Emily, John, James and I                      W.S. Gilbert         37

Ellen M'Jones Aberdeen                        W.S. Gilbert         41

The Sycophantic Fox and the Gullible Raven    Guy Wetmore Carryl   45

Red Ridinghood                                Guy Wetmore Carryl   47

A Nautical Ballad                             Charles E. Carryl    50

The Plaint of the Camel                       Charles E. Carryl    52

Child's Natural History                       Oliver Herford       54

Alphabet of Celebrities                       Oliver Herford       56

Nonsense Verses                               Gelett Burgess       57

Vers Nonsensiques                             George du Maurier    59

Nonsense Verses                               W.S. Gilbert         60

Varia                                         Anonymous            61




BEST NONSENSE VERSES




FATHER WILLIAM


"You are old, father William," the young man said,
  "And your hair has become very white:
And yet you incessantly stand on your head--
  Do you think, at your age, it is right?"

"In my youth," father William replied to his son,
  "I feared it might injure the brain:
But now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
  Why, I do it again and again."

"You are old," said the youth, "as I mentioned before,
  And have grown most uncommonly fat;
Yet you turned a back somersault in at the door--
  Pray, what is the reason of that?"

"In my youth," said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
  "I kept all my limbs very supple
By the use of this ointment--one shilling the box--
  Allow me to sell you a couple."

"You are old," said the youth, "and your jaws are too weak
  For anything tougher than suet;
Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak;
  Pray, how did you manage to do it?"

"In my youth," said his father, "I took to the law,
  And argued each case with my wife:
And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw
  Has lasted the rest of my life."

"You are old," said the youth; "one would hardly suppose
  That your eye was as steady as ever;
Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose--
  What made you so awfully clever?"

"I have answered three questions, and that is enough,"
  Said his father; "don't give yourself airs!
Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
  Be off, or I'll kick you down stairs!"

[_Lewis Carroll_




THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER


The sun was shining on the sea,
  Shining with all his might:
He did his very best to make
  The billows smooth and bright--
And this was odd, because it was
  The middle of the night.

The moon was shining sulkily,
  Because she thought the sun
Had got no business to be there
  After the day was done--
"It's very rude of him," she said,
  "To come and spoil the fun!"

The sea was wet as wet could be,
  The sands were dry as dry.
You could not see a cloud, because
  No cloud was in the sky:
No birds were flying overhead--
  There were no birds to fly.

The Walrus and the Carpenter
  Were walking close at hand:
They wept like anything to see
  Such quantities of sand:
"If this were only cleared away,"
  They said, "it would be grand!"

"If seven maids with seven mops
  Swept it for half a year,
Do you suppose," the Walrus said
  "That they could get it clear!"
"I doubt it," said the Carpenter,
  And shed a bitter tear.

"O Oysters come and walk with us!"
  The Walrus did beseech.
"A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,
  Along the briny beach:
We cannot do with more than four,
  To give a hand to each."

The eldest Oyster looked at him,
  But never a word he said:
The eldest Oyster winked his eye,
  And shook his heavy head--
Meaning to say he did not choose
  To leave the oyster-bed.

But four young oysters hurried up,
  All eager for the treat:
Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,
  Their shoes were clean and neat--
And this was odd, because, you know,
  They hadn't any feet.

Four other oysters followed them,
  And yet another four;
And thick and fast they came at last,
  And more, and more, and more--
All hopping through the frothy waves,
  And scrambling to the shore.

The Walrus and the Carpenter
  Walked on a mile or so,
And then they rested on a rock
  Conveniently low:
And all the little Oysters stood
  And waited in a row.

"The time has come," the Walrus said,
  "To talk of many things;
Of shoes--and ships--and sealing-wax--
  Of cabbages--and kings--
And why the sea is boiling hot--
  And whether pigs have wings."

"But wait a bit," the Oysters cried,
  "Before we have our chat:
For some of us are out of breath,
  And all of us are fat!"
"No hurry!" said the Carpenter.
  They thanked him much for that.

"A loaf of bread," the Walrus said,
  "Is what we chiefly need:
Pepper and vinegar besides
  Are very good indeed--
Now if you're ready, Oysters dear,
  We can begin to feed."

"But not on us!" the Oysters cried,
  Turning a little blue.
"After such kindness that would be
  A dismal thing to do!"
"The night is fine," the Walrus said,
  "Do you admire the view?"

"It was so kind of you to come!
  And you are very nice!"
The Carpenter said nothing but
  "Cut us another slice:
I wish you were not quite so deaf--
  I've had to ask you twice!"

"It seems a shame," the Walrus said,
  "To play them such a trick,
After we've brought them out so far,
  And made them trot so quick!"
The Carpenter said nothing but
  "The butter's spread too thick!"

"I weep for you," the Walrus said:
  "I deeply sympathize."
With sobs and tears he sorted out
  Those of the largest size,
Holding his pocket-handkerchief
  Before his streaming eyes.

"O Oysters," said the Carpenter,
  "You've had a pleasant run!
Shall we be trotting home again?"
  But answer came there none--
And this was scarcely odd, because
  They'd eaten every one.

[_Lewis Carroll_




THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK--Extracts


"Come, listen, my men, while I tell you again
    The five unmistakable marks
By which you may know, wheresoever you go,
    The warranted genuine Snarks.

"Let us take them in order. The first is the taste,
    Which is meagre and hollow, but crisp:
Like a coat that is rather too tight in the waist,
    With a flavour of Will-o-the-wisp.

"Its habit of getting up late you'll agree
    That it carries too far, when I say
That it frequently breakfasts at five-o'clock tea,
    And dines on the following day.

"The fourth is its fondness for bathing-machines,
    Which it constantly carries about,
And believes that they add to the beauty of scenes--
    A sentiment open to doubt.

"The fifth is ambition. It next will be right
    To describe each particular batch:
Distinguishing those that have feathers, and bite,
    From those that have whiskers, and scratch.

"For although common Snarks do no manner of harm,
    Yet I feel it my duty to say
Some are Boojums--" The Bellman broke off in alarm,
    For the Baker had fainted away.

       *       *       *       *       *

They roused him with muffins--they roused him with ice--
    They roused him with mustard and cress--
They roused him with jam and judicious advice--
    They set him conundrums to guess.

When at length he sat up and was able to speak,
    His sad story he offered to tell;
And the Bellman cried "Silence! Not even a shriek!"
    And excitedly tingled his bell.

There was silence supreme! Not a shriek, not a scream,
    Scarcely even a howl or a groan,
As the man they called "Ho!" told his story of woe
    In an antediluvian tone.

"My father and mother were honest, though poor--"
    "Skip all that!" cried the Bellman in haste,
"If it once becomes dark, there's no chance of a Snark.
    We have hardly a minute to waste!"

"I skip forty years," said the Baker, in tears,
    "And proceed without further remark
To the day when you took me aboard of your ship
    To help you in hunting the Snark.

"A dear uncle of mine (after whom I was named)
    Remarked, when I bade him farewell--"
"Oh, skip your dear uncle," the Bellman exclaimed,
    As he angrily tingled his bell.

"He remarked to me then," said the mildest of men,
    "'If your Snark be a Snark, that is right;
Fetch it home by all means--you may serve it with greens
    And it's handy for striking a light.

"'You may seek it with thimbles--and seek it with care;
    You may hunt it with forks and hope;
You may threaten its life with a railway-share;
    You may charm it with smiles and soap--

"'But oh, beamish nephew, beware of the day,
    If your Snark be a Boojum! For then
You will softly and suddenly vanish away
    And never be met with again!'

"It is this, it is this that oppresses my soul,
    When I think of my uncle's last words:
And my heart is like nothing so much as a bowl
    Brimming over with quivering curds!

"It is this, it is this--" "We have had that before!"
    The Bellman indignantly said.
And the Baker replied "Let me say it once more.
    It is this, it is this that I dread!

"I engage with the Snark--every night after dark--
    In a dreamy delirious fight:
I serve it with greens in those shadowy scenes,
    And I use it for striking a light:

"But if ever I met with a Boojum, that day,
    In a moment (of this I am sure),
I shall softly and suddenly vanish away--
    And the notion I cannot endure!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Bellman looked uffish and wrinkled his brow.
    "If only you'd spoken before!
It's excessively awkward to mention it now,
    With the Snark, so to speak, at the door!

"We should all of us grieve, as you well may believe,
    If you never were met with again--
But surely, my man, when the voyage began,
    You might have suggested it then?

"It's excessively awkward to mention it now--
    As I think I've already remarked."
And the man they called "Hi!" replied, with a sigh,
    "I informed you the day we embarked.

"You may charge me with murder--or want of sense--
    (We are all of us weak at times)
But the slightest approach to a false pretence
    Was never among my crimes!

"I said it in Hebrew--I said it in Dutch--
    I said it in German and Greek:
But I wholly forgot (and it vexes me much)
    That English is what you speak!"

[_Lewis Carroll_




JABBERWOCKY.


'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
  Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
All mimsy were the borogoves,
  And the mome raths outgrabe.

"Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
  The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
  The frumious Bandersnatch!"

He took his vorpal sword in hand;
  Long time the manxome foe he sought.
So rested he by the Tumtum tree,
  And stood awhile in thought.

And as in uffish thought he stood,
  The Jabberwock with eyes of flame,
Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
  And burbled as it came!

One, two! One, two! And through, and through,
  The vorpal blade went snicker-snack!
He left it dead, and with its head
  He went galumphing back.

"And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?
  Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
Oh, frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!"
  He chortled in his joy.

'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
  Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:
All mimsy were the borogoves
  And the mome raths outgrabe.

[_Lewis Carroll_




THE JUMBLIES


1

They went to sea in a sieve, they did;
  In a sieve they went to sea:
In spite of all their friends could say,
On a winter's morn, on a stormy day,
  In a sieve they went to sea.
And when the sieve turned round and round,
And every one cried, "You'll all be drowned!"
They called aloud, "Our sieve ain't big;
But we don't care a button, we don't care a fig;
  In a sieve we'll go to sea!"
    Far and few, far and few,
      Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
    Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
      And they went to sea in a sieve.

2

They sailed away in a sieve, they did,
  In a sieve they sailed so fast,
With only a beautiful pea-green veil
Tied with a ribbon, by way of a sail,
  To a small tobacco-pipe mast.
And everyone said who saw them go,
"Oh! won't they be soon upset, you know?
For the sky is dark, and the voyage long;
And, happen what may, it's extremely wrong
  In a sieve to sail so fast."
    Far and few, far and few,
      Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
    Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
      And they went to sea in a sieve.

3

The water it soon came in, it did:
  The water it soon came in:
So, to keep them dry, they wrapped their feet
In a pinky paper all folded neat;
  And they fastened it down with a pin.
And they passed the night in a crockery jar;
And each of them said, "How wise we are!
Though the sky be dark, and the voyage be long,
Yet we never can think we are rash or wrong.
  While round in our sieve we spin."
    Far and few, far and few,
      Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
    Their heads are green, and their hands are blue:
      And they went to sea in a sieve.

4

And all night long they sailed away:
  And when the sun went down,
They whistled and warbled a moony song
To the echoing sound of the coppery gong,
  In the shade of the mountains brown.
"O Timballoo! How happy we are
When we live in a sieve and a crockery-jar!
And all night long, in the moonlight pale,
We sail away with a pea-green sail
  In the shade of the mountains brown."
    Far and few, far and few,
      Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
    Their heads are green, and their hands are blue:
      And they went to sea in a sieve.

5

They sailed to the Western sea, they did--
  To a land all covered with trees;
And they bought an owl, and a useful cart,
And a pound of rice, and a cranberry-tart,
  And a hive of silvery bees;
And they bought a pig, and some green jackdaws,
And a lovely monkey with lollipop paws,
And forty bottles of ring-bo-ree,
  And no end of Stilton cheese.
    Far and few, far and few,
      Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
    Their heads are green, and their hands are blue:
      And they went to sea in a sieve.

6

And in twenty years they all came back,--
  In twenty years or more;
And every one said, "How tall they've grown!
For they've been to the lakes, and the Torrible Zone,
  And the hills of the Chankly Bore."
And they drank their health, and gave them a feast
Of dumplings made of beautiful yeast;
And every one said, "If we only live,
We, too, will go to sea in a sieve,
  To the hills of the Chankly Bore."
    Far and few, far and few,
      Are the lands where the Jumblies live;
    Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,
      And they went to sea in a sieve.

[_Edward Lear_




THE YONGHY-BONGHY-BO


1

On the Coast of Coromandel
  Where the early pumpkins blow,
    In the middle of the woods
  Lived the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.
Two old chairs, and half a candle,
One old jug without a handle,--
    These were all his worldly goods:
    In the middle of the woods,
    These were all the worldly goods
Of the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo,
Of the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.

2

Once, among the Bong-trees walking
  Where the early pumpkins blow,
    To a little heap of stones
  Came the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.
There he heard a Lady talking,
To some milk-white Hens of Dorking,--
    "'Tis the Lady Jingly Jones!
    On that little heap of stones
    Sits the Lady Jingly Jones!"
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo,
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.

3

"Lady Jingly! Lady Jingly!
  Sitting where the pumpkins blow,
    Will you come and be my wife?"
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo,
"I am tired of living singly,--
On this coast so wild and shingly,---
    I'm a-weary of my life;
    If you'll come and be my wife,
    Quite serene would be my life!"
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo,
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.

4

"On this Coast of Coromandel
  Shrimps and watercresses grow,
    Prawns are plentiful and cheap,"
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.
"You shall have my chairs and candle,
And my jug without a handle!
    Gaze upon the rolling deep
    (Fish is plentiful and cheap):
    As the sea, my love is deep!"
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo,
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.

5

Lady Jingly answered sadly,
  And her tears began to flow,--
    "Your proposal comes too late,
  Mr. Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo!
I would be your wife most gladly!"
(Here she twirled her fingers madly,)
    "But in England I've a mate!
    Yes! you've asked me far too late,
    For in England I've a mate,
  Mr. Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo!
  Mr. Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo!

6

"Mr. Jones (his name is Handel,--
  Handel Jones, Esquire & Co.)
    Dorking fowls delights to send,
  Mr. Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo!
Keep, oh, keep your chairs and candle,
And your jug without a handle,--
    I can merely be your friend!
    Should my Jones more Dorkings send,
    I will give you three, my friend!
  Mr. Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo!
  Mr. Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo!

7

"Though you've such a tiny body,
  And your head so large doth grow,--
    Though your hat may blow away,
  Mr. Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo!
Though you're such a Hoddy Doddy,
Yet I wish that I could modi-
    fy the words I needs must say!
    Will you please to go away?
    That is all I have to say,
  Mr. Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo!
  Mr. Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo!"

8

Down the slippery slopes of Myrtle,
  Where the early pumpkins blow,
    To the calm and silent sea
  Fled the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.
There, beyond the Bay of Gurtle,
Lay a large and lively Turtle.
    "You're the Cove," he said, "for me;
    On your back beyond the sea,
    Turtle, you shall carry me!"
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo,
  Said the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.

9

Through the silent roaring ocean
  Did the Turtle swiftly go;
    Holding fast upon his shell
  Rode the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.
With a sad primeval motion
Toward the sunset isles of Boshen
    Still the Turtle bore him well.
    Holding fast upon his shell,
    "Lady Jingly Jones, farewell!"
  Sang the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo,
  Sang the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.

10

  From the Coast of Coromandel
    Did that Lady never go,
      On that heap of stones she mourns
    For the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.
On that Coast of Coromandel,
In his jug without a handle
    Still she weeps, and daily moans;
    On the little heap of stones
    To her Dorking Hens she moans,
  For the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo,
  For the Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo.

[_Edward Lear_




NONSENSE VERSES


1

There was an Old Man with a beard,
Who said, "It is just as I feared!--
Two Owls and a Hen, four Larks and a Wren,
Have all built their nests in my beard."

2

There was an old man of Hong Kong,
Who never did anything wrong;
He lay on his back, with his head in a sack,
That innocuous old man of Hong Kong.

3

There was an Old Man who supposed
That the street door was partially closed;
But some very large Rats ate his coats and his hats,
While that futile Old Gentleman dozed.

4

There was a Young Lady of Norway,
Who casually sat in a doorway;
When the door squeezed her flat, she exclaimed "What of that?"
This courageous Young Lady of Norway.

5

There was an old person of Bow,
Whom nobody happened to know;
So they gave him some soap, and said coldly, "We hope
You will go back directly to Bow!"

6

There was an Old Man on some rocks,
Who shut his wife up in a box:
When she said, "Let me out," he exclaimed, "Without doubt
You will pass all your life in that box!"

7

There was an old man who said, "How
Shall I flee from this horrible Cow?
I will sit on this stile, and continue to smile,
Which may soften the heart of that Cow."

8

There was an old man who said "Hush!
I perceive a young bird in this bush!"
When they said, "Is it small?" he replied, "Not at all;
It is four times as big as the bush!"

9

There was a young person in green,
Who seldom was fit to be seen;
She wore a long shawl, over bonnet and all,
Which enveloped that person in green.

10

There was an old person of Ware,
Who rode on the back of a bear;
When they asked, "Does it trot?" he said, "Certainly not!
He's a Moppsikon Floppsikon bear!"

[_Edward Lear_




GENTLE ALICE BROWN


It was a robber's daughter, and her name was Alice Brown,
Her father was the terror of a small Italian town;
Her mother was a foolish, weak, but amiable old thing;
But it isn't of her parents that I'm going for to sing.

As Alice was a-sitting at her window-sill one day
A beautiful young gentleman he chanced to pass that way;
She cast her eyes upon him, and he looked so good and true,
That she thought, "I could be happy with a gentleman like you!"

And every morning passed her house that cream of gentlemen,
She knew she might expect him at a quarter unto ten,
A sorter in the Custom-house, it was his daily road
(The Custom-house was fifteen minutes' walk from her abode).

But Alice was a pious girl, who knew it wasn't wise
To look at strange young sorters with expressive purple eyes;
So she sought the village priest to whom her family confessed--
The priest by whom their little sins were carefully assessed.

"Oh, holy father," Alice said, "'twould grieve you, would it not?
To discover that I was a most disreputable lot!
Of all unhappy sinners I'm the most unhappy one!"
The padre said, "Whatever have you been and gone and done?"

"I have helped mamma to steal a little kiddy from its dad,
I've assisted dear papa in cutting up a little lad.
I've planned a little burglary and forged a little cheque,
And slain a little baby for the coral on its neck!"

The worthy pastor heaved a sigh, and dropped a silent tear--
And said, "You mustn't judge yourself too heavily, my dear--
It's wrong to murder babies, little corals for to fleece;
But sins like these one expiates at half-a-crown apiece.

"Girls will be girls--you're very young and flighty in your mind;
Old heads upon young shoulders we must not expect to find;
We mustn't be too hard upon these little girlish tricks--
Let's see--five crimes at half-a-crown--exactly twelve-and-six."

"Oh, father," little Alice cried, "your kindness makes me weep,
You do these little things for me so singularly cheap--
Your thoughtful liberality I never can forget;
But, oh, there is another crime I haven't mentioned yet!

"A pleasant-looking gentleman, with pretty purple eyes--
I've noticed at my window as I've sat a-catching flies;
He passes by it every day as certain as can be--
I blush to say I've winked at him, and he has winked at me!"

"For shame," said Father Paul, "my erring daughter! On my word
This is the most distressing news that I have ever heard.
Why, naughty girl, your excellent papa has pledged your hand
To a promising young robber, the lieutenant of his band!

"This dreadful piece of news will pain your worthy parents so!
They are the most remunerative customers I know;
For many, many years they've kept starvation from my doors,
I never knew so criminal a family as yours!

"The common country folk in this insipid neighborhood
Have nothing to confess, they're so ridiculously good;
And if you marry any one respectable at all,
Why, you'll reform, and what will then become of Father Paul?"

The worthy priest, he up and drew his cowl upon his crown,
And started off in haste to tell the news to Robber Brown;
To tell him how his daughter, who was now for marriage fit,
Had winked upon a sorter, who reciprocated it.

Good Robber Brown he muffled up his anger pretty well,
He said, "I have a notion, and that notion I will tell;
I will nab this gay young sorter, terrify him into fits,
And get my gentle wife to chop him into little bits.

"I've studied human nature, and I know a thing or two;
Though a girl may fondly love a living gent, as many do,
A feeling of disgust upon her senses there will fall
When she looks upon his body chopped particularly small."

He traced that gallant sorter to a still suburban square;
He watched his opportunity and seized him unaware;
He took a life-preserver and he hit him on the head,
And Mrs. Brown dissected him before she went to bed.

And pretty little Alice grew more settled in her mind,
She never more was guilty of a weakness of the kind,
Until at length good Robber Brown bestowed her pretty hand
On the promising young robber, the lieutenant of his band.

[_W.S. Gilbert_




EMILY, JOHN, JAMES, AND I

A Derby Legend


Emily Jane was a nursery maid--
  James was a bold Life Guard,
And John was constable, poorly paid
  (And I am a doggerel bard).

A very good girl was Emily Jane,
  Jimmy was good and true,
And John was a very good man in the main
  (And I am a good man, too).

Rivals for Emmie were Johnny and James,
  Though Emily liked them both;
She couldn't tell which had the strongest claims
  (And I couldn't take my oath).

But sooner or later you're certain to find
  Your sentiments can't lie hid--
Jane thought it was time that she made up her mind
  (And I think it was time she did).

Said Jane, with a smirk and a blush on her face,
  "I'll promise to wed the boy
Who takes me to-morrow to Epsom Race!"
  (Which I would have done, with joy).

From Johnny escaped an expression of pain,
  But Jimmy said, "Done with you!
I'll take you with pleasure, my Emily Jane!"
  (And I would have said so too).

Johnny lay on the ground, and he roared like mad
  (For Johnny was sore perplexed),
And he kicked very hard at a very small lad
  (Which I often do, when vexed).

For John was on duty next day with the Force,
  To punish all Epsom crimes;
Some people will cross when they're clearing the course
  (I do it myself, sometimes).

       *       *       *       *       *

The Derby Day sun glittered gaily on cads,
  On maidens with gamboge hair,
On sharpers and pickpockets, swindlers and pads
  (For I, with my harp, was there).

And Jimmy went down with his Jane that day
  And John by the collar or nape
Seized everybody who came in his way
  (And I had a narrow escape).

He noticed his Emily Jane with Jim,
  And envied the well made elf;
And people remarked that he muttered "Oh, dim!"
  (I often say "dim!" myself).

John dogged them all day, without asking their leaves;
  For his sergeant he told, aside,
That Jimmy and Jane were notorious thieves
  (And I think he was justified).

But James wouldn't dream of abstracting a fork,
  And Jenny would blush with shame
At stealing so much as a bottle or cork
  (A bottle I think fair game).

But, ah! there's another more serious crime!
  They wickedly strayed upon
The course, at a critical moment of time
  (I pointed them out to John).

The crusher came down on the pair in a crack--
  And then, with a demon smile,
Let Jenny cross over, but sent Jimmy back
  (I played on my harp the while).

Stern Johnny their agony loud derides
  With a very triumphant sneer--
They weep and they wail from the opposite sides
  (And I shed a silent tear).

And Jenny is crying away like mad,
  And Jimmy is swearing hard;
And Johnny is looking uncommonly glad
  (And I am a doggerel bard).

But Jimmy he ventured on crossing again
  The scenes of our Isthmian Games--
John caught him and collared him, giving him pain
  (I felt very much for James).

John led him away with a victor's hand,
  And Jimmy was shortly seen
In the station-house under the grand Grand Stand
  (As many a time I've been).

And Jimmy, bad boy, was imprisoned for life,
  Though Emily pleaded hard;
And Johnny had Emily Jane to wife
  (And I am a doggerel bard).

[_W.S. Gilbert_




ELLEN M'JONES ABERDEEN


Macphairson Clonglocketty Angus M'Clan
Was the son of an elderly laboring man,
You've guessed him a Scotchman, shrewd reader, at sight,
And p'raps altogether, shrewd reader, you're right.

From the bonnie blue Forth to the hills of Deeside,
Round by Dingwall and Wrath to the mouth of the Clyde,
There wasn't a child or woman or man
Who could pipe with Clonglocketty Angus M'Clan.

No other could wake such detestable groans,
With reed and with chanter--with bag and with drones:
All day and all night he delighted the chiels
With sniggering pibrochs and jiggety reels.

He'd clamber a mountain and squat on the ground,
And the neighboring maidens would gather around
To list to his pipes and to gaze in his een,
Especially Ellen M'Jones Aberdeen.

All loved their M'Clan, save a Sassenach brute,
Who came to the Highlands to fish and to shoot!
He dressed himself up in a Highlander way,
Though his name it was Pattison Corby Torbay.

Torbay had incurred a good deal of expense
To make him a Scotchman in every sense:
But this is a matter, you'll readily own,
That isn't a question of tailors alone.

A Sassenach chief may be bonily built,
He may purchase a sporran, a bonnet, and kilt;
Stick a skean in his hose--wear an acre of stripes--
But he cannot assume an affection for pipes.

Clonglocketty's pipings all night and all day
Quite frenzied poor Pattison Corby Torbay;
The girls were amused at his singular spleen,
Especially Ellen M'Jones Aberdeen.

"Macphairson Clonglocketty Angus, my lad,
With pibrochs and reels you are driving me mad;
If you really must play on that cursed affair,
My goodness! play something resembling an air."

Boiled over the blood of Macphairson M'Clan--
The clan of Clonglocketty rose as one man;
For all were enraged at the insult, I ween--
Especially Ellen M'Jones Aberdeen.

"Let's show," said M'Clan, "to this Sassenach loon
That the bagpipes can play him a regular tune.
Let's see," said M'Clan, as he thoughtfully sat,
"'In My Cottage' is easy--I'll practice at that."

He blew at his "Cottage," and blew with a will,
For a year, seven months, and a fortnight until
(You'll hardly believe it) M'Clan, I declare,
Elicited something resembling an air.

It was wild--it was fitful--as wild as the breeze--
It wandered about into several keys;
It was jerky, spasmodic, and harsh, I'm aware,
But still it distinctly suggested an air.

The Sassenach screamed and the Sassenach danced,
He shrieked in his agony--bellowed and pranced;
And the maidens who gathered rejoiced at the scene,
Especially Ellen M'Jones Aberdeen.

"Hech gather, hech gather, hech gather around;
And fill a' yer lugs wi' the exquisite sound,
An air frae the bagpipes--beat that if ye can!
Hurrah for Clonglocketty Angus M'Clan!"

The fame of his piping spread over the land;
Respectable widows proposed for his hand,
And maidens came flocking to sit on the green--
Especially Ellen M'Jones Aberdeen.

One morning the fidgety Sassenach swore
He'd stand it no longer--he drew his claymore,
And (this was, I think, in extremely bad taste),
Divided Clonglocketty close to the waist.

Oh! loud were the wailings for Angus M'Clan--
Oh! deep was the grief for that excellent man--
The maids stood aghast at the horrible scene,
Especially Ellen M'Jones Aberdeen.

It sorrowed poor Pattison Corby Torbay
To find them "take on" in this serious way.
He pitied the poor little fluttering birds,
And solaced their souls with the following words:--

"Oh, maidens," said Pattison, touching his hat,
"Don't snivel, my dears, for a fellow like that;
Observe, I'm a very superior man,
A much better fellow than Angus M'Clan."

They smiled when he winked and addressed them as "dears,"
And they all of them vowed, as they dried up their tears,
A pleasanter gentleman never was seen--
Especially Ellen M'Jones Aberdeen.

[_W.S. Gilbert_




THE SYCOPHANTIC FOX AND THE GULLIBLE RAVEN


A raven sat upon a tree,
And not a word he spoke, for
His beak contained a bit of Brie,
Or, maybe, it was Roquefort:
  We'll make it any kind you please,
  At all events, it was a cheese.

Beneath the tree's umbrageous limb
A hungry fox sat smiling;
He saw the raven watching him,
And spoke in words beguiling.
  "_J'admire_," said he "_ton beau plumage_,"
  (The which was simply persiflage.)

Two things there are, no doubt you know,
To which a fox is used;
A rooster that is bound to crow,
A crow that's bound to roost,
  And whichsoever he espies
  He tells the most unblushing lies.

"Sweet fowl," he said, "I understand
You're more than merely natty,
I hear you sing to beat the band
And Adelina Patti.
  Pray render with your liquid tongue
  A bit from 'Goetterdaemmerung.'"

This subtle speech was aimed to please
The crow, and it succeeded:
He thought no bird in all the trees
Could sing as well as he did.
  In flattery completely doused
  He gave the "Jewel Song" from "Faust."

But gravitation's law, of course,
As Isaac Newton showed it,
Exerted on the cheese its force.
And elsewhere soon bestowed it,
  In fact, there is no need to tell
  What happened when to earth it fell.

I wish to add that when the bird
Took in the situation
He said one brief, emphatic word,
Unfit for publication.
  The fox was greatly startled, but
  He only sighed and answered "Tut."

The Moral is: A fox is bound
To be a shameless sinner.
And also: When the cheese comes round
You know it's after dinner.
  But (what is only known to few)
  The fox is after dinner, too.

[_Guy Wetmore Carryl_




RED RIDINGHOOD


Most worthy of praise were the virtuous ways
  Of Little Red Riding Hood's ma,
And no one was ever more cautious and clever
  Than Little Red Riding Hood's pa.
They never misled, for they meant what they said,
  And frequently said what they meant:
They were careful to show her the way she should go,
  And the way that they showed her, she went.
    For obedience she was effusively thanked,
    And for anything else she was carefully spanked.

It thus isn't strange that Red Riding Hood's range
  Of virtues so steadily grew,
That soon she won prizes of different sizes,
  And golden enconiums, too.
As a general rule she was head of her school,
  And at six was so notably smart
That they gave her a check for reciting The Wreck
  Of the Hesperus wholly by heart.
    And you all will applaud her the more, I am sure,
    When I add that the money she gave to the poor.

At eleven this lass had a Sunday-school class,
  At twelve wrote a volume of verse,
At fourteen was yearning for glory, and learning
  To be a professional nurse.
To a glorious height the young paragon might
  Have climbed, if not nipped in the bud,
But the following year struck her smiling career
  With a dull and a sickening thud!
    (I have shad a great tear at the thought of her pain,
    And must copy my manuscript over again!)

Not dreaming of harm, one day on her arm
  A basket she hung. It was filled
With drinks made of spices, and jellies, and ices,
  And chicken-wings, carefully grilled,
And a savory stew, and a novel or two
  She persuaded a neighbor to loan,
And a Japanese fan, and a hot water-can.
  And a bottle of _eau de cologne_,
    And the rest of the things that your family fill
    Your room with whenever you chance to be ill.

She expected to find her decrepit but kind
  Old grandmother waiting her call,
Exceedingly ill. Oh, that face on the pillow
  Did not look familiar at all!
With a whitening cheek she started to speak,
  But her peril she instantly saw:
Her grandma had fled and she'd tackled instead
  Four merciless paws and a maw!
    When the neighbors came running the wolf to subdue
    He was licking his chops--and Red Riding Hood's, too!

At this horrible tale some readers will pale,
  And others with horror grow dumb,
And yet it was better, I fear, he should get her:--
  Just think what she might have become!
For an infant so keen might in future have been
  A woman of awful renown,
Who carried on fights for her feminine rights,
  As the Mare of an Arkansas town,
    Or she might have continued the sin of her 'teens
    And come to write verse for the Big Magazines!

     _The Moral_

     The Moral: There's nothing much glummer
       Than children whose talents appal.
     One much prefers those that are dumber,
       And as for the paragons small--
     If a swallow cannot make a summer.
       It can bring on a summary fall!

[_Guy Wetmore Carryl_




A NAUTICAL BALLAD


A capital ship for an ocean trip,
  Was the "Walloping Window-blind";
No gale that blew dismayed her crew
  Or troubled the captain's mind.
The man at the wheel was taught to feel
  Contempt for the wildest blow,
And it often appeared, when the weather had cleared,
  That he'd been in his bunk below.

"The boatswain's mate was very sedate,
  Yet fond of amusement, too;
And he played hop-scotch with the starboard watch,
  While the captain tickled the crew.
And the gunner we had was apparently mad,
  For he sat on the after rail,
And fired salutes with the captain's boots,
  In the teeth of the booming gale.

"The captain sat in a commodore's hat
  And dined in a royal way
On toasted pigs and pickles and figs
  And gummery bread each day.
But the cook was Dutch and behaved as such;
  For the diet he gave the crew
Was a number of tons of hot-cross buns
  Prepared with sugar and glue.

"All nautical pride we laid aside,
  And we cast the vessel ashore
On the Gulliby Isles, where the Poohpooh smiles,
  And the Rumbletumbunders roar.
And we sat on the edge of a sandy ledge
  And shot at the whistling bee;
And the cinnamon-bats wore water-proof hats
  As they danced in the sounding sea.

"On rubgub bark, from dawn to dark,
  We fed, till we all had grown
Uncommonly shrunk,--when a Chinese junk
  Came by from the torriby zone.
She was stubby and square, but we didn't much care,
  And we cheerily put to sea;
And we left the crew of the junk to chew
  The bark of the rubgub tree."

[_Charles E. Carryl_




THE PLAINT OF THE CAMEL


"Canary-birds feed on sugar and seed,
  Parrots have crackers to crunch:
And, as for the poodles, they tell me the noodles
Have chickens and cream for their lunch.
  But there's never a question
  About MY digestion--
Anything does for me!

"Cats, you're aware, can repose in a chair,
  Chickens can roost upon rails;
Puppies are able to sleep in a stable,
And oysters can slumber in pails.
  But no one supposes
  A poor Camel dozes--
Any place does for me!

"Lambs are enclosed where it's never exposed,
  Coops are constructed for hens:
Kittens are treated to houses well heated,
And pigs are protected by pens.
  But a Camel comes handy
  Wherever it's sandy--
Anywhere does for me!

"People would laugh if you rode a giraffe,
  Or mounted the back of an ox;
It's nobody's habit to ride on a rabbit,
Or try to bestraddle a fox.
  But as for a Camel, he's
  Ridden by families--
Any load does for me!

"A snake is as round as a hole in the ground,
  And weasels are wavy and sleek;
And no alligator could ever be straighter
Than lizards that live in a creek,
  But a Camel's all lumpy
  And bumpy and humpy--
Any shape does for me!"

[_Charles E. Carryl_




CHILD'S NATURAL HISTORY


_Geese_

Ev-er-y child who has the use
Of his sen-ses knows a goose.
Sees them un-der-neath the tree
Gath-er round the goose-girl's knee,
While she reads them by the hour
From the works of Scho-pen-hau-er.
How pa-tient-ly the geese at-tend!
But do they re-al-ly com-pre-hend
What Scho-pen-hau-er's driving at?
Oh, not at all; but what of that?
Nei-ther do I; nei-ther does she;
And, for that matter, nor does he.

_A Seal_

See, children, the Furbearing Seal;
Ob-serve his mis-di-rect-ed zeal;
He dines with most ab-ste-mi-ous care
On Fish, Ice Water and Fresh Air
A-void-ing cond-i-ments or spice
For fear his fur should not be nice
And fine and soft and smooth and meet
For Broad-way or for Re-gent Street,
And yet some-how I often feel
(Though for the kind Fur-bear-ing Seal
I harbor a Re-spect Pro-found)
He runs Fur-bear-ance in the ground.

_The Ant_

My child, ob-serve the use-ful Ant,
How hard she works each day.
She works as hard as ad-a-mant
(That's very hard, they say).
She has no time to gall-i-vant;
She has no time to play.
Let Fido chase his tail all day;
Let Kitty play at tag;
She has no time to throw away,
She has no tail to wag;
She scurries round from morn till night;
She nev-er nev-er sleeps;
She seiz-es ev-ery-thing in sight,
She drags it home with all her might,
And all she takes she keeps.

_The Yak_

This is the Yak, so negligee;
His coif-fure's like a stack of hay;
He lives so far from Any-where,
I fear the Yak neglects his hair.
And thinks, since there is none to see,
What mat-ter how un-kempt he be:
How would he feel if he but knew
That in this Picture-book I drew
His Phys-i-og-no-my un-shorn,
For children to de-ride and scorn?

[_Oliver Herford_

[From "A Child's Primer of Natural History." Copyright, 1899, by
Oliver Herford, Chas. Scribner's Sons, Publishers]




ALPHABET OF CELEBRITIES


E is for Edison, making believe
He's invented a clever contrivance for Eve,
Who complained that she never could laugh in her sleeve.

O is for Oliver, casting aspersion
On Omar, that awfully dissolute Persian,
Though secretly longing to join the diversion.

R's Rubenstein, playing that old thing in F
To Rollo and Rembrandt, who wish they were deaf.

S is for Swinburne, who, seeking the true,
The good, and the beautiful, visits the Zoo,
Where he chances on Sappho and Mr. Sardou,
And Socrates, all with the same end in view.

W's Wagner, who sang and played lots,
For Washington, Wesley and good Dr. Watts;
His prurient plots pained Wesley and Watts,
But Washington said he "enjoyed them in spots."

[_Oliver Herford_




NONSENSE VERSES


1

The Window has Four little Panes:
    But One have I;
The Window-Panes are in its sash,--
    I wonder why!

2

My Feet they haul me 'round the House:
    They hoist me up the Stairs;
I only have to steer them and
    They ride me everywheres.

3

Remarkable truly, is Art!
See--Elliptical wheels on a Cart!
    It looks very fair
    In the Picture up there;
But imagine the Ride when you start!

4

I'd rather have fingers than Toes;
I'd rather have Ears than a Nose:
    And as for my hair,
    I'm glad it's all there,
I'll be awfully sad when it goes!

5

I wish that my Room had a floor;
I don't so much care for a Door,
    But this walking around
    Without touching the ground
Is getting to be quite a bore!

[_Gelett Burgess_




VERS NONSENSIQUES


I am gai. I am poet. I dvell
Rupert Street, at the fifth. I am svell.
  And I sing tralala
  And I love my mamma,
And the English, I speaks him quite well!

2

"Cassez-vous, cassez-vous, cassez-vous,
O mer, sur vos froids gris cilloux!"
  Ainsi traduisit Laure
  Au profit d'Isadore
(Bon jeune homme, et son futur epoux.)

3

Il existe une espinstere a Tours
Un peu vite, et qui portait toujours
  Un ulster peau-de-phoque,
  Un chapeau bilicoque,
Et des nicrebocquers en velours.

4

Un marin naufrage (de Doncastre)
Pour priere, au milieu du desastre
  Repetait a genoux
  Ces mots simples et doux:--
"Scintellez, scintellez, petit astre!"

[_George du Maurier_




NONSENSE VERSES


1

There was a small boy of Quebec,
Who was buried in snow to his neck:
When they said, "Are you friz?"
  He replied, "Yes I is--
But we don't call this cold in Quebec!"

[_Rudyard Kipling_

2

There was an old man of St. Bees,
Who was stung in the arm by a wasp:
When they asked, "Does it hurt?"
  He replied, "No it doesn't,
But I thought all the while 'twas a Hornet!"

[_W.S. Gilbert_




VARIA.


1

There was an old man of Tarentum
Who gnashed his false teeth till he bent 'em;
  And when asked for the cost
  Of what he had lost,
Said, "I really can't tell, for I rent 'em!"

2

A lady there was of Antigua,
Who said to her spouse, "What a pig you are!"
  He answered, "My queen
  Is it manners you mean,
Or do you refer to my figure?"

3

There were three young women of Birmingham,
And I know a sad story concerning 'em;
  They stuck needles and pins
  In the right rev'rend shins
Of the Bishop engaged in confirming 'em!








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Best Nonsense Verses, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEST NONSENSE VERSES ***

***** This file should be named 20353.txt or 20353.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/3/5/20353/

Produced by Sigal Alon, Fox in the Stars, Linda Cantoni,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
