The Project Gutenberg EBook of The 23rd (Service) Battalion Royal
Fusiliers (First Sportsman's), by Fred W. Ward

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The 23rd (Service) Battalion Royal Fusiliers (First Sportsman's)
       A Record of its Services in the Great War, 1914-1919

Author: Fred W. Ward

Release Date: January 15, 2007 [EBook #20377]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 23RD (SERVICE) BATTALION ***




Produced by David Clarke, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
    | been preserved.                                           |
    |                                                           |
    | The Nominal Roll was originally printed in two columns,   |
    | and numbered on each page from top to bottom, left to     |
    | right. This has been reproduced in this document. To      |
    | avoid confusion, each page break is marked.               |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected in this  |
    | text. For a complete list, please see the end of this     |
    | document.                                                 |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




                 THE 23RD (SERVICE) BATTALION
                       ROYAL FUSILIERS.

                     (FIRST SPORTSMAN'S)


     [Illustration: _Army and Navy Stores, photo._
     COL. THE VISCOUNT MAITLAND.
     _Frontispiece_]




                             THE
                   23RD (SERVICE) BATTALION
                       ROYAL FUSILIERS

                     (FIRST SPORTSMAN'S)

               A RECORD OF ITS SERVICES IN THE
                     GREAT WAR, 1914-1919

                              BY

                        FRED. W. WARD

                        CAPTAIN R.E.,
         FORMERLY NO. 662 FIRST SPORTSMAN'S BATTALION

                            LONDON
                   SIDGWICK & JACKSON, LTD.
                             1920




CONTENTS


                                                             PAGE

FOREWORDS                                                       1

  THE SPORTSMEN                                                 3

  FROM MAJOR-GENERAL SIR C.E. PEREIRA, K.C.B., C.M.G.           4

  FROM MAJOR-GENERAL R.O. KELLETT, C.B., C.M.G.                 7

FORMATION OF THE BATTALION, THE HONOURS GAINED, AND ITS
  RECORD IN BRIEF                                               9

A NEW TYPE OF SOLDIER--THE COSMOPOLITAN COMPOSITION OF
  THE BATTALION                                                15

TRAINING AT HOME--HOW THE FINISHED SOLDIER EMERGED FROM
  THE ROUGH MATERIAL                                           23

SERVICE OVERSEAS--HEAVY FIGHTING ALL ALONG THE FRONT,
  AND A TRIUMPHAL MARCH INTO GERMANY                           35

GREAT WORK ACCOMPLISHED--HOLDING UP A GERMAN ADVANCE--
  SILENCING SNIPERS IN A DERELICT TANK--AND SOME OTHER
  THINGS                                                       67

PRESENTATION OF THE KING'S COLOUR--MAJOR-GENERAL SIR
  C.E. PEREIRA, K.C.B., C.M.G., AND HIS PRIDE IN THE
  BATTALION                                                    73

"GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK"--BRIGADIER-GENERAL A.E.
  MCNAMARA, C.M.G., D.S.O., AND HIS FAREWELL TO THE 23RD
  ROYAL FUSILIERS                                              77

THE BATTLE OF DELVILLE WOOD--AN ADVANCE IN FACE OF
  HUNDREDS OF MACHINE GUNS--A PERSONAL NARRATIVE               81

EXPERIENCES AS A PRISONER OF WAR--EXTRACTS FROM THE
  DIARY KEPT BY "MR. BROOKS, THE SCHOOLMASTER"                 93

THE HONOURS' LIST: NAMES OF OFFICERS AND MEN AWARDED
  DECORATIONS AND MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES                     103

THE ROLL OF HONOUR: OFFICERS AND OTHER RANKS WHO
  DIED THAT ENGLAND MIGHT LIVE                                111

THE NOMINAL ROLL: NAMES AND NUMBERS OF THE ORIGINAL
  MEMBERS OF THE BATTALION WHO JOINED EITHER AT THE HOTEL
  CECIL, LONDON, OR AT HORNCHURCH, ESSEX                      143

EDITOR'S NOTE                                                 167




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


COLONEL THE VISCOUNT MAITLAND                      _Frontispiece_

FIRST INSPECTION OF BATTALION: HYDE PARK, OCTOBER,
  1914                                            _to face p._ 20

MARCHING AWAY FROM HYDE PARK TO ENTRAIN FOR
  HORNCHURCH                                      _to face p._ 28

THE CAMP, HORNCHURCH                                   "       30

INTERIOR OF A HUT, HORNCHURCH                          "       30

LIEUTENANT-COLONEL H.A. VERNON, D.S.O.                 "       42

LIEUTENANT-COLONEL E.A. WINTER, D.S.O., M.C.           "       50

PRESENTATION OF COLOURS: NIEDERAUSSEM, GERMANY,
JUNE 24, 1919                                     _to face p._ 66

BATTALION HEADQUARTERS, HORNCHURCH                     "       80

THE BATTALION PIERROT TROUPE: GERMANY                  "       80




FOREWORDS




THE SPORTSMEN


    Sportsmen of every kind,
    God! we have paid the score
    Who left green English fields behind
    For the sweat and stink of war!
    New to the soldier's trade,
    Into the scrum we came,
    But we didn't care much what game we played
    So long as we played the game.

    We learned in a hell-fire school
    Ere many a month was gone,
    But we knew beforehand the golden rule,
    "Stick it, and carry on!"
    And we were a cheery crew,
    Wherever you find the rest,
    Who did what an Englishman can do,
    And did it as well as the best.

    Aye, and the game was good,
    A game for a man to play,
    Though there's many that lie in Delville Wood
    Waiting the Judgment Day.
    But living and dead are made
    One till the final call,
    When we meet once more on the Last Parade,
    Soldiers and Sportsmen all!

    TOUCHSTONE
    (of the "_Daily Mail_").




FROM MAJOR-GENERAL SIR C.E. PEREIRA, K.C.B., C.M.G.

The history of any New Army battalion is a valuable contribution to
the history of the war. This applies particularly to a battalion like
the 23rd Royal Fusiliers, which achieved a high morale and maintained
excellent discipline throughout the war.

At the Front our only knowledge of the New Army before they came
overseas was gained from the Brigade Staffs and Commanding Officers of
the new Formations, who were sent over for short attachment to troops
in the line.

We learnt from them the great difficulties that had to be overcome in
raising new units, with very few officers, warrant officers, and
N.C.O.'s to lead the new force and instruct them in military routine.
Without exception they were filled with admiration of the physique,
intelligence, and spirit of the men who had rushed to arms in those
dark early days of the war.

It was evidently the flower of the nation that came forward, and
probably in the history of all wars such magnificent material has
never been equalled.

My acquaintance with the 23rd Battalion Royal Fusiliers extended from
the end of 1916 to March, 1919, when the Battalion left the 2nd
Division, and it is interesting to look back at my first impression of
the Battalion, as I had not previously had any New Army battalions
under my command. Regular battalions have the pride of history to
sustain them, and traditions to live up to, but here I found a
battalion not two years old, with its history in the making, but with
the same spirit and self-consciousness that one finds in the old
formations.

Those who have not had considerable experience of troops in peace and
war may imagine that regiments are, at all times, sustained by a great
pride in their past, and a determination to live up to it. Alas! in
some cases this spirit dies away in adversity. I have seen the 23rd
Royal Fusiliers in good times and in bad, and I have never found them
downhearted.

When out for a few weeks' rest and training, in pleasant surroundings,
their work and play were carried out with much life and zest.

In the fighting in the Cambrai salient, in the Bourlon-Moeuvres
Ridge, on November 30, 1917, when the 2nd Division defeated six
successive attacks on their line, the 23rd Royal Fusiliers at the end
of the day held their line intact. This action was followed two days
later by a withdrawal which was necessary to get us out of a sharp
salient. This entailed very hard work and constant trench fighting,
extending over several days. The troops were very exhausted from the
extremely heavy calls that had been made on them, but after a few
days' rest it was almost incredible how rapidly they had thrown off
their fatigue and how good their spirits were.

They knew they had killed large numbers of Germans, and had
successfully defeated a German attack which, if successful, would have
been a great disaster for the British.

A more trying time was the March retreat in 1918. Lieutenant-Colonel
Winter had lost his voice from the effect of several days of very
heavy gas shelling of the Highland Ridge just before the Germans
launched their attack, and he was voiceless for the next ten days. A
large proportion of his Battalion were similarly affected, but time
after time during the retreat they turned and fought, and inflicted
heavy losses on the enemy until they did their share in repelling a
heavy attack at Beaumont Hamel, where the Germans were finally held.

It was the spirit of such battalions as the 23rd Royal Fusiliers that
broke the German offensive, and the marvellous power of recuperation
that they had, given a few days to rest and sleep.

In the offensive operations that lasted from August 21, 1918, to the
Armistice, the Battalion delivered many successful attacks with
undiminished dash and courage, and it was a proud day when I saw them
march through the Square in Duren with fixed bayonets, headed by the
few Regimental pipers that had been through the war with them since
their formation.

Well had they earned their Victory March into Germany, and
Lieutenant-Colonel Winter was justified in his great pride in their
fine appearance and magnificent transport.

In conclusion I must pay a tribute to the private soldiers, the
non-commissioned officers, and the young officers, who, year in and
year out, faced death and the greatest of hardships with that dogged
courage that has always broken the hearts of our enemies. The saying
that the British soldier never knows when he is beaten has never been
truer than in this war.

My hope is that histories such as this may have a wide circulation, so
that mothers, wives, and children may know what their men have done
for their country, what dangers they have faced, and what vast
sacrifices they cheerfully made.




FROM MAJOR-GENERAL R.O. KELLETT, C.B., C.M.G.

The story of the 23rd Battalion Royal Fusiliers cannot fail to be a
fine one. Every soldier who, like myself, had the honour of fighting,
I may say, shoulder to shoulder with it, will read its history with
the deepest interest.

As its first Brigadier, I took up that appointment on December 19,
1914, when the Battalion was in its infancy, deficient of arms and
equipment, but full of men whose physique, zeal, and spirit were
magnificent, and this spirit was fully maintained, to the honour and
fame of the Battalion, in the face of the enemy in France during the
winter of 1915-16, and throughout 1916 and 1917, during which time it
was in my (99th) Brigade, which formed part of the 2nd Division.

Throughout the heavy fighting we went through during this period, the
23rd Battalion Royal Fusiliers never failed me. What they were ordered
to do they did, and more; any objective they seized they held on to,
and never retired from. Few units can boast of as proud a record as
this.

Many hundreds of their best and bravest made the last sacrifice, but
the splendid gallantry and dogged and cheerful endurance of the
Battalion never lessened.

I was, and am, a proud man to have had such a Battalion in my Brigade,
a Battalion second to none amongst those who fought for the Empire in
the Great War.




+-----------------------------------------------------+
| FORMATION OF THE BATTALION, THE HONOURS GAINED, AND |
|                 ITS RECORD IN BRIEF                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------+




FORMATION OF THE BATTALION, THE HONOURS GAINED,
AND ITS RECORD IN BRIEF

RAISED IN LONDON IN 1914 BY MRS E. CUNLIFFE-OWEN (NOW MRS.
STAMFORD, O.B.E.)


PARTICULARS OF STRENGTH.

---------------------------------------+-----------+--------+--------+
                                       | Officers. | Other  | Total. |
                                       |           | Ranks. |        |
---------------------------------------+-----------+--------+--------+
Total strength of Battalion on         |           |        |        |
 embarkation                           |     31    |  1,006 |  1,037 |
                                       |           |        |        |
Total number of reinforcements who     |           |        |        |
 were posted to and joined the         |           |        |        |
 Battalion whilst overseas             |    188    |  3,762 |  3,950 |
                                       |           |        |        |
Total number who have served on the    |           |        |        |
 effective strength of the 23rd Royal  |           |        |        |
 Fusiliers whilst overseas             |    219    |  4,768 |  4,987 |
---------------------------------------+-----------+--------+--------+

    NOTE.--The above figures do not include those posted to the
    Battalion for record purposes only, and who never joined the
    Battalion in the Field. The figures represent only those who
    have served on the effective strength of the Battalion
    overseas.


COLONELS IN COMMAND.

Colonel Viscount MAITLAND. From formation of Battalion to January 29,
1916.

Lieut.-Colonel H.A. VERNON, D.S.O. From January 31, 1916, to May 23,
1917.

Lieut.-Colonel E.A. WINTER, D.S.O., M.C. From May 24, 1917, to April
14, 1919.

Lieut.-Colonel F.L. ASHBURNER, M.V.O., D.S.O. From April 15, 1919, to
March, 1920.

The Battalion proceeded overseas on November 15, 1915.


CASUALTIES SUSTAINED.

--------------------------------------+-----------+--------+--------+
                                      | Officers. |  Other |    All |
                                      |           | Ranks. | Ranks. |
--------------------------------------+-----------+--------+--------+
 Killed in action                     |        26 |    427 |    453 |
 Died of wounds                       |         2 |    128 |    130 |
 Wounded in action                    |        81 |  2,216 |  2,297 |
 Missing in action                    |        19 |    331 |    350 |
 Died from sickness whilst on active  |           |        |        |
  service                             |       Nil |     11 |     11 |
--------------------------------------+-----------+--------+--------+
    Total                             |       128 |  3,113 |  3,241 |
--------------------------------------+-----------+--------+--------+


HONOURS AWARDED.

  D.S.O.                                        5
  Bar to D.S.O.                                 1
  M.C.                                         27
  Bar to M.C.                                   5
  Order de l'Caronne                            1
  D.C.M.                                       14
  M.M.                                         93
  Bar to M.M.                                   6
  M.S.M.                                        8
  French Croix de Guerre                        1
  Belgian Croix de Guerre                       1
  Italian Bronze Medal for Military Valour      1


MOVEMENTS OF THE BATTALION AND BATTLES IN WHICH
IT TOOK PART.

1915.

November: Bethune sector.
December: Cambrin sector.

1916.

January: Festubert sector.
February: Givenchy sector.
March: Souchez sector.
April:     "      "
May:       "      "
June: Carency sector.
July: Somme and Battle of Delville Wood.
August: Somme, in support.
September: Hebuterne sector.
October: Redan.
November: Battle of Beaumont Hamel.
December: Battalion resting.

1917.

January: Courcelette sector.
February: Battle of Miraumont.
March: Battles of Greyvillers and Lady's Leg Ravine.
April: Vimy Ridge and battle in front of Oppy.
May: Battle for and capture of Oppy-Fresnoy line.
June: Cambrin sector.
September: Givenchy.
October: Battalion resting.
November: Battalion moved to Herzeele, behind Passchendale, ready to
  go in, and was then moved south to meet the German counter-attack
  at Bourlon Wood.
December: Holding Hindenburg line.

1918.

January: Highland Ridge.
February: Highland Ridge.
March: German attack. Battalion fought a rearguard action from
  Highland Ridge to Mailly-Mailly.
April: Battalion holding line at Blairville and Adnifer.
May:      "            "            "              "
June: Holding line at Adnifer and Ayette.
July:     "            "            "
August: Battalion led off for the Third Army on 21st inst., attacking
  and capturing enemy positions near Courcelles.
September: Battalion attacked and captured part of the Hindenburg
  line at Doignes, and later helped to capture Noyelles, and
  attacked Mount sur l'[OE]uvres.
October: Battalion attacked and captured Forenville.
November: Battalion attacked and captured Ruesnes.
November and December: Battalion marched forward into Germany.

1919.

Battalion in Cologne area as part of Army of Occupation.


1920.

Battalion in Cologne area until it was disbanded in March.




+-----------------------------------------------------+
|       A NEW TYPE OF SOLDIER--THE COSMOPOLITAN       |
|            COMPOSITION OF THE BATTALION             |
+-----------------------------------------------------+




A NEW TYPE OF SOLDIER--THE COSMOPOLITAN
COMPOSITION OF THE BATTALION


With the formation of the Sportsman's Battalion it will be admitted
quite a new type of man was brought into the British Army. Public
Schools battalions, the Chums, the Footballers, and other battalions
were formed. But to the First Sportsman's belongs the honour of
introducing an actually new type.

To begin with, it was cosmopolitan. Practically every grade of life
was represented, from the peer to the peasant; class distinctions were
swept away, every man turned to and pulled his bit. To illustrate what
is meant one hut of thirty men at Hornchurch may be mentioned.

In this hut the first bed was occupied by the brother of a peer. The
second was occupied by the man who formerly drove his motor-car. Both
had enlisted at the same time at the Hotel Cecil, had passed the
doctor at the same time at St. Paul's Churchyard, and had drawn their
service money when they signed their papers. Other beds in this hut
were occupied by a mechanical engineer, an old Blundell School boy,
planters, a mine overseer from Scotland, a man in possession of a
flying pilot's certificate secured in France, a photographer, a
poultry farmer, an old sea dog who had rounded Cape Horn on no fewer
than nine occasions, a man who had hunted seals, "with more patches on
his trousers than he could count," as he described it himself, a bank
clerk, and so on.

It must not be thought that this hut was an exceptional one. Every hut
was practically the same, and every hut was jealous of its reputation.
Scrubbing day was on Saturdays as a rule, and it was then that the
"un-char-lady" side of various men came out. They were handling
brooms, scrubbing-brushes, and squeegees for the first time in their
lives, but they stuck it, and, with practice making perfect, it was
surprising to what a pitch of cleanliness things eventually got.

Even church parade has been dodged on a Sunday morning in order that
three pals might unite in an effort to get the stoves blacked, the
knives and forks polished, and a sheen put on the tea-pails.

One may smile about these things now when in civilian life again, but
it was all very real at the time. The First Sportsman's were not
coddled; no man thought twice about getting in a terrible mess when
domestic duties had to be performed. The only kick came when the hut
windows had to be cleaned with old newspapers. The man who had
forgotten to wash the old cloths or buy new ones came in for a
terrible time.

Rivalry, perfectly friendly in character, was great in the earlier
days before chums began to be split up as the result of taking
commissions. If we were digging trenches "somewhere in Essex," our
particular sector had to be completed quicker and be more finished in
character than any other. Jobs were done at the double if it were
thought to be necessary; if any man developed a tendency to take a
rest at too frequent intervals--well, he was ticked off in the most
approved fashion. It all made for the good of the whole. The N.C.O. in
charge had an easy time, he hadn't to drive a man. All he had to do
was to see that in over-eagerness his working party did not take
risks.

But the time came when the calculations upon securing a commission
began to make their appearance. It may be some men were approached on
the matter, or that others thought they would get to the Front more
quickly as individual officers than as members of the Battalion (as
indeed proved the case in many instances), but certain it is that the
Colonel began to be inundated with applications to apply for
permission.

Whilst freely recommending all suitable applications, the Colonel, in
order to keep up the strength of the Battalion, made a rule that an
applicant was to supply two other recruits to the Battalion of a
certain height and of absolute physical fitness.

Naturally this was conformed with, and the recruiting sergeants round
Whitehall were all the richer for it. So, too, were the recruits, and
everyone was satisfied. If one man went two others took his place.

     [Illustration: FIRST INSPECTION OF BATTALION: HYDE PARK,
     OCTOBER, 1914.
     To face p. 20]

Finally, as it was found that men constantly leaving was interfering
with the internal organization of the companies, a special company was
formed of all those waiting for their commission papers to come
through.

This company, "E," proved the friendly butt of all the others, one wag
even going so far as to christen it the "Essex Beagles," alleging they
did not "parade," but "met"!

So, in order to free the others for harder training this company
provided very nearly all the fatigue parties for the camp.

Still, this didn't matter. It just gave the budding officers a chance
to show what they were capable of. On several occasions a member of
"E" Company proved he was more than a little useful with his hands
when it came to a matter of treating things from a physical point of
view and cutting the cheap wit out. The fatigues were also done
without a murmur, that was another point of honour, and although the
available strength of the company was dwindling day by day, "grousing"
about extra work was conspicuous by its absence.

There was a funny side about this dwindling of the strength, too. Men
would be on the morning parade, and not on that later in the day. The
explanation was a simple one. Their papers had come through. A man
would walk out through the gates and be pulled up by the sentry.

"What about your pass?" the latter would ask.

"Got my discharge," would be the reply.

"Got a commission?"

"Yes."

"Good luck, old chap. I'm getting my papers to-morrow."

So, many of the original members of the First Sportsman's Battalion
were scattered about on every front in their various regiments.
Walking through the Rue Colmar, Suez, one day I met my old company
officer, then in the Royal Flying Corps. At Sidi Bishr, on the banks
of the Mediterranean, I met another. A fellow-sergeant in the
Battalion came up in the Rue Rosetta, Alexandria, and claimed me.

Out beyond the Bitter Lakes, east of the Suez Canal, I met an old
Sportsman who had been a fellow-corporal with me. Back of the Somme, a
prominent West Country Sportsman shouted a greeting to me from the
Artillery. He still remembered rousing the camp at Hornchurch one
night by sounding a hunting horn.

In an Artillery Captain in the Hebuterne sector I recognized another
member--a Machine-Gun officer rolled up smilingly on the way up the
line, and, finest time of all, I had nearly a whole day with what was
left of the old crowd when they were resting after Delville Wood.

Friendships made in the First Sportsman's Battalion were not easily
broken. We are out of it now, but--once a Sportsman, always a
Sportsman. That, at least, has been my experience.

And it must not be forgotten that to Mrs. Cunliffe-Owen is due the
credit of conceiving the idea of a battalion formed of men over the
then enlistment age, who, by reason of their life as sportsmen, were
fit and hard. Approaching the War Office, she obtained permission to
raise a special battalion of men up to the age of forty-five. This was
how the Sportsman's Battalion was actually brought into being.




+-----------------------------------------------------+
| TRAINING AT HOME--HOW THE FINISHED SOLDIER EMERGED  |
|               FROM THE ROUGH MATERIAL               |
+-----------------------------------------------------+




TRAINING AT HOME--HOW THE FINISHED SOLDIER EMERGED
FROM THE ROUGH MATERIAL


Formed almost as soon as the war broke out in 1914, the First
Sportsman's Battalion may have provoked some criticism. It was
uncertain at first as to what branch of the service it was to
represent. Personally I thought it was to be mounted, and I was not
alone in this idea either. More than a few of us got busy at once in
settling how, if possible, we could provide our own mounts. That was
in the days when we were new to war, long before we began to know what
something approaching the real thing was.

Recruiting went on briskly at the Hotel Cecil, London, where Mrs.
Cunliffe-Owen and her staff worked hard and late. Lieutenant-Colonel
Winter, then Second-Lieutenant Winter, with his ledger-like book and
his green-baize-covered table, was a familiar figure. So, too, was the
tailor who had been entrusted with the task of fitting us out with our
uniforms. He, poor man, was soon in trouble. The stock sizes could be
secured, but stock sizes were at a discount with the majority of the
men who first joined up. They wanted outside sizes, and very
considerable outside sizes, too, for the average height was a little
over six feet, and the chest measurements in proportion.

Still, we recognized that these things had to be, and we kept on with
a smile and a joke for everything. Perhaps we had a pair of army
trousers and a sports-coat. Perhaps we had a pair of puttees, and the
rest of the costume was our own. It didn't matter. It was good enough
to parade in off the Embankment Gardens. It was good enough to route
march in through the London streets. And the traffic was always
stopped for us when we came home up the Strand, and proceeded down the
steps by the side of "the Coal Hole" to the "dismiss." Rude things
might be said to us by the crowd, but there was a warm spot in their
hearts for us. We just carried on.

Bit by bit we were provided with our uniforms, and we began to fancy
ourselves as the real thing. We began to make new friends, and we were
drawn closer to those we knew. We came from all over the world. At the
call men had come home from the Far East and the Far West. A man who
had gone up the Yukon with Frank Slavin, the boxer; another who had
been sealing round Alaska; trappers from the Canadians woods; railway
engineers from the Argentine; planters from Ceylon; big-game hunters
from Central Africa; others from China, Japan, the Malay States,
India, Egypt--these were just a few of the Battalion who were ready
and eager to shoulder a rifle, and do their bit as just common or
garden Tommies. The thought of taking a commission did not enter our
minds at the start. Every man was eager to get on with the work, with
but a dim thought of what it was going to be like, but worrying not a
bit about the future.

In a few weeks the Battalion had learnt how to form fours, to wheel,
and to maintain a uniformity of step. Every man was desperately keen;
to be late for parade was a great big sin. And this despite the fact
that every man had to come into London from all parts of the suburbs,
and farther out than that in many instances, by train (paying his own
fare) every morning.

So the time went on. Then came the news that we were to go into camp
at the Grey Towers, Hornchurch, Essex, and next came the formation of
a fatigue party to go on ahead and get things ready for the reception
of the Battalion. There was a rush to get into this party as soon as
the news went round. Everyone was eager to do something fresh, and,
after all, we didn't know what fatigues were in those days. So the
party went on ahead.

We who were left kept on with our drills; we even did physical jerks
on the slopes of Savoy Street, Strand. Then came the news that we were
to march away. That bucked everybody up tremendously, for, to tell the
truth, we were really beginning to get tired of the London life. Some
of us, who had seen life in various parts of the world previously,
were sighing again for the open air. All of us were thinking it was
really time we did something to justify our existence. We did not
claim to be show soldiers; we wanted to get at it.

     [Illustration: MARCHING AWAY FROM HYDE PARK TO ENTRAIN FOR
     HORNCHURCH.
     To face p. 28]

All things come to those who wait, however. We were to move to
Hornchurch--the first step to active service. We had our uniforms, we
even had white gloves, and at last we fell in, by the Hotel Cecil,
with a band at our head, and off we went. Funnily enough, some of us
felt this break with London more than we felt anything afterwards. It
was really our first introduction to "the Great Unknown."

Had the Guards been marching away they could not have had a greater
and a more enthusiastic send-off. The streets of the City were packed;
it was a struggle to get through. At Liverpool Street we were reduced
to a two-deep formation, and even then it became a case of shouldering
your way through those who had gathered to wish us "God speed." But we
were entrained at last; we detrained at Romford, and we marched to
Hornchurch. We were in the camp.

OUR FIRST SURPRISE.--That's when we had the first surprise sprung upon
us, for we learnt that the camp would be our home for a whole solid
fourteen days. No one was to be allowed to go into the village; we
were to begin our course of instruction in discipline. There were a
few heart-burnings, but nothing more. The Battalion played up to its
ideal.

We were drilled early and late; we were instructed in the art of guard
mounting; we peeled potatoes in the cookhouse; we fetched coal from
the quartermaster's stores; we fell in to get our rations from the
cookhouse; and last, but not least, we began to grouse. That was our
first advance to becoming real soldiers. At least, so the author was
told by an old N.C.O. who had marched with Roberts to Kabul, and who
was again in the Service, too aged to do more than to instruct, but
not too aged to do that well.

Hard work and plain but plentiful food soon made the Battalion as hard
as nails, a phrase coined by the London _Evening News_, and a phrase
that stuck. Quite as important, too, was the fact that a member of the
"hard as nails" Battalion had to prove he was capable of acting up to
it. So it was just a matter of honour that every man should keep off
the sick parades, and not come home in the ambulance when a long route
march or a field day was indulged in.

This took a bit of doing sometimes, for there was no mercy shown us.
We said we wanted the real thing, and, between ourselves, we got it. A
march of seven miles to the scene of operations, a hard field day, and
a march of seven miles home again, with pack, rifle, and full
equipment in other ways, was our lot. We began to recognize that we
were really soldiers, and we patted ourselves on the back.

Sport, too, played a very big part in our training. The Army of to-day
recognizes the fact that athletics makes and keeps our youngsters fit
and well. Our Colonel recognized it from the start, and as we had
plenty of material to work upon we went right away with it. We had a
"soccer" team, a "rugger" team, and a cricket eleven. The records of
the matches we won, and the fact that very few defeats were notched up
against us, proves we had a perfect right to style ourselves "the
First Sportsman's Battalion, the 23rd (Service) Battalion Royal
Fusiliers."

     [Illustration: THE CAMP: HORNCHURCH.]

     [Illustration: INTERIOR OF A HUT: HORNCHURCH.
     To face p. 30]

Scullers, footballers, boxers, runners, wrestlers, actors, musicians,
artists--all these could be had for the asking, and we drew upon them
liberally. We were given plenty of opportunities to indulge in our
passion for sport in the ordinary way, but the private who once asked
for leave in order to go grouse shooting didn't get it. It was
suggested he might put in a little time at the rifle range instead. No
restrictions, however, were put upon any early morning running
matches, and the football and cricket teams were helped in every way.

To get back to the purely military side, however. We groused at the
amount of drills and night operations, to being hut orderlies, going
on guard, and so on. But we did them as a means to an end. Then we had
the rudest shock of all. We learnt we were to embark on the task of
digging trenches--somewhere in Essex! That put the lid on things, so
we considered. We, infantry soldiers, to dig trenches! It couldn't be
right. We thought the Engineers, or the Pioneers, or somebody else,
always did that. Our job was to carry a rifle, and to shoot Germans.
That's how the rank and file looked at it in the first place. Of
course they discovered other things when the Battalion got to France,
but that's another story.

However, it had to be done and, like everything else, it _was_ done.
After an early breakfast, the company detailed fell in and marched off
to the station. After a while, a special train arrived and we
scrambled in. In the interim, it may be mentioned, packed trains
proceeding cityward went by, the passengers cheering us. That passed
the time if it did nothing else.

Nearly an hour in the train, a march of perhaps a couple of miles, and
we reached our objective. Mysterious personages, with a big "G.R." in
gold on scarlet armlets popped up from somewhere, produced plans, and
informed our Company Officer that trenches had to be dug at such and
such a place. As a rule it was somewhere where the water from an
adjacent brook would percolate through the earth and make things
uncomfortable. That's by the way, though, and after all it was good
practice, this working out a method of trench drainage on our own. As
a matter of fact we had a lot of Civil and Colonial Engineers in our
ranks, and so we put all the mistakes made by the others right.
Whenever possible, of course. One or two things, it must be admitted,
beat us.

Sometimes it rained, sometimes it snowed, occasionally, very
occasionally, it happened to be fine. But we got on with our work,
waiting for the bugler to blow for the midday lunch. When "cookhouse"
went we straightened our backs, got _some_ of the mud off our boots,
and proceeded to take what the gods (in this case the quartermaster)
were good enough to give us. We always had two guesses, and we were
always right. It was either bread and cheese, or bread and bully. If
we were fortunate we might be able to purchase beer at a local
hostelry, or Oxo at a village shop. If not so fortunate, the
waterbottle or, if again lucky, a pocket-flask was brought into
service.

THE KINDLY SHOPKEEPER.--Digressing for a moment, though, it may be
mentioned that the various shopkeepers were always very, very good to
us! They always supplied us with what we needed, if they had it, and
they never put the prices up to us! At least, not much. For instance,
if a resident could buy a pair of bootlaces for a penny, we were only
occasionally charged more than threepence. Other things were in
proportion, and Essex to-day has quite a lot of nice new shops,
unknown before the advent of the First Sportsman's Battalion. It is
pleasing to remember that a Navvy Battalion followed us!

To resume the trench digging. As we were later complimented on the
quality of the work we did, we must have shone in the way of handling
the pick and the spade. At the end of our labours, when the "fall in"
was sounded, we were quite ready to say we were looking forward to a
hot meal in our huts in camp, where, outside, the breezes whispered
through the branches of the trees lining the drive, where the moon
silvered the tin roofs of our living quarters, and all was bright and
jolly--in the sergeants' mess!

So time sped away, and still we kept on wondering if we were
forgotten. We sat by the fires in "stoves, hot, combustion slow," and
we told the tale of the two highly placed War Office officials who
were discussing the war years after it had finished. One had asked the
other how the Sportsman's Battalion had shaped in "the Great
Adventure," and then would come the climax. "Good God!" the other
would say, "I've forgotten them. They're still at Hornchurch!"

All things have to come to a finish though, and so we found. We had
night attacks, some three and four day route marches, even a
recruiting march through Barking and its neighbourhood, we did our
shooting tests, got through our bayonet exercises, had battalion drill
in the early mornings, with a fair amount of ceremonial drill thrown
in as a makeweight, and then came the rumour that a real big move was
to be made, such a move that the departure for the Front could not be
long delayed.

This was the move to Clipstone Camp for brigade training. We had heard
so many rumours previously that we did not believe this, the latest,
at first. But it was correct, and at last the Battalion, formed up in
hollow square, was found on the parade ground at Grey Towers, where
the Rector of Hornchurch bade us God speed and good cheer.

A few days later the Battalion, leaving two companies behind as depot
companies, entrained at Hornchurch for the new camp at Clipstone.

There it went through brigade training, was equipped with its
regimental transport, and afterwards moved to Candahar Barracks,
Tidworth, to undergo divisional training with the 33rd Division, of
which it formed a part.

Finally, after being reviewed with the Division by Queen Mary, acting
in place of His Majesty the King, who was suffering from his accident
sustained in France, all was in readiness for the next and biggest
move of all.




+-----------------------------------------------------+
|   SERVICE OVERSEAS--HEAVY FIGHTING ALL ALONG THE    |
|      FRONT, AND A TRIUMPHAL MARCH INTO GERMANY      |
+-----------------------------------------------------+




SERVICE OVERSEAS--HEAVY FIGHTING ALL ALONG THE
FRONT, AND A TRIUMPHAL MARCH INTO GERMANY


The day of the move overseas arrived. This was on November 15, 1915,
when the regimental transport entrained at Tidworth for Havre,
followed one day later by the Battalion, which proceeded to
Folkestone, Boulogne being reached on November 17, Ostrohove Rest Camp
being the first objective. No time, however, was wasted there, for on
November 18 the Battalion entrained at Pont-de-Briques, joining the
transport which had come up from Havre.

It was at Steenbecque, reached a day later, and where billets were
found in barns and farmhouses, that the sound of artillery in action
was first heard by the Battalion. Four days were occupied here in
sorting things out generally, the companies parading, route marching,
and being inspected.

On November 23 a move was made to Busnes, the first part of the route
being over badly cut up second-class roads, and the remainder on pave.
The men, the war diary tells us, marching in greatcoats, and carrying
blankets, found the march very trying. Billets in the area La
Miquellerie were reached at 3 p.m. Distance, 111/2 miles.

Then came a very important thing from a soldier's point of view. Pay
was drawn from the Field Cashier, and distributed for the first time
in France. Next came the notification that in conformation with the
policy of re-forming the 33rd and the 2nd Divisions by forming
brigades, each consisting of two new battalions and two regular
battalions, the 99th Brigade was to lose the 17th and 24th Battalions
Royal Fusiliers, receive the 1st Royal Berks and the 1st King's Royal
Rifle Corps and join the 2nd Division.

On November 25 the Battalion paraded to march to their new billets at
Bethune, being inspected _en route_ by General Walker and the Staff of
the 2nd Division. General Walker's opinion was that the 23rd Royal
Fusiliers was one of the best battalions he had seen in Bethune.

Still moving, on November 26 the Battalion marched to Annequin, Fosse
9, and owing to the road being frequently shelled, orders were given
that seventy-pace intervals should be kept between platoons east of
Beuvry. To improve matters, it may be mentioned, there was a heavy
fall of snow, and in the portion of the village south of La Basse the
majority of the houses were in ruins, the result of frequent
bombardments by the enemy.

Then began the first experience of the Battalion in warfare. Before
being trusted to hold a line by itself it had to serve an
apprenticeship. This was done by attaching, in the first place,
platoons, then companies, and then the half-battalion to battalions in
the line in order to learn the work and what was expected of them.

During this time much kindness was experienced from the regular
battalions to which the attachments were made. The units of the
Battalion not doing attachment duty were used for working parties in
the trenches and suffered several casualties. No. 2 platoon, right
flank company, specially suffered, being caught by shrapnel fire on
the Bethune-La Basse road, ten N.C.O.'s and men being wounded.

On December 10 instruction in the use of the gas helmet was given.
Every man was required to pass through a hut sprayed with chlorine gas
ten times as strong as would be used on ordinary occasions, General
Kellett being present while this was being carried out, and himself
going through the test.

So things went on until December 19. On that date the Battalion
marched to Cambrin support point to relieve the 1st Royal Berks and
take over a sector "on its own." In the trenches, No. 1 Company was on
the right, adjoining the 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps, No. 2 Company
on the left, adjoining the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, No. 3
Company was in the centre, and No. 4 Company was in support at
Annequin (Fosse).

It was a very busy time, for No. 3 Company held command of the sap
head at New Crater, a spot where German snipers were particularly
troublesome. A gas attack was ordered upon the enemy, but, much to the
disappointment of the officers and men, it proved a "wash-out" owing
to the breeze dying down at the last moment. On December 21, however,
as the wind was favourable, a gas attack took place on a front of
about a mile. It was on this day that Captain Cameron, of No. 1
Company, was wounded in the arm by a piece of high-explosive while
entering the front line.

Then the Battalion, less No. 4 Company, was relieved by the 1st Royal
Berks, and proceeded to reserve billets at Annequin (Fosse) on
December 22. Not for complete rest, though, as it is generally
understood by the civilian, for working parties had to be detailed;
indeed, on December 24 all four companies were out, less sick and
those on duty. And, says the war diary, no straw was provided for the
billets, no coke, coal, or wood for the drying-room, and no facilities
for drying or cleaning clothes.

CHRISTMAS DAY IN THE TRENCHES--On Christmas Day the Battalion paraded
for trench duty to relieve the 1st Royal Berks, the trenches taken
over being the same as were occupied on December 19-22, with the
alteration in disposition that made No. 4 Company replace No. 3
Company in the centre.

There was also a special bombardment on this day, and the Battalion's
first patrol, consisting of four men and an officer, went over the
parapet, being out in No Man's Land for an hour. During that time the
party located a sniper's post, cut out some wire from the enemy's
entanglements, and were persistently sniped at themselves, while great
difficulty was experienced in maintaining direction.

Then, on Boxing Day, Colonel Lord Maitland was wounded in the knee by
a piece of high-explosive while proceeding to the 99th Brigade
Headquarters via Cambrin Church.

The German snipers continued their activity, there were intermittent
bombardments, several casualties were sustained, and on December 29
the Battalion was relieved by the 18th Royal Fusiliers. Owing to the
bad state of the trenches this relief did not take place until 5.10
p.m., although it was due to be effected at 3 p.m.

Still, the Battalion got back to its billets at Annequin (Fosse), and
on December 30 marched back to Busnettes for sixteen days' divisional
rest. Owing to the very arduous work which had been done since
December 19, on this occasion no packs were carried, and only three
men fell out in a tiring march of 111/4 miles.


1916.

The New Year opened quietly, the usual rest-time routine of kit
inspection, squad drill, route marching, and so on, being indulged in,
a draft coming up from the base on January 7, while on January 11 the
first leave for officers commenced. Then came a move, and on January
19 the Battalion marched to Le Touret, relieving the 6th Queen's
Regiment, the 99th Infantry Brigade taking over a sector of the front
at Festubert from the 37th Infantry Brigade.

     [Illustration: LT.-COL. H.A. VERNON, D.S.O.
     To face p. 42]

On January 22 the Battalion relieved the 1st Royal Berks, "B" Company
being in reserve in the old British line, "A" Company in support in
Richmond Trench, "C" Company in front line Cover Trench and Islands,
and "D" Company in front line Orchard Trench. The front line and
support line garrisons, it may be noted, had to take up their
positions over the top, and so could not be visited in daylight. The
position remained the same until the then Kaiser's birthday, on
January 27, when although the order for relief was given at 6 p.m., a
"stand to" was ordered in anticipation of an attack.

This did not come off, and, the relief by the 24th Royal Fusiliers
being effected, the Battalion marched back to Bethune on January 28,
where the billets were inspected by General Kellett.

On January 29 Colonel Lord Maitland relinquished the command of the
Battalion, temporary command being taken by Major Richey, D.S.O., and
Lieutenant-Colonel H.A. Vernon (1st King's Royal Rifle Corps) assumed
command on January 31, while Lieutenant Cooper was appointed
machine-gun officer in place of Lieutenant Lewis, who had been
wounded.

Le Quesnoy was the next move, made on February 3, and relieving the
1st Royal Berks on February 7, the Battalion was in turn moved out of
the trenches into the village line Givenchy on the 11th, remaining
there until the 15th, when it again relieved the 1st Royal Berks in B3
sub-sector Givenchy. On the 17th the Battalion was relieved by the
16th Royal Welsh Fusiliers and moved to Le Quesnoy, remaining there
until the 27th, when it proceeded to Barlin. On February 28 another
move was made to Petit Sains, relieving the 22nd Royal Fusiliers, and
on the 29th the Battalion took over the Souchez North sector of
trenches from the French 77th Infantry Regiment.

From March 1 to March 13 the Battalion held the line at Souchez North
in turn with the 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps and on the latter date
proceeded to billets at Noulette, returning again to the trenches on
the 17th, the Battalion on the left being the 17th Royal Fusiliers,
and on the right the 1st Royal Berks. Then on March 28 it moved to La
Comte for divisional rest.

Reclinghem was the next move, made on April 9, and on April 11 there
was a Brigade field day, another reinforcing draft arriving on the
same day. Then on the night of April 21-22 the Battalion relieved the
1st King's Royal Rifle Corps in the Souchez second sector of the line.
So the end of the month arrived with alternate duty in the trenches
and rest in billets.

More reinforcements, to replace wastage, arrived in the early part of
May, and on the 23rd the Battalion was in the trenches at Berthouval,
marching to its billets at Camblain l'Abbe on May 30. Working parties
were naturally provided for the trenches while the Battalion was
resting, and two men were accidentally wounded on the 4th. But things
were moderately quiet until the night of June 10-11. On that date the
Battalion relieved the 17th Middlesex Regiment in the Carency left
sector of the front.

On June 21 Lieutenant-Colonel Vernon was wounded whilst visiting a sap
head held by Jerry Delaney, the boxer, Major H.V. Pirie assuming
command of the Battalion until he returned to duty. The Battalion was
relieved by the 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps on the night of June
22-23, and proceeded to billets at Villiers aux Bois. The next move,
on the 27th, was made to Estree Cauchie.

THE SOMME FIGHTING.--Then came the move to the Somme and the July of
1916, when the average life of the infantry subaltern in France was
only worth three weeks. Many, indeed, were killed within a week of
their crossing the Channel, on the very first day of entering the
trenches and taking part in the British advance. The 23rd Royal
Fusiliers were engaged in the whole of the desperate fighting on the
Somme, including the battle of Delville Wood, the story of which is
told in another part of this volume.

Following this bath of blood, on August 1 the Battalion left Bund
support trench, two companies going to Longueval Alley, and two
remaining to garrison and dig trenches at Montauban.

Becoming united again, on the 29th the Battalion, under the
impression that it was going out for a promised rest after its battle,
moved to The Citadel, Sandpit Valley, and on to Mericourt l'Abbe;
thence on to Fremont (passing through Amiens), Naours, Longuevillette,
Authie, and Bus les Artois; and next, instead of the longed-for rest,
found itself back in the trenches again at Hebuterne, relieving the
1st Coldstream Guards!

September was spent in the Hebuterne sector, and October saw many
moves. Starting with Coieneux (Basin Wood) the Battalion was at the
Redan (Serre sector), Mailly-Maillet (where the church, it will be
remembered, had been protected by means of fascines), Raincheval, and
Acheux Wood, where the rail-head and the factory with its tall chimney
were bombed heavily from the air and shelled by the German heavies.
Finally, on October 30, the Battalion relieved the 2nd Highland Light
Infantry in the Redan right sub-sector, being in the trenches there
when the month drew to a close.

November saw the Battalion taking its part in the Battle of Beaumont
Hamel. Told by the War Diary this month's events were:

    November 1.--Battalion in Redan right sub-sector.

    November 2.--Battalion relieved by the 1st King's Royal Rifle
    Corps, and proceeded to billets at Mailly-Maillet.

    November 3-4.--Battalion in billets, providing working and
    carrying parties.

    November 5.--Battalion relieved 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps
    in Redan right sub-sector.

    November 6.--Battalion in Redan right sub-sector.

    November 7.--Battalion relieved by 24th Royal Fusiliers and
    proceeded to billets at Bertrancourt.

    November 8-12.--Battalion in billets, providing working and
    carrying parties.

    November 13.--Battalion left Bertrancourt at 2.10 a.m., and
    proceeded to Ellis Square, Fort Hoystead, and View Trench
    (Redan right sub-sector). "A" and "C" Companies sent at 10.10
    a.m. to G.O.C. 5th Brigade at White City. These companies
    proceeded later to the old German front line, and at 5 p.m.
    "C" Company was ordered up to reinforce the 2nd Highland Light
    Infantry in Green Line.

    "B" and "D" Companies at 7 p.m. carried the German second
    line. During this time, these companies were under the command
    of G.O.C. 8th Infantry Brigade. At 7 p.m. Battalion
    Headquarters moved to White City.

    November 14.--1st King's Royal Rifle Corps at 3 a.m. also
    established Headquarters at White City. At 6 a.m. Battalion
    moved forward in support of 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps and
    1st Royal Berks. "A" and "C" Companies proceeded to Crater
    Lane, and later to Wagon Road (on right). "B" and "D"
    Companies (on left) took up position in Lager Alley, between
    the Oxford and Bucks Light Infantry and the 1st Royal Berks.

    November 15.--At 1 a.m. Battalion Headquarters moved from
    White City to Headquarters of 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps in
    German front line. Companies still in support of 1st King's
    Royal Rifle Corps and 1st Royal Berks.

    November 16.--Battalion at 1 a.m. moved back to Ellis Square.

    November 17.--Battalion moved to billets in Mailly-Maillet.

    November 18.--Battalion moved to billets at Sarton.

    November 19.--Battalion marched to billets at Gezancourt.

    November 20.--Battalion in billets at Gezancourt.

    November 21.--Battalion marched to billets at Candas.

    November 22.--Battalion in billets at Candas.

    November 23.--Battalion marched to billets at Domqueur.

    November 24.--Battalion marched to billets at Gapennes.

    November 25.--Battalion marched to billets at Millencourt.

    November 26.--Battalion in billets at Millencourt.

    November 27.--Battalion marched to billets at Oneux.

    November 28-29-30.--Battalion in billets at Oneux.

The following month, December, the Battalion also spent in rest at
Oneux.


1917.

On January 9 a move was made from Oneux to Candas, to Beauquesne on
the 11th, to Bouzincourt on the 13th, and to Aveluy on the 20th. From
there it went into the trenches at Courcelette, "A" and "C" Companies
being in the front line, and "B" and "D" in support.

On February 1 the Battalion moved from Courcelette to Ovillers Huts,
and on the 5th went on to Senlis, moving to Wolfe Huts on the 15th,
and into the line for operations a day later.

Intense cold was experienced at this time. The ground, like iron, was
covered with snow. The frost was intense, one man being actually
frozen stiff at his post on sentry, and drinking water carried to the
front line arrived as lumps of ice, from which bits were chipped for
eating.

An attack on the German trenches was made on February 17. Unluckily a
day before the attack the frost gave way, a very rapid thaw set in,
making No Man's Land deep and heavy with slush and mud. Moving to the
attack over such ground was terrible; the objective line was reached,
but the following casualties were sustained:

  Officers killed             8
       "   wounded            4
       "   missing            1
                            ---
                             13

  Other ranks killed         30
       "      wounded       165
       "      missing        32
                            ---
                            227

The Battalion held the Red Line on February 18, and in the night was
relieved and moved to Ovillers Huts again. On the 24th it moved to
Bruce Huts, and on the 26th to Albert, returning to Ovillers Huts on
the 27th.

March 5 found the Battalion back in the trenches at Courcellette, and
on the 10th "D" Company cooperated with the 1st Royal Berks and the
1st King's Royal Rifle Corps in an attack on Grevillers Trench and
Lady's Leg Ravine, taking the ravine, killing about 20 of the enemy,
and capturing 30 men and 2 machine guns. The casualties of the company
amounted to 7 other ranks killed, 26 wounded, 1 accidentally wounded,
and 2 died later from their wounds.

The following day the Battalion moved to Wolfe Huts, and on the 19th
to Albert again, proceeding from there to Contay, Amplier, Bonnieres,
Framecourt, Aumerval, and Bailleul les Pernes.

VIMY RIDGE.--From Bailleul les Pernes the Battalion moved up to
Larosette, behind Vimy Ridge, ready to go in and take over a part of
the Ridge after its capture in the coming battle for its possession.
On the night of April 11, in a blinding snowstorm, the Battalion
relieved the 1/5th Gordons on the captured Ridge, and on the 13th
continued the advance to the line of the railway, captured the village
of Bailleul, established a line on the enemy side of it, and sent out
patrols to Oppy, which was found to be very strongly held by the
enemy.

     [Illustration: _Swaine, photo._
     LT.-COL. E.A. WINTER, D.S.O., M.C.
     To face p. 50]

Owing to a mistaken order, one platoon of "C" Company actually
advanced on Oppy to capture it, but were themselves taken prisoners
after severe fighting. During this advance one 77mm., two field guns,
and one 4.2 howitzer were captured, and whilst moving forward, at the
Colonel's side, to the railway embankment, the Adjutant of the
Battalion, Captain Lissaman, was killed by an enemy shell.

Being relieved on the 14th by the 1st Royal Berks, the Battalion moved
into support and reserve lines, but on the 18th were in the trenches
west of Ecurie, moving to a tent camp on the Roclincourt-Maison-Blanche
road on the 22nd. Another move, to Maroeil, was made on April 23, and
on the 25th the 17th Royal Fusiliers were relieved in the trenches west
of Bailleul.

On April 29, at 4 a.m., "B" Company took part in an attack on Oppy by
the 1st Royal Berks and the 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps, and then the
Battalion moved back into reserve trenches.

On May 1 a composite battalion was formed of two companies of the 23rd
Royal Fusiliers and two companies of the 1st Royal Berks, and moved
forward to a position in front of Oppy to deliver an attack on the
Oppy-Fresnoy line.

Attacking on March 3, Fresnoy trench was captured with between sixty
and seventy prisoners and a machine gun. Heavy counter-attacks were
made by the Germans during the day, and, in view of these and the
retirement of the troops on the right, it became necessary to retire
along Fresnoy trench. At 3.30 a.m., on the night of May 3-4, the
Battalion was relieved by the 15th Warwicks, and moved back to disused
enemy trenches in the Roclincourt area, the total casualties sustained
being 7 officers and 122 other ranks.

On May 5 Lieutenant-Colonel Vernon having proceeded on leave, Major
E.A. Winter assumed command, and on May 24 Lt.-Colonel Vernon having
to report to the War Office on promotion to Brigadier-General, Major
Winter was promoted Lieutenant-Colonel, and appointed to the command
of the Battalion. On the same day the Battalion moved into the line
again, relieving first the 1st Royal West Kents, and then the 22nd
Royal Fusiliers.

June 1 saw the Battalion relieved by the 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps
in the front line (Oppy-Arleux line), and moved back to Deutscher
House and Thelus Wood, working parties for the front line being
provided each night. On the 4th, the 22nd Royal Fusiliers came in as
the relief, and the Battalion moved to St. Aubyn for rest.

This did not last long, for on June 8-9 the Battalion relieved the 1st
King's Royal Rifle Corps in immediate support, Oppy-Arleux line, the
casualties sustained being one other rank killed and two wounded.
Then, relieving the 22nd Royal Fusiliers, the Battalion went into the
front line, being relieved in turn on the night of June 13-14 by the
Royal West Kents, and proceeded to Bray.

On June 20 the Battalion was taken by omnibus to Beuvry, and on the
21st relieved the 2/5th Manchester Regiment in the front line, Cambrin
left sub-sector, the casualties being two other ranks killed and six
wounded. A German raid on the Battalion right was repelled at 3.30
a.m. on the 27th, and the 22nd Royal Fusiliers came in as relief on
the evening of that day, the Battalion proceeding to Noyelles for
rest.

July opened with the Battalion training at Noyelles under company
arrangements, so far as it was possible, having in view its proximity
to the line and liability to observation by the enemy. On July 3 the
Battalion went into the front line, Cambrin left sub-sector. Six days
later it went into support with headquarters at Annequin.

July 5 saw the Battalion, less two companies, in the Cambrin left
sub-sector front line, Major N.A. Lewis assuming command in the
trenches, with 100 Corps cyclists attached, while Lieutenant-Colonel
Winter remained at Annequin for the purpose of training "C" and "D"
Companies for a raid.

About 3.30 a.m. an enemy raiding party, about fifteen strong, entered
the front line, wounding and carrying off one man. Bombing parties at
once bombed along the trench, driving the raiders out, who came under
Lewis gun and rifle fire both on entering and leaving their objective.
On returning to their own lines they left our wounded man, who was
brought in. The body of one of the enemy was found in No Man's Land,
but a complete search could not be made owing to the light. At night,
however, a patrol went out and brought in the body of the dead German.
Other bodies had apparently been dragged back to the enemy trenches.
Our casualties were only four wounded.

On July 20, at 10.30 p.m., a raiding party, consisting of two officers
and about a hundred other ranks, crossed to the enemy's front and
support lines, the object being the capture of these two lines, the
infliction of loss on the enemy, and the securing of prisoners and
identifications. The raid was preceded by a hurricane barrage from our
artillery, Stokes' mortars, and machine guns, being also accompanied
with a discharge from oil projectors.

Very few of the enemy were found in the front and support lines, but
small parties who were in dug-outs were bombed. Five of the enemy were
also bayoneted in a communication trench. The main garrisons of the
lines had apparently retired, and no prisoners were taken. Our
casualties during the raid were two killed, fifteen wounded, and five
wounded and missing.

Then came a move into reserve at Annequin, but from the 27th the
Battalion moved into the front line of the Cambrin left sub-sector
again up to, and including, August 1. From then until the night of
August 25 the Battalion were doing duty in the trenches and in
reserve, but on the 26th was relieved by the 8th Sherwood Foresters,
and moved to Oblinghem.

There training was carried on, and on September 6 the C.O.,
accompanied by the company commanders and specialist officers,
reconnoitred the Givenchy support line. On the following day the
Battalion proceeded to the village support line, no shelling being
experienced during the relief of the 17th Middlesex. On September 13
the Battalion relieved the 22nd Royal Fusiliers in the Givenchy left
sub-sector front line, a battalion of the Portuguese troops being
attached for instruction.

Gas was projected upon the enemy on the 14th; there was no
retaliation, and on the following day the Portuguese were relieved by
another of their battalions.

About a hundred enemy heavy shells fell on September 16 near the right
company's headquarters at Barnton Tee, Barnton Road, blowing in the
trench in five places. A bombardment on the left, which commenced
later, ceased on our retaliating. On September 17 the Portuguese
troops left the trenches and returned to their billets, while on the
night of the 18th-19th the Battalion was relieved and proceeded to
Beuvry.

Training there until September 26, the Battalion then relieved the
22nd Royal Fusiliers in the Cambrin left sub-sector, and finding the
enemy to be ominously quiet, a patrol was sent out to Railway Craters.
On the following night eight small patrols were sent out into No Man's
Land, and on the 28th two patrols reconnoitred the enemy wire. On the
following day eight small patrols were established in No Man's Land
to cover work in the trenches, and, ensuing upon this, the German
artillery became fairly active.

A move into support, following relief, was made on September 2. On the
5th the Battalion was relieved, and the companies marched
independently to the Orphanage, Bethune, then on to Raimbert, the
Battalion being watched on the line of march by Generals Pereira and
Kellett.

AT BOURLON WOOD.--Training was carried on, and on November 5 the
Battalion made a move through Busnes, Merville, and the Eecke area to
the Herzeele area. More training ensued, and a strong rumour was in
the air that the 2nd Division was "for Italy." The Battalion was
equipped up to the last button, all ranks were looking forward to a
change of scenery and new phases of fighting; the medical officer
lectured the Battalion on the perils to be avoided in relation to
charming Italians, and spirits were high and merry.

But the first attack on Cambrai took place, and instead of going to
Italy the 2nd Division was hurriedly moved south by road and rail to
take over the line from troops which had conducted the attack.

On the night of November 26-27 the Battalion had reached
Beaumetz-les-Cambrai, from which it was moved up to the slopes of
Bourlon Wood to take over from elements of the 2/4th King's Own
Yorkshire Light Infantry and the Bays. The march along the Cambrai
road, across the captured Hindenburg Line, and on to the Sugar
Factory will long be remembered by those who took part in it.

Again it snowed--it is curious how many important moves of the
Battalion took place in a snowstorm. This time, however, it was a
blessing, for it deadened the sound of moving troops, and certainly
saved the Battalion being heard and shelled by the enemy.

On the line (if a few scattered posts in shell-holes can be called a
line) being taken over, the Battalion at once set to work to dig
itself in, profiting greatly by the recent training it had received in
"intensive digging." On the left was the 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps,
and on the right the 62nd Division, the battalion in support being the
1st Royal Berks. The Battalion held the line on the 27th, and on the
28th changed places with the 1st Royal Berks, going into support
positions to them.

On the 30th the heavy enemy attack developed, and the Berks being hard
pressed, three companies of the 23rd were moved up to their support.
The enemy gained a footing in their line, and one company of the 23rd
was used to counter-attack and re-establish the line, which it
successfully performed.

The 17th Royal Fusiliers, on the Berks' left, having severe fighting,
a section of the 23rd was sent to strengthen their posts, and help was
given in supplying them with bombs and S.A.A. On the evening of
December 1 the line was readjusted between the 1st Royal Berks and the
23rd Royal Fusiliers--the Berks taking the left and the 23rd the
right. On the night of December 1 the position of the Battalion was:
two companies and two platoons in the line; two companies, less two
platoons, in support.

On the night of December 2 the unit on the right of the 23rd Royal
Fusiliers pushed forward its line. In order to keep touch with them,
one company from the support positions went over with them at 8.10
p.m. The advance was successful, the objective duly gained and rapidly
consolidated--one prisoner and one machine gun being taken in the
advance.

Then came a great disappointment to the troops who had fought so well.
Further south the enemy's counter-attack had proved successful,
converting the position held by the 2nd Division into a very dangerous
salient, from which it was imperative to retire.

The necessary orders were issued, and at dead of night, December 4-5,
the Battalion retired through Graincourt to Hermies. To cover the
retirement two sections per company were left in the line with orders
not to retire until just before dawn, and to spend the night in moving
up and down the vacated line, firing Verey-lights and rifles to delude
the enemy into thinking the line was still held.

By this ruse the Battalion was enabled to carry out the difficult
operation of withdrawing in the face of the enemy without his
knowledge. The sections so left behind gallantly carried out their
tasks and safely rejoined the Battalion at Hermies.

From December 5 the Battalion was in support, but on the 11th it
relieved the 21st Londons in the Hindenburg Line, and, after relief,
marched on December 20 to Gropi Camp, where Christmas was spent in
tents in the snow. In reserve until the 30th, it then relieved the
22nd Royal Fusiliers in the left canal sector (Canal du Nord) of the
Hindenburg Line.


1918.

On January 3 the Battalion, relieved, marched independently by
companies to Barastre for Divisional rest. January 23 found them at
Villers Plouich in the Vacquerie right sub-sector, the Battalion
headquarters being in Farm Ravine. On February 3 they entrained on the
light railway for Equancourt, where they were placed in Divisional
reserve. Not much time was spent in this way, though, for on the 9th
the Battalion entrained for Trescault, and proceeded from there to the
Vacquerie right sub-sector, remaining in the line there until going
into reserve at Equancourt again on the 15th.

On February 22 a move was made to the line again in the Vacquerie
right sub-sector. On the night of March 6-7 the Battalion was
relieved, and marched to Metz, where they were billeted in huts. It
was impossible, however, to secure any real rest here, for the camp
was shelled intermittently both during the day and the night.

The afternoon of March 12 saw the Battalion back in the trenches
again at Lincoln Reserve and Midland Reserve, "D" Company being in
Snap Trench. There was a heavy gas-shell bombardment by the enemy on
the nights of the 12th, 13th, and 14th, the Battalion suffering heavy
casualties, also intermittent shelling during the day and night, while
there was, as a welcome change, a raid on the enemy front line by the
Battalion on the night of March 13-14. Then came the relief of the
Battalion, which marched back to Equancourt, a rest for the Battalion
being absolutely necessary owing to the fact that all the remaining
members were suffering from gas poisoning.

THE GERMAN OFFENSIVE.--Next came the great offensive by the enemy--the
time when the Germans almost thrust their way right through by force
of numbers.

The first indication of the break-through which the Battalion received
was enemy bullets actually falling in the camp. Every man turned out,
the Battalion took up a line north of Equancourt in an attempt to hold
up the advance of the enemy, patrols being sent forward into Fins,
where it was found the Germans had succeeded in establishing
themselves.

On the following morning an enemy attack was beaten back with heavy
loss, but both its flanks being "in the air" the Battalion received
orders to retire on Le Transloy. Moving though Hayettes Wood, Ytres,
Bus, and Rocquigny, Le Transloy was reached late at night, where the
Brigade from which it had become separated was rejoined.

Moving again before dawn, a line was taken up round Gueudecourt, which
was held during the day. Making another move at dusk, a fresh line was
established at Eaucourt l'Abbaye. Very heavily attacked on the
following day, the Battalion was forced to fight a rearguard action,
retreating through Le Sars on Pys, where another stand was made.

Again slipping back at night, a position was taken up near Beaucourt
sur Ancre. From this position the Battalion again moved back and
occupied the old British trenches known as White City trenches near
Beaumont Hamel. In spite of many heavy enemy attacks this position was
held until the Battalion was relieved by New Zealand troops.

_On relief it marched out to the wood at Mailly-Maillet only four
officers and seventy men strong._

Resting at Englebelmer for a day or so, it was again moved into the
front line at Aveluy Wood, where a German attack was beaten off, the
enemy being badly mauled. During the fighting round Gueudecourt,
Brigadier-General Barnett-Barker was killed, and, as senior Colonel in
the 99th Brigade, Lieutenant-Colonel Winter assumed command, the
command of the 23rd Royal Fusiliers devolving upon Major Lewis.

In his anxiety to hold up the enemy for as long as possible and to get
the battalion back safely to a line being formed behind him, Major
Lewis was taken prisoner at Eaucourt l'Abbaye. The command then
devolved upon Captain C.H. Bowyer, who kept it until the return of
Lieutenant-Colonel Winter, who rejoined the Battalion on General E.
Ironside (now General Sir E. Ironside, who earned fame in Russia)
taking over the Brigade.

It only remains to add that the gas casualties from March 12 onwards
amounted to 11 officers and 240 other ranks, while the casualties in
action from the 22nd to the 31st were:

  Officers killed                    1
      "    wounded                   2
      "    wounded and missing       1
      "    missing                  10
  Other ranks killed                15
      "    wounded                  59
      "    wounded and missing       6
      "    missing                 210

During the early part of April the Battalion was busy in moving, being
in turn in Hedeauville, Beauval, Houvin, Houvigneul, Ivergny,
Coullemont, La Cauchie, and on the 14th relieved the 1st Coldstream
Guards in Brigade Reserve in front of Blaireville. Two days later it
was in the front line, right sub-sector, in front of Adinfer, doing
alternate front line and support duty until the end of the month.

It was not until May 12 that the Battalion marched back to billets at
Berles au Bois, where training was carried on until June 7. On that
date it relieved the 1st Grenadier Guards in the Ayette left
sub-sector. Relieved on the night of June 10-11, it marched back to
reserve position near Monchy au Bois, going into the line again in the
Ayette sector on the night of 13th-14th.

During the night of June 24-25 "A" Company carried out a raid on the
enemy front line, and at 2 a.m. on the 26th "B" Company also carried
out a similar operation. July came round, and on the night of the
22nd-23rd the Battalion supplied a flanking party to a raid carried
out by the 1st Royal Berks. On the 30th the Battalion was in the
Ayette right sub-sector, but on August 5 and August 6 there was a
reorganization of the Brigade front, and it went into support.

Then came the British advance, and on the night of August 20-21 the
Battalion moved up for an attack by the 3rd Army. Leading off in a
dense fog, the 23rd Royal Fusiliers went over the top at Ayette,
capturing Aerodrome Trench, and so clearing the way for other troops
to leap-frog over them and capture Courcelles.

Moving forward again in its turn, two companies of the Battalion,
under Major W.B. Cluff, captured Behagnies. On the night of August
23-24, being relieved by the Loyal North Lancs, the Battalion moved
back to bivouac near Courcelles, where it remained until September 2.
Moving forward on that day to Vaulx-Vraucourt, it attacked at dawn on
the 3rd and reached Morchies, bivouacking near Doignes.

On the 6th-7th the Battalion took over the front line from the 1st
King's Royal Rifle Corps and delivered an attack on Slag Avenue,
suffering casualties of 3 officers killed and 100 other ranks killed
and wounded.

Relieved on the 8th by the 52nd Light Infantry, a bivouac was made at
Beaumetz-les-Cambrai, moving on the 15th to Mory. On the 27th the
Battalion moved forward in support to the Brigade which was fighting
its way onwards, and spent the night in the Hindenburg Support Line
just west of Flesquieres.

The advance continuing, the Battalion moved again at dawn on the 28th,
reaching Nine Wood just west of Noyelles. From here one company was
sent forward and assisted the King's Royal Rifle Corps in capturing
Noyelles. Then the remainder of the Battalion moved up and took over
the front line from the 1st King's Royal Rifle Corps. Attacking on the
30th, the Battalion found itself up against the strong position of
Mount sur l'Ouvres, suffering casualties of two officers and
sixty-four other ranks. This position could only be subsequently
captured by the use of a whole new brigade for the purpose.

GERMAN TANKS UNSUCCESSFUL.--Relieved at night, the Battalion moved
back to bivouac at Nine Wood. Remaining there, resting, till October 7
the Battalion moved up to east of Rumilly on the night of 7th-8th, and
delivered a successful attack on Forenville at dawn on the 8th. During
a counter-attack the enemy used tanks against the Battalion in an
endeavour to oust it from the positions secured, but without success.

On one tank, indeed, getting close to our line an officer, Lieutenant
Anderson, armed with a rifle, and accompanied by his batman, got out
of the trench, went forward under heavy fire, reached the oncoming
tank, hammered at its side with his rifle-butt, and called on it to
surrender. The iron door opened, and out came the crew, to be escorted
back in triumph as prisoners!

On the early morning of the 9th the Guards' Brigade "leap-frogged" the
Battalion and continued the attack, the Battalion moving back to
bivouac at Flesquieres. Remaining there for a few days, a move was
made on the 13th to keep in touch with the general advance, Wambaix
being reached after a long march.

Training was carried out here until the 19th, when the Battalion
marched to Boussieres. At midnight on October 22, under the command of
Major H.P. Rogers, it moved up to St. Python, and on the 23rd to
Escarmain, taking over the front line from the 52nd Light Infantry. At
dawn on the 24th it attacked and captured Ruesnes, and established a
line of outposts on the railway beyond. This was the last actual
fighting done by the Battalion. Relieved on the 26th by the 7th King's
Shropshire Light Infantry, it moved back into reserve.

With the signing of the Armistice came a welcome change. Duty was
relaxed so far as was possible, and the Battalion employed the rest of
the year in fitting itself out, and getting back into something
approaching its old condition, and marching into Germany, a distance
of 200 miles.


1919.

January found the Battalion in billets at Niederaussem, forming part
of the British Army of Occupation in Germany. Training was still being
carried on, however, but sport was not lost sight of. There were
platoon football matches, whist drives, paper-chases, and so on, while
there was also voluntary educational training in such things as
English, French, and shorthand.

On January 24 came the presentation of the King's Colour to the
Battalion by Major-General Pereira. Later, on the reorganization of
Divisions taking place, the Battalion on February 27 left the 99th
Brigade, 2nd Division, in which it had served so long, proceeded by
rail through Cologne to Ehreshoven, joined the London Division, and
took over the outposts of the Occupied Zone at Lindlar on March 18.

On April 15, the Battalion then being back in Cologne, the command was
taken over by Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel L.F. Ashburner, M.V.O.,
D.S.O., Lieutenant-Colonel Winter being appointed to the command of
the British Camp at Antwerp. On May 6 the Battalion was inspected and
complimented by General Sir William Robertson, G.C.B., K.C.V.O.,
D.S.O., Commander-in-Chief British Army of the Rhine.

In the event of the non-acceptance of the Peace Terms by Germany,
preparations were made between June 8 and June 19 for an advance, but
the orders on June 20 were held in abeyance and subsequently
cancelled.

     [Illustration: PRESENTATION OF COLOURS: NIEDERAUSSEM, GERMANY,
     JUNE 24TH, 1919.]

On June 22, at the Brigade swimming gala, the Battalion won two-thirds
of the prizes put up for competition, although they had previously
lost (2-1) in the "Kalk" football cup final to the 57th Siege Battery.

Battalion sports were held at Klef, near Vilkerath, on July 19, the
championship being annexed by "C" Company. A competition for the best
company in the Division was won by "D" Company, who were subsequently
called upon to furnish a guard of honour on the occasion of the visit
of the Army Council to Cologne.

The Battalion also scored in another way, for on August 1 the War
Savings results for July were announced. The amount subscribed by the
23rd Royal Fusiliers was L1,137 19s. 1d., the percentage of members
being 51 per cent, of the Battalion strength, and the Battalion being
top of the VIth Corps list for the amount subscribed.

Finally, the 23rd (Service) Battalion Royal Fusiliers (1st
Sportsman's) ceased to exist in March, 1920, after having had a longer
life than any other Service Battalion of the Royal Fusiliers.




+-----------------------------------------------------+
|    GREAT WORK ACCOMPLISHED--HOLDING UP A GERMAN     |
| ADVANCE--SILENCING SNIPERS IN A DERELICT TANK--AND  |
|                  SOME OTHER THINGS                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------+




GREAT WORK ACCOMPLISHED--HOLDING UP A GERMAN
ADVANCE--SILENCING SNIPERS IN A DERELICT TANK--AND
SOME OTHER THINGS


From the official narratives available it is possible to amplify, in
some few instances, the great work accomplished by the Battalion, and
which is told but tersely in the War Diary from which the previous
pages have been collated.

Taking May 3, 1917, as an instance, when the 23rd Royal Fusiliers
formed a part of the attacking force, we are told it was determined to
capture--

    Fresnoy Trench on a front of 1,400 yards.

    Oppy Support, by a bombing attack, over a length of 200 yards.

    Crucifix Lane, by a bombing attack, over a length of 200
    yards.

    Form a defensive front facing south on a front of 400 yards,
    and

    Form eight strong points and four posts.

The above, it may be explained, entailed the Brigade having, on the
whole, a fighting front of no fewer than 2,200 yards.

"The task of the 23rd Royal Fusiliers, forming the left assaulting
battalion, was to capture a certain sector of Fresnoy Trench, to form
two strong points, and to form four posts....

"The whole of 'C' Battalion (the 23rd Royal Fusiliers) gained their
objective, but, owing to a slight loss of direction, found the enemy
still occupying Fresnoy Trench to their north.

"A strong bombing party was immediately organized, the trench cleared,
sixty to seventy prisoners and a machine gun captured, and touch
established with the Canadians at the south end of Fresnoy Wood. At
about 5.45 a.m. a strong enemy counter-attack developed from Oppy,
which, coming up over Oppy Support and Crucifix Lane, and over the top
by several well-covered approaches, worked its way north, and attacked
the right company, whose flank was left bare owing to the retirement
of 'B' (another) Battalion.

"This attack was pushed home with the greatest energy and
determination, and succeeded in driving the right two companies and
part of left centre company out of Oppy Trench. At this point,
however, it was brought to a halt by a strong bombing and sniping post
of the 23rd Royal Fusiliers, who not only stopped it, but
counter-attacked in their turn, and regained some 400 yards of the
trench.

"This party then halted owing to numerical weakness and lack of bombs,
and retiring a short way, formed a block and a post, and occupied a
shell-hole line from the first point named through the second and a
little beyond it, thus forming a defensive flank in close touch with
the Canadians.

"This party held out all day, until relieved by the 15th Warwicks at
3.30 a.m. A strong point was also formed immediately after dark and
handed over to the 15th Warwicks on relief...."

"In one instance the garrison of a post calmly watched an enemy
machine-gun team establish a machine gun in position; they then opened
rapid fire, killed all the team, and brought in the gun...."

Amongst the gallant services mentioned by Major-General Pereira in the
special order of the day, dated December 17, 1917, is the following:

"No. 1,079 Lance-Sergeant James Cochrane, M.M., and No. 2,852 Private
Frank Hemington: In the enemy lines west of Bourlon Wood there was a
derelict tank, from which enemy snipers were very active at only 70
yards from our line, causing many casualties.

"On December 1, Lance-Sergeant Cochrane and Private Hemington
volunteered to deal with them. Creeping out through our wire, they
succeeded in reaching the tank in spite of heavy enemy fire. They put
two Mills' bombs into the tank, and on the bombs exploding they came
under heavy machine-gun fire, but returned in safety. No further
sniping came from this tank. By their gallant work we were saved many
casualties, and this daring feat cheered and encouraged the men in the
line...."

In the desperate fighting in March, 1918, the Battalion also
distinguished itself.

"Hexham Road," says the narrative of the morning of the 25th, "where
the headquarters of the 23rd Royal Fusiliers was in a dug-out, had
been swept by machine-gun fire all the morning, and as the Divisions
on the right had retired, the 23rd Royal Fusiliers were left in a very
precarious and isolated position, from which only small bodies of men
were able to extricate themselves...."

Then, however, came March 28, and here our men were afforded an
opportunity of getting their own back. It is with delight that we
consequently read:

"The old trenches were, on the whole, in surprisingly good condition,
the men had ammunition and had had some sleep and food, and orders had
been received that this was to be the line of resistance, and that
there would be no further retirement.

"It was a day of anxiety, but still a day on which our men could at
last settle down to shooting down the enemy. This they did with great
relish."

Bald, perhaps, these details may appear to those who have judged the
war from the pen pictures of the various war correspondents, but they
possess the ring of real reality to those who have known what it is to
be shelled day after day and night after night in the trenches, to
have advanced in the face of a rain of machine-gun bullets, or to have
been forced to take shelter in an all too small shell crater, when to
show an inch of head or body meant death or a serious wound.




+-----------------------------------------------------+
|  PRESENTATION OF THE KING'S COLOUR--MAJOR-GENERAL   |
| SIR C.E. PEREIRA, K.C.B., C.M.G., AND HIS PRIDE IN  |
|                    THE BATTALION                    |
+-----------------------------------------------------+




PRESENTATION OF THE KING'S COLOUR--MAJOR-GENERAL
SIR C.E. PEREIRA, K.C.B., C.M.G., AND HIS PRIDE IN
THE BATTALION


His pride in the Battalion was expressed by Major-General C.E.
Pereira, C.B., C.M.G., on the occasion of the presentation of the
King's Colour at Niederaussem, Germany, on January 24, 1919.

"First of all," said Major-General Pereira, "I will tell you how
highly I esteem the privilege of presenting these colours to-day.

"For two years," he went on, "I have had the honour to command the 2nd
Division, and I have been proud of your work in the Field and out of
it, and of the fine spirit which you have always shown.

"These colours are given you as a mark of the magnificent service you
have rendered in the campaign during the last four years.

"The record of the Regiment during the whole of its service will
compare with the services of any battalion in the British Army,
whether in the Somme fighting, 1916, Courcelette, Vimy Ridge, and
Bourlon Wood in 1917, the retirement from the Cambrai salient in
March, 1918, or the recent victorious advance which culminated in the
overthrow of the Germans. In all these operations, in spite of mud,
heat or cold, or desperate resistance, you have always shown the
dogged determination to win.

"It is a fine tribute to the British race that a newly-raised
battalion, without any previous traditions, which are such assets to
regular battalions, should have outfought the German battalions,
trained to war for generations.

"Perhaps your finest record is that of March, 1918, when along a great
part of our front detached Divisions fought their way slowly back from
position to position, facing overwhelming numbers, and an enemy drunk
with the idea that the final victory was theirs; it was then, when
short of food, without rest, short of men, that you showed what you
were made of, and after successive days of retirement you turned and
held the Germans.

"It is fitting that the work of this Battalion should be crowned by
the victorious march to the Rhine, and that your colours should make
their first appearance in a conquered country--a country which has
taken us four and a half years to reach."




+-----------------------------------------------------+
| "GOOD-BYE, AND GOOD LUCK!"--BRIGADIER-GENERAL A.E.  |
|  McNAMARA, C.M.G., D.S.O., AND HIS FAREWELL TO THE  |
| 23RD ROYAL FUSILIERS (FIRST SPORTSMAN'S BATTALION)  |
+-----------------------------------------------------+




"GOOD-BYE, AND GOOD LUCK!"--BRIGADIER-GENERAL A.E.
McNAMARA, C.M.G., D.S.O., AND HIS FAREWELL TO THE
23RD ROYAL FUSILIERS (FIRST SPORTSMAN'S BATTALION)


Appreciation of and admiration for the Battalion was also expressed by
Brigadier-General A.E. McNamara, commanding the 99th Infantry Brigade,
when he bade it "good-bye and good luck" on February 25, 1919, when it
left the 2nd Division to join the London Division.

"Owing to the reorganization of the Army of Occupation," he said, "the
23rd Royal Fusiliers, the oldest member of the 99th Infantry Brigade,
is leaving it.

"I wish to place on record my high appreciation and admiration of the
magnificent services of the Battalion while in the 99th Infantry
Brigade.

"The Battalion came out to France with the 99th Infantry Brigade in
November, 1915. Since then it has taken a leading part in all the many
and strenuous battles in which the Brigade has been engaged. In these
eventful three years we have seen together good times and bad, but
whether things were good or evil the 23rd Royal Fusiliers have ever
shown the same high discipline, _esprit de corps_, and indomitable
spirit which eventually beat down all resistance and won the war.

     [Illustration: BATTALION HEADQUARTERS: HORNCHURCH.]

     [Illustration: THE BATTALION PIERROT TROUPE: GERMANY.
     To face p. 80]

"The battles of Delville Wood, Bourlon Wood, Ayette, Behagnies, Mory
Copse, Canal du Nord, Forenville, and Ruesnes stand out in history as
a record of the achievements of the 23rd Royal Fusiliers--a record of
which the Battalion may well be proud.

"The Battalion is now going to another Brigade and another Division. I
wish it the best of luck, and know it will maintain the high
reputation for discipline, efficiency, and, if need be, fighting,
which it has built up since its formation.

"In bidding it farewell, I wish to thank officers, N.C.O.'s, and men
(including the gallant comrades who have fallen in the fight), for
their gallant services when in the 99th Infantry Brigade. It is they
who have borne the brunt of the hardships and the fighting, and it is
they who have won the war.

"I cannot express how sorry I am to lose the Battalion, or how proud I
am of the honour I have had of having had it under my command.

"Good-bye, and good luck!"




+-----------------------------------------------------+
| THE BATTLE OF DELVILLE WOOD--AN ADVANCE IN FACE OF  |
|   HUNDREDS OF MACHINE GUNS--A PERSONAL NARRATIVE    |
+-----------------------------------------------------+




THE BATTLE OF DELVILLE WOOD--AN ADVANCE IN FACE OF
HUNDREDS OF MACHINE GUNS--A PERSONAL NARRATIVE


To the personal side of the late war we have, in a measure, been
introduced by various war correspondents. But there has always been
something actually lacking, and that something is the touch and the
atmosphere which can only be introduced by those who have been through
the baptism of blood and fire.

In the following pages the _real_ touch is introduced. Every incident
is told by a man who has actually seen and experienced what he
describes. These incidents are in the actual words of the writers.
Nothing is altered.

Here, then, is the story of the capture of Delville Wood by the 1st
Sportsman's Battalion in 1916, told by Major N.A. Lewis, D.S.O., M.C.:

"For two days before the fight the Battalion occupied some trenches
near Bernefay Wood, and sustained a number of casualties from
shell-fire. Battalion headquarters was a shelter dug in a bank at the
side of Bernefay Wood. This shelter was constructed by Albany, the
sculler, and as he was killed in the fight it was his last job as
dug-out constructor. Needless to say, he did this job excellently.

"For some hours before the Battalion moved off to take up its
position, the Huns shelled the area with gas shells. Fortunately,
however, just before 11 p.m., the time for starting, a breeze sprang
up, and we were able to move without wearing gas masks.

"The move up was not pleasant. The area had been much fought over, it
had been impossible to bury the dead for ten days, and it was a hot
July!

"Our artillery was firing to cover our move up. Just after passing
Longueval one of our shells dropped, unfortunately, near the platoon
which, with the C.O., I was following. As luck would have it, though,
only one man was badly wounded. The platoon, of course, went on, and
the C.O. went over to the man who had been hit.

"'It's hard lines, sir,' said the man.

"'I know it is,' said the C.O., 'but you will soon be all right. The
stretcher-bearers are coming.'

"'Oh, it's not that,' was the man's rejoinder. 'It's being hit now!
Here have I been all this time in France without having a real go at
the b----s, and now the chance has come, here I go and get knocked
out.'

"The C.O. made only one remark to me as we passed on. It was: 'Well,
if that's what the rest of the Battalion feels, I have no fears for
to-morrow.'

"We took up our position in a trench at the edge of the wood. This was
all that remained after the South Africans had been beaten back, and
our attack was to start at dawn on the following morning. This attack
was in two parts, two companies to take the first objective, a trench
in the centre of the wood, and two companies to capture the far edge,
and dig themselves in there. The 1/60th were on our right, each
battalion having half the wood allotted to it.

"The waves formed up in position shortly before dawn, and it was our
first experience of going over the top as a battalion. The men,
however, were quite cool and cheerful; in fact, one, named Lewis
Turner, asked me, 'How long to go?' I looked at my watch, and said,
'Five minutes.' His reply was, 'Oh, then I've time to finish my
breakfast.' And he did.

"At zero our barrage started, and our first waves were off, the thing
I noticed most being that most of the men were smoking as they went
over. The whole wood was immediately full of machine-gun bullets.
There must have been hundreds of machine guns--up in trees, hidden in
the undergrowth, in fact all over the place. The Hun artillery came
down on all the approaches to the wood, but not on the wood itself so
long as any of their own men were in it.

"Owing to the position of the wood, however, at the apex of a captured
triangle of ground, we received fire from both flanks, and also from
our right rear, as well as from the front.

"The first objective was quickly taken, and then there was a pause
before the advance to the second. A large number of prisoners came in,
and were herded up near Battalion headquarters' trench. We then found
that we were up against the Brandenburg Regiment, which had been
specially sent up to hold the wood.

"A number of these prisoners next got into a shell-hole near Battalion
headquarters, refusing to come farther, and one of the funniest sights
was to see our R.S.M., Sergeant-Major Powney, who, as a rule, was most
dignified, rush at them, and kick and cuff them out of it.

"I said to him: 'Sergeant-Major, that's not your job.' He replied: 'I
know that, sir, but I couldn't help it.' Poor Powney was wounded later
in the day, and died of his wounds.

"The advance to the second objective started promptly, but the Hun
fought hard for a time, and held us up. Every bush seemed to contain a
machine gun, and a redoubt on our left front caused us many
casualties. This redoubt contained several machine guns, with overhead
cover, and a first-aid post. As soon as the C.O. received news of this
check he sent up two reserve Lewis guns. These worked round the
redoubt, and, finding an opening, killed most of the garrison, and
then rushed it. The survivors fled, but Sergeant Royston found one of
their own guns was still in action, and finished them off with it.

"DEALING WITH COUNTER-ATTACKS.--The final objective was quickly
reached and consolidated, and for a while our men had a pleasant time
dealing with counter-attacks from the front. The field of fire was
good, and they quickly dealt with all the attempts made to push us
back. Our casualties, though, were very heavy, particularly amongst
officers. At one time 'A' Company was commanded by Lance-Corporal
Goodman, and another company by a C.S.M.

"Then the Hun artillery got busy on the wood, which was, of course, an
ideal mark. For the rest of the day they simply poured heavy shells
in. It was pretty terrible. Trees were torn up by the dozens, and fell
blazing. By the end of the day there was nothing but shattered stumps.

"The Medical Officer had a busy time, and owing to the barrage could
not evacuate his wounded. The aid post was filled, and the overflow
had to be put in shell-holes round about. The consequence was that
many of them were killed as they lay there. Owing to the barrage, too,
the sending of messages back to Brigade headquarters and the companies
in front became almost impossible. Out of sixteen headquarter runners
no fewer than fourteen became casualties before mid-day.

"One message was sent back by carrier pigeon, and a message received
from the Brigadier read: 'Hold on. Reinforcements are being sent.' The
reply of the C.O. was: 'Of course we shall hold on. We are being
hammered, but our tails are still up.'

"As the day wore on many efforts were made to get round our flanks and
turn us out. Bombing parties crept up, and had to be dealt with by
our bombers. It was in one of these tussles that Jerry Delany (the
famous boxer) was killed.

"At one time word came from our comrades on the right that the Hun had
broken through. So we sent over a party to their assistance, and
finally repelled the attackers. We spent the whole of the afternoon
and evening in this way, but when our relief came up that night we
handed over the wood intact.

"The scene at night was awful, the wood being ablaze in many places. I
read messages and wrote out the relief orders by the light of a
blazing tree, which had fallen across the shell-hole then being
occupied by Battalion headquarters.

"During the night our Brigadier came up and held a conference in our
shell-hole. One of our men, Corporal Walker, who was attached to the
Brigade Machine-Gun Company, came to this conference, and when asked
by the Brigadier what he wanted, replied: 'I have reason to believe,
sir, I now command the Machine-Gun Company.' This was actually the
case, and he brought the remnants out, being badly wounded in doing
so.

"We were relieved by the 6th Brigade, and at dawn returned to our
quarters at Bernefay--that is to say, those of us who were left. Our
casualties were nearly 400, over 60 per cent, of those who went in.
Out of eighteen officers who went into the wood, thirteen became
casualties, every company commander being included in this number,
while the 1/60th suffered equally heavily.

"As I was making out our casualty return in our headquarters'
shell-hole by the light of the blazing trees, our Quartermaster
appeared with the rations. He threw a newspaper down to me, with the
remark: 'You'll find something interesting in that.' I opened the
paper, and found a full column describing how the South Africans took
Delville Wood!

"When we were moving back into support, I noticed a horrible smell,
and found it was due to the fact that almost every man was smoking a
Hun cigar, large quantities of which had been found in the trenches,
together with large quantities of soda-water.

"One of the Hun officer prisoners remarked that our advance through
the wood was the finest thing they ever saw, but that he objected to
being captured by civilians."

       *       *       *       *       *

SOME LIGHTER STORIES.--Another story of Delville Wood, introducing the
M.O.

"During the Delville Wood show a captured Hun Red Cross man was
lending a hand in the Battalion aid post. Suddenly a scuffle was heard
on the steps of the dug-out, and the prisoner went to see what was the
matter. 'What's happened?' asked Doc. Isaac, busily engaged in
bandaging a wounded man.

"'Oh, it's only some of those b---- Bosches!' was the reply...."

       *       *       *       *       *

There were many middle-aged men in the First Sportsman's. This
introduces one of them.

"The Battalion was marching down the main street of Carnoy when a
charming French girl of about eighteen dashed into the line of route,
evidently with the idea of 'parleyvooing' with one of the young
sports. She commenced in a breezy manner chatting with my father, a
youngster of fifty, not noting, at first, his grey hair. Suddenly he
turned his head toward her and smiled. 'Oh, papa!' she ejaculated, and
fled...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Quartermaster is a noted personage in the Army. This is to
introduce him.

"While the Battalion was at Aix Neulette the transport came under
shell-fire one morning. The shells came nearer and nearer, in a direct
line with the water-carts, highly polished, the pride of the corporal
in charge. The personnel eventually thought fit to take shelter in an
adjacent shell-hole until the Hun had finished his unpleasant pranks.

"Over came the fifth shell with a whistle and a scream, and--bang!--up
went the two carts in the air, while shell fragments flew all over the
place. Hanging on a line were various articles of washing, the clean
clothes of the water-cart crew. These were in the line of fire, and as
a consequence were well perforated.

"Now comes the sequel. They were taken to the Quartermaster on the
following morning, and, so it is said, he refused to replace them _on
the ground that the holes were not the result of fair wear and
tear_!..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Two gentlemen rankers are introduced here.

"After some months of hard roughing it, two of the Battalion cooks
decided to apply, modestly, for commissions. So they duly appeared
before the Colonel. But the summons to attend did not give them time
in which to get out of their cooking rig, and the sergeant paraded
them in their old overalls.

"'Hem. Where were you educated?' asked the Colonel of one man.

"'Rugby and Oxford,' was the reply.

"'And what were you in private life?' asked the Colonel, turning to
the other.

"'A painter.'

"'A painter?' queried the Colonel.

"'Yes, sir. I have exhibited at the Royal Academy....'"

       *       *       *       *       *

Many Germans left London when the war started, to fight against us.
This is one of them, turned up as a prisoner.

"We were up the line one day when a patrol brought in a Hun prisoner.
Of course we wanted information, for we were expecting an attack of
some sort that very night. So we hauled our man up before the C.O. and
started asking him questions. We tried him in German, and got no
reply. We tried French with him, and it had no result. Then, seeing he
was eyeing a water-bottle eagerly, I suddenly thought he might be
thirsty.

"'Ask him if he would like a drink,' I suggested.

"'I should,' came the reply, in quite as good English as I could have
spoken myself. Naturally I was surprised, and I asked him where he had
learnt his English.

"'In London, sir,' was the rejoinder. 'I worked as a barber close to
Holborn for years.'

"We gave him a little drink of whisky, and he told us there would be
no attack that night. But we took no chances. A guard, with fixed
bayonet, was placed over him, and he was told in English that he would
be the first to get his medicine if he had played us false.

"He had not, however. No attack was made, and he was sent back behind
the lines to the 'cage' next day...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Another.

Overheard in the ranks on the march up the Cambrai Road in a
snow-storm to take over at Bourlon Wood.

"Italy!" said the Doc. "It looks more like being _another_ b----
Wood!"




+-----------------------------------------------------+
|   EXPERIENCES AS A PRISONER OF WAR--EXTRACTS FROM   |
|  THE DIARY KEPT BY "MR. BROOKS, THE SCHOOLMASTER"   |
+-----------------------------------------------------+




EXPERIENCES AS A PRISONER OF WAR--EXTRACTS FROM
THE DIARY KEPT BY "MR. BROOKS, THE SCHOOLMASTER"


"Reported missing."

Many poignant memories attach to such a bald announcement as this.
Dead--probably a prisoner of war--perhaps. And there have been those
who would have preferred, had they had the chance, of a death under
the open sky to imprisonment under the Hun.

In the diary of a 23rd Royal Fusilier, "Mr. Brooks, the schoolmaster,"
as he was once dubbed by his captors, tells the story of how he was
made a prisoner, his detention by the enemy, and his eventual return
home.

The arrival of a parcel, he says, was a red-letter event; the problem
of how much to eat at a time, and how much to save out of his rations
for the provision of another apology of a meal, was a big one. Boiled
nettles and dandelions for dinner and tea on Whit Sunday, 1917, proves
what the fare actually was; quarters of eggs were unaccustomed
luxuries. "I have picked mouldy crusts off the ground, and prunes off
dust-heaps," he says.

Dry bread and tea was a luxurious meal; beards had to be cut, or
pulled out by means of borrowed scissors; one loaf, and a small one
at that, had to prove sufficient for the needs of five men; there were
occasional intervals of twenty-two hours between meals. "We were
thinking of nothing but food," he explains. All this time, too, the
prisoners were engaged in heavy manual work, humping bricks, loading
and stacking hay, and so on.

While in hospital, "Mr. Brooks, the schoolmaster," sold his boots for
tobacco and his socks for bread, and he mixed his jam ration with
coffee in order to eke it out. "Personally, I am hungry all day long,"
is how he describes his feelings. "I bought about one-sixth of a loaf
for seventeen cigarettes."

"I was rather slow in getting into bed," is how he describes another
of his experiences, "and the German orderly picked up my satchel and
hurled it against the wall, open as it was, at the risk of spilling
its contents."

He pays a deep tribute to the humanity of the French who were still
living in the occupied territory; the Belgians he met were also kind;
some Germans showed traces of feeling, others were no better than
brutes....

Here, however, are actual extracts from the diary itself. They speak
for themselves.

"Three or four Germans began to advance, and it seemed to me that the
question which had been at the back of my mind since a second or two
after the first opening of the guns, Was this the end? was about to be
answered....

"With many signs to hasten, my German hurried me on. Soon, with three
others, I found myself by poor old Bill Shoebridge, a good old
grumbler of some fifty summers, who had been cruelly sent out to us in
December, and had kept his end up well, with, at times, many
grumblings. He was painfully hit above the knee....

"We came to the village, yet unsmashed, but showing signs that it had
received a knock or two. OPPY was printed in black letters on white
boards in various places, and after wondering for some time what Oppy
meant I found it was the name of a place.... We were then marched off,
and after some more wandering found ourselves in a kitchen with two or
three Germans, who looked quite comfortable, well fed, and at home....

"The Germans we saw almost all regarded us kindly, though many of them
had something of mockery in their looks. We now began to see a few of
the French inhabitants. They are splendid. Willingly they give us all
they can spare, and much that they cannot. Were it not for the fact
that they are not allowed to give, and that all their gifts have to be
_sub rosa_, we should, I think, want for little....

"Then came the first unpleasant incident. A poor Frenchwoman rushed
out and gave a loaf to one of us. One of the guards, a boy of about
nineteen, snatched it out of his hands, and threw it on the pavement
in front of the woman.

"At Phalemphin station we were all included in a party of eighty. We
were addressed in English by a German officer. The gist of his remarks
was that we were to be marched to our destination, and that any man
who tried to escape would be incontinently shot, also that any man who
did not behave would be punished....

"After this day, Saturday, April 28, for more than five and a half
weeks, day in and day out, we left our prison between 6.15 and 6.40,
struck work and returned for dinner between 11.15 and 1.30, according
to the job, left the prison at 1.30 (if we had not arrived for dinner
until after 1 we got extra time), and struck work any time between
5.30 and 10.30....

"In our (British) lines if one (a prisoner of war) has to work extra
time, one always gets time off to compensate, also one has plenty of
food to work on. Here, extra work carried no compensations. The work,
especially latterly, was mainly unloading trucks, pushing the trucks
about, and packing the contents of the trucks in various stores.

"In the yard were always parties of French and Belgians working, and,
if allowed, they would have given us their souls. At the commencement
of our stay, however, we were told to take nothing from the French,
and it was certainly not many days before we found it was almost
impossible to take anything from them because the penalty was so
great. Whenever the French and the Belgians did get a chance they
availed themselves of it....

"Let us never forget that we also got things from the Germans. Until
we reached Phalemphin we had received no rough or cruel treatment
whatever....

"At Douai our gaolers were without exception friendly and kind; at
Lille our gaolers were taciturn, and when they did speak, though loud
and threatening in words, laid hands on no man. We were, therefore,
expecting no man-handling, and it came as a fearful shock. It is my
impression that man-handling began in about four days' time, but it
may be that some smaller incident, such as being thumped in the back
by the guard, had passed unnoticed as being mere playfulness on their
part.

"As to man-handling, it began slowly and increased in frequency, and I
think in severity, as the time went on, until, to me at any rate, it
became somewhat of a nightmare. Within a week of our arrival at
Phalemphin the guard would rush at, beat, strike, or kick any man who
had a pipe or cigarette in his mouth while we were being counted in
the yard....

"Suddenly the man in charge in that part of the yard appeared. It was
the first time I had seen him. Judging from first impressions, he was
a quiet, self-contained, steady kind of man, rather like the great
'Agrippa' in 'Shock-headed Peter' to look at.... Suddenly the man
changed, and with a sudden rush was amongst us.

"'Agrippa,' thinking he was being disparaged, flew at Barber and
struck him violently two or three times in the face. One of our
sergeants, named Morley, remonstrated, and in a second 'Agrippa' had
struck him two or three times in the face....

"I don't know what you would think of one and a half spoonfuls of jam,
or grease, or preserved meat, or half an uncooked herring for the only
thing to eat daily in addition to dry bread and a bowl of soup at
midday, but such are our rations, and I can tell you that by now one
has got to look forward to the day's issue as a very big thing....

"The first 'tying up' shows him, the sergeant-major, at his best as a
wise judge, jury, and executioner.... The method of tying up was as
follows: In the garden behind our barn were some trees. The man had to
stand with his feet close together and his back to the tree; he was
then tied to the tree by a strap round the ankles.

"His hands were tied together behind his back and the strap passed
round the tree. The third strap was the worst; it was tied round the
man's neck, and tied tightly round the tree, so that the back of the
man's head was against the tree.

"Of course, a good deal depended upon the guard--some guards would tie
all the straps lightly, some would tie some men tight and others
loose, and so on. The most popular tree for tying men up to was not
straight, so that being tied up tightly to it was no joke, as I can
vouch for....

"A favourite pastime of the sergeant-major was to come and watch the
men at work. Then, indeed, did everyone buck up.... On one occasion I
saw him mercilessly belabour an Australian boy with his stick. The boy
had not been able to respond quickly enough to his order.

"Well, it is six months to-morrow since I had an English meal. (This
is written in hospital.) The last three days I have tried the tip of
having a drink of coffee at breakfast-time, and having my breakfast
between 8.30 and 10, but I don't know that it is any better. Strange
are the ways of this hospital--no soap and no clean bedding since I
came in.

"Sometimes peace and go as you please, sometimes every little rule
fussed about. Clothes and food are not in any way satisfactory, but
one is getting a rest, and that is what one should remember....
Suspense. Waiting with, oh, how many hopes and fears, for that parcel
to turn up. Hungrier and hungrier, and with the dread of tobacco
running out...."

Then in conclusion comes a pathetic little personal note.

"I have never read this through since I returned in December, 1918.
Seeing the mention of Bull a few pages back reminds me that I
afterwards heard he had died in hospital. I wrote to his wife on my
return, and found she was a widow.

"The Germans reported that her husband had died from wounds in Mons
Hospital. I was with him all through August, and he had no wounds. I
saw him in hospital in November, and he had no wounds, only boils. So
I do not see how he died of wounds."




THE HONOURS' LIST

NAMES OF OFFICERS AND MEN AWARDED DECORATIONS AND
MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES




THE HONOURS' LIST

OFFICERS

---------+----------------------+----------+-----------------------------
         |                      | Date of  |
Rank.    |  Name.               | Award or |  Decoration, etc.
         |                      | Mention. |
---------+----------------------+----------+-----------------------------
Capt.    | Bull, F.G.           |  4. 6.17 | Military Cross
Capt.    | Bull, F.G.           | 26. 7.17 | Bar to M.C.
Major    | Bowyer, C.H.         |  4. 4.17 | Chevalier de la Coronne
Major    | Bowyer, C.H.         | 13. 3.18 | D.S.O.
Capt.    | Barr, A.J.           | 11. 5.17 | Military Cross
Lieut.   | Colman, L.H.         |  9. 4.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
Capt.    | Gardner, A.S.        | 17. 4.17 | Military Cross
Capt.    | Humfrey, A.A.P.      | 13. 2.17 | Military Cross
Capt.    | Humfrey, A.A.P.      | 17. 4.17 | Bar to M.C.
Capt.    | Hilder, M.L.         | 11. 5.17 | Military Cross
Capt.    | Isaac, E.E.          | 20.10.16 | Military Cross
         |  (R.A.M.C.)          |          |
Capt.    | Isaac, E.E.          | 17. 4.17 | Bar to M.C.
         |  (R.A.M.C.)          |          |
Major    | Lewis, N.A.          | 13. 2.17 | Military Cross
Major    | Lewis, N.A.          | 17. 4.17 | Bar to M.C.
Major    | Lewis, N.A.          | 26. 7.17 | D.S.O.
Major    | Lewis, N.A.          |  7.11.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
Lieut.   | Moore, E.A.          | 22. 5.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
Lieut.   | Milsom, M.G.         | 26. 7.17 | Military Cross
Capt.    | Spencer, H.          | 15. 6.16 | Mentioned in Despatches
Capt.    | Spencer, H.          |  1. 1.17 | Military Cross
Capt.    | Spencer, H.          |  7.11.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
Capt.    | Spencer, H.          |  7. 4.18 | Mentioned in Despatches
Capt.    | Spencer, H.          |  8. 7.19 | Mentioned in Despatches
Lt.-Col. | Vernon, H.A. (From   | 22. 2.16 | Croix de Chevalier
         |   1st K.R.R. Corps)  |          |
Lt.-Col. | Vernon, H.A. (From   | 20.10.16 | D.S.O.
         |   1st K.R.R. Corps)  |          |
Lt.-Col. | Vernon, H.A. (From   |  4. 1.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
         |   1st K.R.R. Corps)  |          |
Lt.-Col. | Winter, E.A.         |  1. 1.17 | Military Cross
Lt.-Col. | Winter, E.A.         |  7.11.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
Lt.-Col. | Winter, E.A.         |  1. 1.18 | D.S.O.
Lt.-Col. | Winter, E.A.         | 23. 7.18 | Bar to D.S.O.
Lt.-Col. | Winter, E.A.         |  8.11.18 | Mentioned in Despatches
Capt.    | Wiggen, R.H.         | 20.10.16 | Military Cross
Lieut.   | Anderson, J. McC.    |  8. 3.19 | Military Cross
Lieut.   | Cashman, J.          |  8.11.18 | Mentioned in Despatches
Capt.    | Cluff, W.B.          | 23. 7.18 | Military Cross
2/Lieut. | De Ritter, J.R.      | 15. 2.19 | Military Cross
2/Lieut. | James, C.F.          |  8. 3.19 | Military Cross
Lieut.   | Phipps, G.C.         |  8. 3.19 | Military Cross
2/Lieut. | Bird, H. Mc.         | 18. 2.18 | Military Cross
2/Lieut. | Brownlee. J.         | 18. 2.18 | Military Cross
Lieut.   | Carr, J.W.           |  3. 6.18 | Military Cross
Lieut.   | Carr, J. W           |  8.11.18 | Mentioned in Despatches
2/Lieut. | Colbourne, J.        |  8.11.18 | Mentioned in Despatches.
Lieut.   | Driscoll, J.         |  9. 1.18 | Military Cross. (Award
         |                      |          | also mentioned in _Lon
         |                      |          | Gaz._, dated 26.9.17)
Capt.    | Goodman, S.T.        | 12. 2.18 | Military Cross
A/Capt.  | Gore, J.T., D.C.M.,  |  2.12.18 | Military Cross
         |   M.M.               |          |
Lieut.   | Maxfield, S.C.       | 18. 2.18 | Military Cross
2/Lieut. | McLean, A.           |  2.12.18 | Military Cross
A/Capt.  | Royston, E.          |  8.11.18 | Mentioned in Despatches
Lieut.   | Sizen, R.            | 18. 2.18 | Military Cross
Lieut.   | Sizen, R.            | 23. 7.18 | Bar to M.C.
Lieut.   | Skinner, T.E.        | 18. 2.18 | Military Cross
Capt.    | Taylor, H.A.         |  1. 1.18 | Military Cross
2/Lieut. | Woodford, R.D.L.     |  8. 3.19 | Military Cross
Major    | Rogers, H.P.         |  8. 3.19 | D.S.O.
---------+----------------------+----------+-----------------------------


N.C.O.'S AND MEN

-------+----------+------------------+----------+-------------------------
_Regtl.|          |                  | _Date of |
No._   | _Rank._  | _Name._          | Award or | _Decoration, etc._
       |          |                  | Mention._|
-------+----------+------------------+----------+-------------------------
115    | Cpl.     | Albany, W.       | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
1495   | L/Cpl.   | Anderson, D.     | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
1657   | Sgt.     | Bell, T.T.       | 10.10.16 | Military Medal
1657   | Sgt.     | Bell, T.T.       |  5. 1.17 | Bar to M.M.
82231  | Pte.     | Bate, F.T.       | 11. 2.19 | Military Medal
1375   | Pte.     | Beaven, F.L.     | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
48041  | Pte.     | Becks, J.W.      | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
88156  | Cpl.     | Bryden, T.       | 24. 4.17 | Military Medal
Old No.|          |                  |          |
1278   |          |                  |          |
61952  | Cpl.     | Buery, W. J      | 17. 9.17 | Military Medal
4502   | Pte.     | Bull, W.         | 29. 1.19 | French Croix de Guerre
4502   | Pte.     | Bull, W.         | 11. 2.19 | Military Medal
1358   | Sgt.     | Carmichael, D.C. | 10.10.16 | Military Medal
1473   | Pte.     | Clarke, C.       | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
20906  | L/Cpl.   | Carter, A.       | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
619    | C.Q.M.S. | Catley, C.K.     | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
351    | Sgt.     | Clark, A.E.      | 17. 6.18 | M.S. Medal
7332   | L/Cpl.   | Clark, E.        | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
7332   | L/Cpl.   | Clark, E.        | 18. 7.17 | Bar to M.M.
7028   | Pte.     | Clark, J.G.      | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
1079   | Sgt.     | Cochrane, J.     | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
1079   | Sgt.     | Cochrane, J.     | 13. 3.18 | Bar to M.M.
216    | L/Cpl.   | Collings, J.     | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
6025   | L/Sgt.   | Cornish, J.A.    | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
18783  | Pte.     | Cramb, J.J.      |  Not     | Military Medal
       |          |                  |  stated. |
7613.  | L/Cpl.   | Crompton, J.B.   | 19.11.17 | Military Medal
390    | L/Cpl.   | Crozier, F.D.    | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
390    | L/Cpl.   | Crozier, F.D.    |    ?     | Bar to M.M.
856    | Pte.     | Diamond, J.A.    |  5. 1.17 | Military Medal
1861   | L/Cpl.   | Davies, A.E.     | 24. 4.17 | Military Medal
1123   | Cpl.     | Dennis, H.G.     |  9. 4.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
1123   | Cpl.     | Dennis, H.G.     | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
975    | Sgt.     | Dobinson, C.R.   | 18. 1.19 | M.S. Medal
1405   | C.Q.M.S. | Donn, R.         |  7.11.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
1405   | C.Q.M.S. | Donn, R.         | 17. 6.18 | M.S. Medal
1649   | Pte.     | Dossett, H.E.    | 19. 9.17 | Military Medal
3185   | Pte.     | Downing, J.T.    | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
48150  | Cpl.     | East. A.         | 14.12.17 | Military Medal
229431 | Pte.     | Ervin, J.H.      | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
152    | R.Q.M.S. | Essex, P.C.      |  9. 4.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
4179   | L/Sgt.   | Fisher, E.       | 17. 9.17 | Military Medal
74823  | R.S.M.   | Franey, S.H.     |  1. 1.19 | D.C. Medal
13632  | Sgt.     | Freelove, W.A.   | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
1244   | Sgt.     | Goodfellow, H.   | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
1217   | Sgt.     | Goodman, S.T.    | 20.10.16 | D.C. Medal
1593   | Pte.     | Gardner, A.      |  5. 1.17 | Military Medal
316    | Pte.     | Garratt, E.V.    | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
1775   | Sgt.     | Gore, J.T.       | 10.10.16 | Military Medal
1775   | Sgt.     | Gore, J.T.       | 17. 4.17 | D.C. Medal
702    | Pte.     | Hopkins, H.      | 10.10.16 | Military Medal
3796   | Pte.     | Hollyer, H.W.D.  |  5. 1.17 | Military Medal
7688   | Cpl.     | Haslam, C.       |  5. 1.17 | Military Medal
61752  | Pte.     | Gower, A.        | 19. 9.17 | Military Medal
9635   | Sgt.     | Harvey, W.R.J.   | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
2825   | Cpl.     | Hemington, F.    | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
59592  | Pte.     | Hitchcock, E.J.  | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
113    | L/Cpl.   | Hope, R.         | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
3595   | Sgt.     | Horton, T.       | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
51156  | Sgt.     | Jackson, A.G.    | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
3419   | Sgt.     | Jones, C.        | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
4500   | Pte.     | Jones, F.        | 17. 9.17 | Military Medal
4500   | Pte.     | Jones, F.        | 15. 4.18 | Belgian Croix de Guerre
48325  | A/C.S.M. | Jones, T.B.      | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
1967   | L/Cpl.   | King, G.W.       | 17. 4.17 | D.C. Medal
151    | Pte.     | Kirby, F.D.      | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
3592   | Pte.     | Kirk, H.         | 14. 3.16 | D.C. Medal
63095  | A/Sgt.   | Lawes, G.        | 11. 2.19 | Military Medal
1257   | C.S.M.   | Leith, E.        | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
4322   | Cpl.     | Leveritt, H.     | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
646    | Sgt.     | Lindsay, C.W.    | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
57987  | Pte.     | Little, J.       |  6. 8.18 | Military Medal
9172   | Cpl.     | Lord, B.D.       | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
275    | C.S.M.   | Lewis, R.        |  8. 8.16 | Military Medal
275    | C.S.M.   | Lewis, R.        | 17. 4.17 | Bar to M.M.
533    | Sgt.     | Lewis, M.        | 10.10.16 | Military Medal
1293   | L/Cpl.   | Little, J.       | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
3533   | L/Sgt.   | MacDonald, R.V.  | 26. 7.17 | D.C. Medal
773    | R.Q.M.S. | Madgwick, H.     | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
51270  | Pte.     | Mallon, W.J.A.   |  8.11.18 | Mentioned in Despatches
229467 | Pte      | Marchbank, R.    | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
564    | Sgt.     | McCowan, T.E.    |  5. 1.17 | Military Medal
564    | Sgt.     | McCowan, T.E.    | 26. 7.17 | D.C. Medal
57184  | Sgt.     | McDiarmiad, J.   | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
1314   | Sgt.     | Nunn, H.E.       |  9. 4.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
57185  | Cpl.     | Orme, J.         | 11. 2.19 | Military Medal
49288  | Sgt.     | Parsons, J.L.    | 26. 7.17 | D.C. Medal
357    | Sgt.     | Payne, E.A.      |  8.11.18 | Mentioned in Despatches
687    | L/Sgt.   | Penfold, R.F.    |  7. 4.18 | Mentioned in Despatches
269    | R.S.M.   | Pilkington, F.   |  4. 6.17 | D.C. Medal
1242   | Sgt.     | Plummer, V.      | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
1242   | Sgt.     | Plummer, V.      | 16. 7.18 | Bar to M.M.
57350  | Sgt.     | Purgavie, W.R.   | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
3826   | L/Sgt.   | Randall, P.T.    | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
1024   | Pte.     | Rhodes, L.M.L.   | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
89197  | Pte.     | Raymond, F.      | 17. 6.18 | M.S. Medal
7896   | C.Q.M.S. | Read, F.C.       | 17. 6.18 | M.S. Medal
1997   | Sgt.     | Reynolds, R.     | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
12463  | L/Sgt.   | Rowley, E.G.     | 24. 4.17 | Military Medal
375    | Sgt.     | Royston, E.      |  9. 4.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
375    | Sgt.     | Royston, E.      | 26. 5.17 | Italian Bronze Medal
       |          |                  |          |  for Military Valour
1719   | C.S.M.   | Rutherford, P.J. | 16. 2.17 | Military Medal
1340   | L/Cpl.   | Sutherland, W.L. | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
4680   | Pte.     | Sears, H.R.      | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
1258   | Sgt.     | Sadd, C.W.H.     | 17. 4.17 | D.C. Medal
2337   | Q.M.S.   | Sarginson, R.H.  |  1. 1.18 | M.S. Medal
7964   | Pte.     | Saxton, J.B.     | 19.11.17 | Military Medal
7964   | Pte.     | Saxton, J.B.     | 11. 2.19 | Bar to M.M.
7415   | Sgt.     | Shepard, H.      | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
63073  | L/Cpl.   | Smith, A.        | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
60911  | Pte.     | Sparrowhawk, A.  | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
1318   | Sgt.     | Spowage, P.H.    | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
1618   | A/R.S.M. | Stafford, W.D.   |  1. 1.18 | M.S. Medal
1618   | A/R.S.M. | Stafford, W.D.   |  3. 9.18 | D.C. Medal
1398   | Sgt.     | Steggal, R.F.    | 11. 5.17 | D.C. Medal
49304  | Sgt.     | Stirrups, A.T.   | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
1296   | Pte.     | Thomas, T.W.     |  5. 1.17 | Military Medal
4109   | L/Cpl.   | Thomas, A.       | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
48089  | Cpl.     | Thompson, P.     | 11. 2.19 | Military Medal
4114   | Sgt.     | Walters, T.S.    | 11. 2.19 | Military Medal
183    | Cpl.     | Webber, A.E.     | 18. 1.19 | M.S. Medal
8736   | Cpl.     | Webster, R.G.    | 26. 4.17 | Military Medal
8736   | Cpl.     | Webster, R.G.    | 18. 7.17 | Bar to M.M.
12315  | Sgt.     | Weller, C.       | 17. 9.17 | Military Medal
60918  | L/Cpl.   | Weston, A.       | 11. 2.19 | Military Medal
5915   | C.S.M.   | Wheeler, F.E.    |  7.11.17 | Mentioned in Despatches
5915   | C.S.M.   | Wheeler, F.E.    |  1. 5.18 | D.C. Medal
49479  | Pte.     | White, C.        | 18. 7.17 | Military Medal
1795   | Pte.     | Wilks, E.L.      | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
186    | Sgt.     | Wingate, T.C.    | 17. 4.17 | Military Medal
1886   | Sgt.     | Wood, W.F.       | 24. 4.17 | Military Medal
1441   | A/C.S.M. | Woodward, E.M.M. | 15.11.18 | D.C. Medal
14681  | Sgt.     | Wren, H.G.       | 16. 7.18 | Military Medal
211    | Cpl.     | Wright, T.H.     | 13. 3.18 | Military Medal
4127   | L/Cpl.   | Walker, V.D.     | 21.10.16 | Military Medal
165    | Sgt.     | Woollett, C.     | 10.10.16 | Military Medal
569    | L/Cpl.   | White, W.H.      |  5. 1.17 | Military Medal
-------+----------+------------------+----------+-------------------------




THE ROLL OF HONOUR

OFFICERS AND OTHER RANKS WHO DIED THAT ENGLAND
MIGHT LIVE




THE ROLL OF HONOUR

OFFICERS

---------+-------------------+----------+--------------------------------
         |                   |          |
 _Rank._ | _Name._           |_Date of  |  _Remarks._
         |                   | Death._  |
---------+-------------------+----------+--------------------------------
Lieut.   | Aris, T.A.        | 16. 4.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Bushell, R.H.C.   | 27. 7.16 |    ----
Lieut.   | Carpenter, C.     | 17. 2.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Chubb, T.         | 17. 2.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | De Beck, G.C.     | 18. 2.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Green, L.A.       | 13.11.16 |    ----
Capt.    | Hayward, C.B.     | 27. 7.16 |    ----
Capt.    | Hilder, M.L.      |  3. 5.17 |    ----
Capt.    | Johnson, R.D.     |  6. 7.16 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Kentfield, E.N.   | 17. 2.17 |    ----
Capt.    | Lissaman, A.J.    | 13. 4.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Morris, R.M.      | 17. 2.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Oliver, E.A.      | 27. 7.16 |    ----
Capt.    | Ranken, D.C.      | 27. 7.16 |    ----
Capt.    | Rattray, D.L.     | 17. 2.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Symonds, A.       | 17. 2.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Taylor, E.F.H.    | 27. 7.17 |    ----
Capt.    | Wiggen, R.H.      | 17. 2.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Balbirnie, J.V.E. |  7. 9.18 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Burgess, R.C.     |  3. 5.17 | Missing 3.5.17. Death accepted
         |                   |          | as having occurred on or since
         |                   |          | 3.5.17, on lapse of time.
2/Lieut. | Cornes, H.P.G.    | 27. 9.17 |    ----
A/Capt.  | Coull, J.F.       | 30. 9.18 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Davies, D.F.      | 15. 4.18 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Dixon, R.E.L.     |  8. 5.18 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Freeston, C.A.E.  | 25. 3.18 | Reported wd. and missing
         |                   |          | 25.3.18. Death accepted as
         |                   |          | having occurred on or since.
Capt.    | Fugeman, W.A.     |  1.12.17 |    ----
2/Lieut  | Jackson, A.R.     | 25. 4.18 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Jackson, W.       | 30. 9.18 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Pratt, W.G.J.     | 28. 9.17 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Sanders, F.J.     |  6. 8.18 | Died of wds. at 3 Can. St.
         |                   |          | Hosp.
2/Lieut. | Smith, A.W.       |  7. 9.18 |    ----
2/Lieut. | Wells, F.B.       | 10.10.18 | Died of wds. at 46 C.C.S.
---------+-------------------+----------+--------------------------------


N.C.O.'s AND MEN

-------+----------+--------------------+----------+-----------------------
_Regtl.| _Rank._  | _Name._            | _Date of | _Remarks._
  No._ |          |                    | Death._  |
-------+----------+--------------------+----------+-----------------------
115    | Cpl.     | Albany, W.         |  2. 8.16 | Died of wds. 5 C.C.S.
4197   | L/Cpl.   | Arnold, E.L.       | 13.11.16 |     ----
4429   | Pte.     | Ayers, E.R.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
7111   | Pte.     | Allison, G.        |  1. 8.16 | Died of wds. 21 C.C.S.
2409   | Pte.     | Alcock, C.J.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
10689  | L/Cpl.   | Anthony, G.C.      | 16. 9.16 |     ----
1208   | Pte.     | Baker, G.F.        | 13.11.16 | Died of wounds at
       |          |                    |          | K.R.R. Aid Post.
1585   | L/Cpl.   | Barrett, T.        | 13.11.16 |     ----
1881   | Pte.     | Boyce, F.J.        | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Report amended to
       |          |                    |          | "Killed in Action."
3935   | Pte.     | Bardell, R.J.      | 29. 7.16 |     ----
1585   | L/Cpl.   | Baker, L.F.        | 14. 8.16 | Reported wd. 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Trans. to U.K.
       |          |                    |          | Subsequently reported
       |          |                    |          | by W.O. as having
       |          |                    |          | died of wds. at
       |          |                    |          | Southwark Military
       |          |                    |          | Hosp. 14.8.16.
1380   | Pte.     | Bell, R.           |  8. 2.16 |     ----
1739   | Pte.     | Brown, A.E.        | 17. 9.16 |     ----
1710   | Pte.     | Brown, G.          | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1045   | Pte.     | Black, W.D.        |  1. 6.16 |     ----
828    | Pte.     | Bowman, H.         |  1. 8.16 | Died of wounds 1 S.
       |          |                    |          | African Gen. Hosp.
1800   | Pte.     | Bown, H.E.         | 24. 1.16 |     ----
1847   | Pte.     | Brewer, A.H.       | 25. 6.16 |     ----
702    | Pte.     | Burt, T.M.         | 20. 3.16 |     ----
4325   | Pte.     | Bradburn, W.       |  9. 5.16 |     ----
4421   | Pte.     | Burnip, W.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
2474   | Pte.     | Burnie, J.G.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
2492   | Pte.     | Brandreth, A.K.B.  |  1.11.16 |     ----
7275   | Pte.     | Baron. H.          | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4621   | Pte.     | Broderick, J.A.    | 13.11.16 |     ----
3949   | Pte.     | Brown, A.          | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1998   | Pte.     | Burrington, P.C.   | 13.11.16 |     ----
10679  | Pte.     | Bardsley, W.M.     | 13.11.16 |     ----
13655  | Pte.     | Benn, E.           | 13.11.16 |     ----
3779   | Pte.     | Britten, H.A.      | 13.11.16 |     ----
1871   | Pte.     | Bennett. F.J.      | 14.11.16 |     ----
1068   | L/Cpl.   | Clunas, C.         |  8. 2.16 |     ----
1626   | Pte.     | Crone, W.C.        | 24. 6.16 | Wd. 10.5.16. Trans.
       |          |                    |          | to U.K. 20.5.16.
       |          |                    |          | Subsequently reported
       |          |                    |          | "Died of wounds" at
       |          |                    |          | Ashbourne Hosp.,
       |          |                    |          | Sunderland, 24.6.16.
1942   | Pte.     | Cable, M.          | 14.11.16 |     ----
1354   | Pte.     | Clarke, E.A.       | 26. 3.16 | Died of wds. 1 Stat.
       |          |                    |          | Hosp., Rouen, 23.3.16.
1219   | L/Cpl.   | Conquer, H.G.K.    | 21. 3.16 |     ----
1309   | L/Cpl.   | Cross, W.          |  3. 8.16 |     ----
796    | L/Cpl.   | Christophers, G.C. | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1957   | L/Cpl.   | Curtis, A.C.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
3756   | L/Cpl.   | Crokett, I.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
3868   | Pte.     | Carey, R.D.A.      |  1. 3.16 |     ----
96     | Pte.     | Clarke, F.W.       | 12. 3.16 | Died from wounds
       |          |                    |          | 5 Gen. Hosp., Rouen.
4123   | Pte.     | Catlin, H.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4318   | Pte.     | Crowe, R.J.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4746   | Pte.     | Coffey, R.         | 13. 9.16 | Died from wounds
       |          |                    |          | 100 F.A.
4736   | Pte.     | Cunnington, A.W.   | 13.11.16 |     ----
12272  | Pte.     | Cook, A.E.         | 14.11.16 | Died from wounds
       |          |                    |          | 14.11.16, 20 C.C.S.
       | Pte.     | Crickner, J.       | 14. 9.16 |     ----
9877   | Pte.     | Alport, S.         | 19. 1.17 | Wd. 16.9.16. Trans. to
       |          |                    |          | U.K. 18.9.16. Reported
       |          |                    |          | by W.O. as died of
       |          |                    |          | wounds 19.1.17 Horton
       |          |                    |          | C./Ldn. War Hosp.,
       |          |                    |          | Epsom.
10669  | L/Cpl.   | Delaney, J.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1431   | Pte.     | Dobbin, W.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
266    | Pte.     | Doe, H.            | 10. 2.16 |     ----
4051   | L/Cpl.   | Dowker, F.H.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
765    | Pte.     | Dandy, A.J.        |  1.11.16 |     ----
4370   | L/Cpl.   | Dimant, R.H.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4206   | Pte.     | Doherty, J.H.      |  1. 5.16 | Died of wounds 69
4456   |          |                    |          | F.A.
4136   | Pte.     | Darbyshire, H.C.   | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1812   | Pte.     | Dodman, A.         |  2. 8.16 | Died of wds. 21 C.C.S.
161    | L/Cpl.   | Davidson, J.       | 27. 7.16 | Wounded in action
       |          |                    |          | and missing.
4217   | Pte.     | Daniel, W.         | 30. 5.16 |     ----
266    | Sgt.     | Ditzen, O.S.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1451   | Pte.     | Eley, C.W.         | 20.12.15 | Died of wounds received
       |          |                    |          | in action.
4514   | Pte.     | Erwood, F.L.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
478    | Pte.     | Fair, J.P.         |  3. 8.16 | Died of wounds received
       |          |                    |          | in action.
1224   | Pte.     | Farren, J.P.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1245   | Pte.     | Fay, V.T.M.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
2494   | Pte.     | Foster, A.J.       | 12. 7.16 | Died of wds. 7 Gen.
       |          |                    |          | Hosp., Stomer.
1834   | Pte.     | Fowler, J.P.A.     | 12. 6.16 | Died of wds. 6 C.C.S.
9101   | Pte.     | Fitton, W.         | 13.11.16 |     ----
1244   | Cpl.     | Goodfellow, H.     |  1. 8.16 |     ----
3780   | Pte.     | Glasgow, M.R.      | 27. 7.16 |     ----
3741   | Pte.     | Garcia, A.R.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
51260  | L/Cpl.   | Grant, A.E.        | 13.11.16 |     ----
504    | Pte.     | Hedger, C.A.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
702    | Pte.     | Hopkins, H.        | 13.11.16 |     ----
1524   | Pte.     | Hodge, R.N.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
974    | Sgt.     | Hutchinson, D.L.   | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1085   | L/Cpl.   | Hanbury, L.F.      | 27. 7.16 |     ----
153    | Sgt.     | Head, P.F.         |  1. 8.16 | Died of wds. 21 C.C.S.
225    | L/Cpl.   | Huntley, E.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1740   | Pte.     | Harrison, H.J.     | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4285   | Pte.     | Holmes, M.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
8943   | Pte.     | Harding, H.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4690   | Pte.     | Harrison, F.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
348    | L/Cpl.   | Hendren, J.M.      | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4683   | Pte.     | Hobden, A.G.       | 17.11.16 | Died of wds. 3 C.C.S.
2021   | Pte.     | Heaton, --         | 14.11.16 |     ----
10535  | Pte.     | Honeyman, G.S.     | 13.11.16 |     ----
10664  | Pte.     | Hirst, J.E.        | 16. 9.16 |     ----
411    | Pte.     | Hopkins, A.        | 13.11.16 |     ----
2066   | L/Cpl.   | Inwood, W.S.       | 13.11.16 |     ----
1735   | Pte.     | Johnston, W.H.     | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1564   | Pte.     | Jones. R,          |  9. 5.16 | Died of wds. 22 C.C.S.
1688   | Pte.     | Jones, W.D.P.      | 18.11.16 | Died of wds. 3 C.C.S.
274    | Pte.     | Jackson, G.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1214   | L/Cpl.   | Jeffreys, C.W.     | 21.11.16 | Died of wounds 2
       |          |                    |          | Stationary Hosp.
7778   | Pte.     | Josephs, B.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4615   | Pte.     | Kelly, W.A.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
8709   | Pte.     | Kibble, --         | 24. 8.16 | Died of wds. 100 F.A.
63094  | Pte.     | King, A.           | 13.11.16 |     ----
1591   | Pte.     | Loveland, H.       | 13.11.16 |     ----
1647   | Pte.     | Littman, S.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4073   | L/Cpl.   | Lewis, T.          |  5.10.16 |     ----
3623   | Pte.     | Lloyd, A.          | 26. 1.16 |     ----
3894   | Pte.     | Lindow, W.A.       | 30. 4.16 |     ----
4491   | Pte.     | Lynn, W.J.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
8743   | Pte.     | Lucas, A.          | 29. 5.16 | Died of wds. 6 C.C.S.
7502   | Pte.     | Lee, J.            |  2. 8.16 | Died of wds. 13th Corps
       |          |                    |          | Main Dressing Station.
4574   | Pte.     | Lambert, A.        | 13. 9.16 |     ----
4665   | Pte.     | Lloyd, E.E.H.C.    | 13.11.16 |     ----
291    | L/Cpl.   | Morgan, D.         | 10. 2.16 |     ----
998    | Pte.     | Macpherson, J.C.B. |  5. 3.16 |     ----
1392   | Pte.     | McKay, A.          |  7. 5.16 | Died of wds. 22 C.C.S.
1796   | Pte.     | Murray, C.F.       | 16. 6.16 | Died of wds. 18 C.C.S.
1878   | Pte.     | McPhail, P.        |  2. 8.16 | Died of wounds 13th
       |          |                    |          | Corps Main Dressing
       |          |                    |          | Station.
4015   | Pte.     | Monk, E.W.         | 12. 3.16 |     ----
1827   | Pte.     | McKenzie, W.       | 16. 3.16 | Died of wds. 5 F.A.
3528   | Pte.     | Moss, F.A.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1277   | Pte.     | McFarlane, J.      | 15. 9.16 |     ----
177    | Pte.     | McGregor, J.M.     | 10. 3.16 |     ----
4008   | Pte.     | Mogford, A.C.      |  4. 8.16 | Died of wds. 21 C.C.S.
4461   | Pte.     | Morris, J.         | 13.11.16 |     ----
4618   | Pte.     | Moore, M.          | 13.11.16 |     ----
1595   | Pte.     | Moore, A.W.N.      |  5.10.16 |     ----
1930   | Cpl.     | Marshall, A.F.     | 21.11.16 | Died of wds. 43 C.C.S.
1862   | Pte.     | Nancarrow, G.W.    |  8. 5.16 |     ----
1725   | Pte.     | Owen, H.           | 13. 3.16 |     ----
4713   | Pte.     | O'Brien, D.C.      | 15. 8.16 | Wd. 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Subsequently reported
       |          |                    |          | by W.O. having died of
       |          |                    |          | wounds at Kitchener
       |          |                    |          | War Hospital.
426    | Pte.     | Palliser, A.J.B.   | 19.12.15 |     ----
1575   | Pte.     | Pearce, F.         |  1.11.16 |     ----
886    | A/R.S.M. | Pouney, F.         |  1. 8.16 | Died of wounds 1
       |          |                    |          | Stationary Hosp.
1458   | Pte.     | Purgavie, F.       |  1. 3.16 |     ----
1564   | L/Cpl.   | Pellymainter, W.J. | 13.11.16 |     ----
807    | Pte.     | Perry, O.          | 27. 7.16 |     ----
3907   | Pte.     | Parr, E.A.         | 10. 2.16 |     ----
3129   | Pte.     | Parry-Crooke, L.W. | 27. 7.16 |     ----
10933  | Pte.     | Philpot, G.H.      | 13.11.16 |     ----
3762   | Pte.     | Redwood, W.        | 22. 6.16 |     ----
1746   | Pte.     | Rogers, B.F.       | 16.11.16 | Died of wds. 6 F.A.
869    | Pte.     | Race, S.           | 13.11.16 |     ----
3827   | Pte.     | Reeman, A.W.       | 10. 2.16 |     ----
1992   | L/Cpl.   | Richards, E.W.     | 18.10.16 | Died of wds. (gunshot),
       |          |                    |          | head (self-inflicted).
4149   | Pte.     | Rooney, E.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4501   | Pte.     | Roe, A.E.C.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
9958   | Pte.     | Ramsbottom, W.     |  5.11.16 | Died of wounds 1/3
       |          |                    |          | H.F.A.
123    | Pte.     | Shotten, J.S.      | 27. 7.16 |     ----
3560   | Pte.     | Simpson, C.        | 27. 5.16 |     ----
1025   | Sgt.     | Skuse, L.N.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
954    | Sgt.     | Siever, E.H.P.     | 13.11.16 |     ----
3629   | Pte.     | Schobiers, J.A.G.  | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1222   | L/Cpl.   | Simpson, W.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
26     | Pte.     | Stagg, E.          | 21. 3.16 | Died of wds. 100 F.A.
3605   | L/Cpl.   | Stares, J.         | 10. 2.16 |     ----
1792   | Pte.     | Stokes, A.E.       | 14. 2.16 | Died of wds. 1 C.C.S.
       |          |                    |          | Chocques.
1509   | Sgt.     | Simpson, J.        | 13.11.16 |     ----
1756   | Pte.     | Smith, H.E.T.      | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1345   | Pte.     | Suttie, W.F.       | 17. 3.16 | Died of wds. 18 C.C.S.
4204   | L/Cpl.   | Smith, A.          | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4163   | Pte.     | Scott, H.          | 27. 7.16 |     ----
7719   | Pte.     | Swift, B.A.        | 13.11.16 |     ----
4226   | Pte.     | Stotford, M.R.F.   | 27. 7.16 |     ----
4227   | Pte.     | Stewart, H.        | 13.11.16 |     ----
4141   | Pte.     | Smith, W.J.        | 27. 7.16 |     ----
10934  | Pte.     | Smith, C.H.        | 21.10.16 | Died of wds. 13th
       |          |                    |          | Corps 3 Operating
       |          |                    |          | Station.
1743   | Cpl.     | Tomalin, R.A.      | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1904   | Pte.     | Taylor, C.W.       | 21. 9.16 | Died of wounds (gas),
       |          |                    |          | 13 Staty. Hosp.
11     | Sgt.     | Taylor, J.H.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
68     | Pte.     | Thomas, T.J.       | 23. 3.16 | Died of wds. 18 C.C.S.
4047   | Pte.     | Talbot, A.J.       | 13.11.16 |     ----
40438  | Pte.     | Talbot, S.W.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
3656   | Pte.     | Teeling, A.        | 13.11.16 |     ----
7531   | Pte.     | Turner, A.         |  8. 7.16 |     ----
1475   | Pte.     | Vickery, G.H.      | 15. 9.16 |     ----
4056   | Pte.     | Wain, G.A.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1478   | L/Cpl.   | Wilson, A.V.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
902    | L/Cpl.   | Whitlock, A.E.     | 30.10.16 |     ----
990    | Pte.     | Willcocks, N.      |  7.12.16 |     ----
1204   | Pte.     | Webster, S.        | 13.11.16 |     ----
1901   | Pte.     | White, F.C.        | 28. 5.16 |     ----
299    | L/Cpl.   | Woodin, J.B.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1634   | L/Cpl.   | Willocks, J.C.     | 13.11.16 |     ----
4460   | Pte.     | Wade, A.           | 14.11.16 |     ----
1582   | Cpl.     | Wright, S.C.H.     | 13.11.16 |     ----
569    | L/Cpl.   | White, W.H.        | 26.11.16 | Died of wounds 13
       |          |                    |          | General Hospital.
4442   | Pte.     | Wilson, H.H.L.     | 15. 6.16 | Died of wounds 7
       |          |                    |          | General Hospital.
4275   | Pte.     | Wood, E.C.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
1075   | Pte.     | Williams, R.W.     | 13.11.16 |     ----
7730   | Pte.     | Wilson, H.E.       | 27. 7.16 |     ----
8542   | Pte.     | Wiseman, W.J.      | 14. 6.16 |     ----
4631   | Pte.     | Willsher, W.A.     | 23. 8.16 | Died of wounds 6
       |          |                    |          | General Hospital.
4775   | Pte.     | Woodcock, J.J.     |  6.10.16 |     ----
4626   | Pte.     | Wright, W.J.       | 19.11.16 | Died of wds. 3 C.C.S.
61934  | Pte.     | Watts, G.          | 23. 1.17 |     ----
75577  | Pte.     | Addison, F.        |  7. 9.18 |     ----
9823   | L/Cpl.   | Aujurai, R.        |  3.12.17 |     ----
1732   | Pte.     | Aldred, H.D.       | 10. 3.17 |     ----
63117  | Pte.     | Amos, H.G.         | 20. 2.17 | Died of wds. 49 C.C.S.
93338  | Pte.     | Andell, N.         | 30. 9.18 |     ----
1692   | Pte.     | Anderson, W.       | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
63057  | Pte.     | Andrews, G.J.      | 17. 2.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 17.2.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes
       |          |                    |          | as having died on
       |          |                    |          | or since 17.2.17.
61962  | Pte.     | Arlidge, A.V.      |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
1489   | L/Cpl.   | Arnot, G.S.        |  1. 6.18 | Died of wds. 3 C.C.S.
275314 | Pte.     | Arthur, W.R.       | 25. 3.18 | Shown on German list
       |          |                    |          | of dead P. of W. No
       |          |                    |          | further details.
60920  | L/Cpl.   | Ashman, L.         |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 30.17.
93342  | Pte.     | Astley, J.W.       |  8.10.18 |     ----
93337  | Pte.     | Aston, J.T.        |  4. 9.18 |     ----
48691  | Pte.     | Bailey, H.         | 11. 6.17 |     ----
27418  | Pte.     | Baker, A.          |  7. 9.18 |     ----
1995   | Pte.     | Baker, C.A.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
50785  | Pte.     | Baker, H.          |  2.12.17 |     ----
1997   | Pte.     | Baker, W.          | 17. 2.17 |     ----
10915  | Pte.     | Balmforth, J.N.    | 14.11.16 |     ----
747530 | L/Cpl.   | Barker, A.A.       |  3. 5.17 |     ----
6625   | L/Cpl.   | Barker, E.B.       | 23. 2.17 | Died of wds. 3rd Can.
       |          |                    |          | General Hospital.
229484 | C.Q.M.S. | Barnes, A.G.       | 31. 5.18 | Died of wds. 91 F.A.
2127   | L/Cpl.   | Barnfather, N.C.   | 16. 2.17 |     ----
61595  | Pte.     | Barrett, C.        |  3. 1.18 |     ----
80142  | Pte.     | Barrett, J.E.      | 30. 9.18 |     ----
4774   | Pte.     | Barry, K.          | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 2.7.16. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
80097  | Pte.     | Barsby, T.N.       | 30. 9.18 |     ----
49579  | Pte.     | Battison, C.       |  8. 3.17 |     ----
4045   | L/Cpl.   | Bavin, W.J.        | 30. 1.17 |     ----
37366  | Pte.     | Beales, C.E.C.     | 17. 2.17 |     ----
21235  | Pte.     | Beamiss, T.J.      | 24. 8.18 |     ----
1375   | Pte.     | Beaven, F.L.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
63082  | Pte.     | Beckett, W.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
1723   | Cpl.     | Bee, L.            | 23. 2.18 |     ----
4744   | Pte.     | Bennett, J.A.      | 13.11.16 | Wd. and reported
       |          |                    |          | missing 3.11.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded for official
       |          |                    |          | purposes as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 13.11.16.
68491  | Pte.     | Bennett, C.R.      |  8. 1.18 | Died from effects of
       |          |                    |          | lobar pneumonia.
82     | Pte.     | Benson, C.         | 11. 2.17 | Died of wds. 47 C.C.S.
3888   | Pte.     | Bibby, C.          |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
82241  | Pte.     | Bimpson, R.W.      | 25.10.18 |     ----
275310 | Pte.     | Bing, W.           | 29.11.17 |     ----
20696  | Pte.     | Blackwell, J.H.    | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18. Identity disc
       |          |                    |          | found; death accepted.
93349  | Pte.     | Blyth, J.          |  3. 9.18 |     ----
15015  | Pte.     | Bolt, A.E.         | 20. 7.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 20.7.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 20.7.17.
14570  | Pte.     | Bourne, W.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
13946  | Pte.     | Bowler, J.W.       | 10. 3.17 |     ----
49310  | Pte.     | Boyle, E.A.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
79744  | Pte.     | Bradbury, C        |  8.10.18 |     ----
60921  | Pte.     | Bradshaw, E.       | 24. 4.17 |     ----
82232  | Pte.     | Brannagan, J.      | 26. 8.18 | Died of wounds.
10451  | Pte.     | Breakley, J.O.J.   |  6. 4.17 | Died from effects of
       |          |                    |          | P.O.O. (?) enteric.
6458   | Pte.     | Brennen, T.        |  7. 3.18 | Died of wounds.
13729  | Pte.     | Brewer, G.A.       | 27.11.17 |     ----
63083  | Pte.     | Briggs, L.G.       | 31. 5.18 |     ----
106    | Pte.     | Bristow, S.R.      | 30. 1.17 |     ----
9164   | L/Cpl.   | Brockley, G.       |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
7513   | Pte.     | Brodle, C.H.       | 23. 7.17 |     ----
127996 | A/Cpl.   | Brook, A.R.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
1513   | L/Cpl.   | Brown, J.          |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
6428   | Pte.     | Buckland, A.       |  7. 7.17 |     ----
50781  | Pte.     | Buggy, W.          |  1. 6.17 | Died of wounds.
63120  | Pte.     | Bull, W.J.         | 24. 3.17 | Died from effects of
       |          |                    |          | tumour of kidney (L).
20338  | Pte.     | Burgess, C.S.V.    | 28. 4.17 |     ----
4607   | Pte.     | Burns, R.          | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
8739   | Pte.     | Burton, G.G.E.     | 28.11.17 |     ----
4527   | Pte.     | Burton, H.B.       | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
4519   | L/Cpl.   | Bush, H.           | 11. 5.17 | Died of wounds.
8717   | Pte.     | Bush, H.C.         | 24.10.18 | Died of wounds.
61749  | Pte.     | Buswell, J.W.      | 20. 2.17 | Died of wounds.
68510  | Pte.     | Butler, S.M.       |  2.12.17 |     ----
E/2295 | Pte.     | Butterworth, L.G.  | 25. 3.18 | Shown on P. of W.
       |          |                    |          | list of dead.
11370  | Pte.     | Bye, C.E.          | 13.11.16 |     ----
75586  | Pte.     | Campbell, W.       |  6. 5.18 | Died of wounds.
1483   | Pte.     | Carnochan, J.      | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded for official
       |          |                    |          | purposes as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
11215  | Pte.     | Carruthers, A.J.   | 8.10.18  | Died of wounds.
1946   | Pte.     | Carter, E.A.       | 3. 5.17  | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
4272   | Pte.     | Carter, H.         | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded for official
       |          |                    |          | purposes as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
631    | L/Cpl.   | Chambers, H.M.     | 10. 3.17 |     ----
51804  | Pte.     | Chilton, S.J.      | 17. 4.17 |     ----
7028   | Pte.     | Clark, J.G.        |  3. 5.18 | Regarded as died of
       |          |                    |          | wds. in War Hosp.,
       |          |                    |          | Germany (P. of W.).
75696  | L/Cpl.   | Clayton, R.        |  7. 9.18 |     ----
93356  | Pte.     | Clennel, J.        | 24.10.18 | Died of wounds.
63124  | Pte.     | Cochrane, T.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
51268  | Pte.     | Coey, V.J.         |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
62051  | Pte.     | Coles, G.H.        |  3.12.17 |     ----
229329 | Pte.     | Coley, G.          | 23. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 23.3.18. Shown on
       |          |                    |          | German list of dead
       |          |                    |          | Assumed as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 23.3.18.
71552  | Pte.     | Collett, T.A.      |  1. 4.18 |     ----
3847   | Pte.     | Colley, T.N.       | 18.11.18 | Died from influenza.
61640  | Pte.     | Collins, A.W.      | 17. 2.17 |     ----
71553  | Pte.     | Cook, G.E.         |  1. 4.18 |     ----
1413   | Sgt.     | Cooke, E.G.        | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 25.3.18.
10159  | Pte.     | Cooney, T.         | 10. 3.17 |     ----
60211  | Sgt.     | Cooper, E.R.       | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 25.3.18.
229330 | Pte.     | Cooper, H.         | 18. 4.18 |     ----
61732  | Pte.     | Cordell, D.        |  9. 3.17 | Died of wounds.
6025   | L/Sgt.   | Cornish, J.A.      |  6. 3.18 |     ----
1594   | Pte.     | Cotterill, H.J.    | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
10940  | Pte.     | Cotterill, W.H.    | 25. 3.18 |     ----
79766  | Pte.     | Coupe, H.          |  8. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
1430   | L/Cpl.   | Coyle, J.          | 14.11.16 |     ----
61928  | Pte.     | Crabb, F.W.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
61967  | Pte.     | Cummins, P.        | 10. 3.17 |     ----
1701   | Pte.     | Curryer, R.W.      |  3.12.17 |     ----
68610  | L/Cpl.   | Daines, A.         | 28. 8.18 | Died of wounds.
12713  | L/Cpl.   | Daniels, F.        | 17. 2.17 | Rptd. missing 3.5.17.
1861   | L/Cpl.   | Davies, A.E.       |  3. 5.17 | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17.
859    | Pte.     | Davies, J.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
161    | L/Cpl.   | Davison, J.        | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
6050   | Pte.     | Day, J.C.          | 28. 1.17 |     ----
4377   | Pte.     | Dean, J.           | 12. 4.17 |     ----
1973   | Pte.     | Deares, H.         | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
2041   | Pte.     | Dearing, J.        | 17. 2.17 | Died of wounds.
4360   | Pte.     | De Backer, M.H.    | 17. 2.17 |     ----
61650  | Pte.     | Dennet, A.J.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
71565  | Pte.     | Dicker, A.S.       |  1. 4.18 |     ----
10768  | L/Cpl.   | Dickerson, G.H.    |  8.10.18 |     ----
23721  | Pte.     | Dinkell, G.E.      |  3. 5.17 |     ----
93366  | Pte.     | Dillon, A.         | 30. 9.18 |     ----
55068  | Pte.     | Dixie, L.          | 30. 9.18 |     ----
1424   | Pte.     | Dodds, W.J.        | 30.11.17 |     ----
245409 | Pte.     | Doel, G.           | 20.12.17 | Died of wounds.
61958  | Pte.     | Donnan, J.P.       |  1.12.17 |     ----
18944  | Pte.     | Donovan, J.P.      |  1.12.17 |     ----
2705   | Pte.     | Dooley, D.         | 29. 4.17 | Killed accidentally
       |          |                    |          | (fall from railway
       |          |                    |          | carriage).
93362  | Pte.     | Dooley, M.         | 30. 9.18 |     ----
61649  | L/Cpl.   | Dossett, H.E.      |  1. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
868    | L/Cpl.   | Drew, C.           | 20. 4.17 | Wd. 12.4.17. Trans.
       |          |                    |          | to U.K. 16.4.17.
       |          |                    |          | Subsequently died of
       |          |                    |          | wds. on 20.4.17 at
       |          |                    |          | Ardmillan Aux. Military
       |          |                    |          | Hospital, Oswestry.
41626  | Pte.     | Driver, E.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
75700  | Pte.     | Driver, W.G.       |  8.10.18 |     ----
73948  | Pte.     | Dumont, J.         | 30. 9.18 |     ----
58802  | Sgt.     | Dunkley, E.        | 26. 6.18 |     ----
82269  | Pte.     | Dupre, T.D.        | 27. 8.18 | Died of wounds.
75592  | Pte.     | Edwards, R.R.      |  8.10.18 |     ----
4034   | Pte.     | Elley, C.H.        | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
20409  | Pte.     | Ellis, B.          | 17. 2.17 |     ----
63080  | Pte.     | Emberson, C.G.     | 25. 3.18 |     ----
93368  | Pte.     | Embleton, A.       |  8. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
15132  | L/Cpl.   | Embleton, W.       |  8.10.18 |     ----
75591  | Pte.     | Evans, G.H.        | 27. 3.18 | Died of wounds.
22     | L/Cpl.   | Evans, H.          | 20. 2.17 | Died of wounds.
7730   | L/Cpl.   | Evans, J.F.        |  2. 5.17 |     ----
82271  | L/Cpl.   | Evans, T.          |  8.10.18 |     ----
6071   | L/Cpl.   | Fadden, E.T.       | 29. 1.17 |     ----
29568  | Pte.     | Farrow, F.         | 21. 2.17 | Died of wounds.
87749  | Pte.     | Fell, H.           | 26.12.18 | Wd. 22.8.18. Trans.
(Prev. |          |                    |          | to U.K. 17.9.18.
No. in |          |                    |          | Subsequently died
23/RF  |          |                    |          | at Military Hosp.,
SP/    |          |                    |          | Kirkham 26.12.18.
 4523) |          |                    |          |
54861  | Pte.     | Fisher, P.         | 17. 9.17 |     ----
253629 | L/Cpl.   | Fitch, T.P.        |  8.10.18 |     ----
229432 | Pte.     | Forbes, G.F.       |  3.12.17 |     ----
1761   | L/Cpl.   | Ford, F.H.         | 13.11.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 13.11.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 13.11.16.
6629   | Pte.     | Forest, J.G.       | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
275312 | Pte.     | Foster, A.         | 23. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 23.3.18. Shown on
       |          |                    |          | German official list
       |          |                    |          | of dead P. of W.
24386  | Pte.     | Frampton, C.W.     | 17. 2.17 |     ----
66879  | Pte.     | Fear, A.           | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 23.3.18. Shown on
       |          |                    |          | German list of dead
       |          |                    |          | P. of W.
13088  | Cpl.     | French, P.J.       |  7. 9.18 |     ----
4264   | Pte.     | Fullarton, A.J.    | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
1506   | Pte.     | Fuller, V.H.       |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded
       |          |                    |          | as having died on
       |          |                    |          | or since 3.5.17.
70737  | Pte.     | Furuta, F.         |  8.10.18 |     ----
93378  | Pte.     | Gaughan, T.        | 30. 9.18 |     ----
23131  | Pte.     | George, J.L.       | 18. 2.17 | Died of wounds.
86129  | Pte.     | George, S.G.       |  7. 9.18 |     ----
64074  | Pte.     | Gibson, W.G.       | 23. 3.18 |     ----
93374  | Pte.     | Gill, A.E.         |  8. 9.18 |     ----
23430  | L/Cpl.   | Gillard, F.B.      | 17. 2.17 |     ----
61643  | L/Cpl.   | Golds, L.H.        |  3. 5.17 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 3.5.17.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17.
29257  | L/Cpl.   | Good, B.           | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18 Shown on
       |          |                    |          | German list of dead
       |          |                    |          | P. of W.
59649  | Pte.     | Goode, P.A.        | 21. 7.18 |     ----
63088  | Pte.     | Goodrum, S.G.      |  3. 5.17 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 3.5.17.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17.
4457   | Pte.     | Goodway, R.W.      | 14. 6.18 |     ----
4250   | Pte.     | Gray, R.           |  3. 5.17 |     ----
75712  | Pte.     | Greener, C.E.      |  9.10.18 | Died of wounds.
3725   | Pte.     | Greenfield, F.     | 17. 2.17 |     ----
66913  | Pte.     | Greenwood, H.      | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.19. Shown on
       |          |                    |          | German list of dead
       |          |                    |          | P. of W.
66881  | Pte.     | Greenwood, J.W.    |  8.10.18 |     ----
82280  | Pte.     | Greenwood, R.S.    | 22. 8.18 | Died of wounds.
6990   | Cpl.     | Gregg, G.E.        |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
21997  | Pte.     | Griffiths, L.J.    |  8.10.18 |     ----
80127  | Pte.     | Griffiths, W.G.    | 30. 9.18 |     ----
8428   | Pte.     | Gromadzki, W.      | 31. 5.18 |     ----
1706   | Pte.     | Grout, H.          | 14.11.16 |     ----
63113  | Pte.     | Gunn, A.R.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
66789  | Pte.     | Hackett, F.G.      | 25. 3.18 | Shown on official
       |          |                    |          | German list of dead.
       |          |                    |          | No further details.
       |          |                    |          | List P.M. 601, 2.1.19.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded for official
       |          |                    |          | purposes as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18.
4721   | Pte.     | Hague, W.          |  3. 5.17 |     ----
2746   | Pte.     | Haines, F.P.       | 28.11.17 |     ----
4923   | L/Cpl.   | Haigh, J.L.        | 21. 8.18 |     ----
49112  | Pte.     | Hall, F.P.         | 15.11.18 | Died from influenza
       |          |                    |          | due to exposure on
       |          |                    |          | military duty
       |          |                    |          | 15.11.18.
61663  | Pte.     | Hance, S.          |  3. 5.17 |     ----
49639  | Pte.     | Harber, R.W.       | 13. 5.17 | Missing and regarded
       |          |                    |          | for official purposes
       |          |                    |          | as having died on
       |          |                    |          | or since 3.5.17.
3858   | Pte.     | Harding, C.W.      | 27. 7.16 | Reported killed in
       |          |                    |          | action or died of
       |          |                    |          | wds. on or shortly
       |          |                    |          | after 27.7.16.
63066  | Pte.     | Harman, W.J.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
15746  | L/Cpl.   | Harniman, R.J.     | 30. 1.17 |     ----
78967  | Pte.     | Harper, E.         | 24. 8.18 |     ----
48322  | Pte.     | Harrild, R.W.C.    | 17. 2.17 |     ----
61921  | Pte.     | Harris, C.J.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
82294  | Pte.     | Harris, F.         | 28. 8.18 | Died of wounds in 16
       |          |                    |          | Gen. Hospital 28.8.18.
7655   | Pte.     | Hart, J.I.         | 17. 4.17 |     ----
1417   | Pte.     | Hart, S.           | 27. 7.16 | Missing and regarded
       |          |                    |          | for official purposes
       |          |                    |          | as having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
72686  | Pte.     | Harvey, F.         |  7. 9.18 | Died of wds. 45 C.C.S.
       |          |                    |          | 7.9.18.
7688   | Cpl.     | Haslam, C.         | 29. 4.17 |     ----
1909   | L/Cpl.   | Hawksworth, K.     | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
4566   | L/Cpl.   | Hazelhurst, B.     | 16. 3.17 | Died of wds. 45 C.C.S.
49642  | L/Cpl.   | Heath, A.          |  3. 5.18 | Died of wounds 26
       |          |                    |          | General Hospital.
93389  | Pte.     | Henderson, D.      |  1.10.18 | Died of wounds.
47783  | Pte.     | Hickie, G.D.C.     | 13. 4.17 |     ----
20352  | Pte.     | Hickman, A.J.      | 13.11.16 |     ----
67023  | Pte.     | Hill, J.W.         | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18. Shown on
       |          |                    |          | German list of dead
       |          |                    |          | P. of W.
1094   | Pte.     | Hills, P.E.        |  7. 6.17 | Died of wounds.
66456  | Pte.     | Hodgetts, F.       | 23. 3.18 |     ----
75704  | Pte.     | Hodgson, H.R.      | 20. 4.18 |     ----
1049   | Pte.     | Hodgson, J.C.      | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded for official
       |          |                    |          | purposes as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
1271   | Cpl.     | Holcombe, C.J.     | 23. 2.18 |     ----
21474  | Pte.     | Holden, A.E.       |  3. 5.17 |     ----
48063  | Pte.     | Holt, T.E.         | 23. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 23.3.18. Shown on
       |          |                    |          | German list of dead
       |          |                    |          | P. of W. 2.1.19.
113    | L/Cpl.   | Hope, R.           | 25. 3.18 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 25.3.18.
       |          |                    |          | Shown on German
       |          |                    |          | list of dead P. of W.
26412  | Cpl.     | Hopgood, A.E.      | 17. 2.17 |     ----
19668  | Pte.     | Hopps, J.S.        | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18. Shown on
       |          |                    |          | German list of dead
       |          |                    |          | P. of W.
63089  | Pte.     | Horn, A.G.         | 15.11.16 | Died of wounds.
4193   | Pte.     | Horsfall, J.       |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
680121 | Pte.     | Horton, P.S.       |  7. 9.18 |     ----
4185   | Pte.     | Howard, F.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
42188  | Pte.     | Howes, E.          | 17. 2.17 |     ----
61924  | Pte.     | Hucker, W.J.       | 18. 2.17 | Died of wounds 47
       |          |                    |          | C.C.S. 18.2.17.
1411   | Pte.     | Hudson, W.         | 27. 7.16 | Missing. Regarded for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
73571  | Pte.     | Hulkes, R.A.       | 23. 8.18 | Died of wounds 19
       |          |                    |          | C.C.S. 23.8.18.
1754   | Pte.     | Humphreys, A.W.    | 25. 3.18 | Shown on P. of W. list
       |          |                    |          | of dead, accepted for
       |          |                    |          | official purposes as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 25.3.18.
78978  | Pte.     | Hyde, V.E.         | 24. 8.18 |     ----
1518   | L/Cpl.   | Irving, T.H.       |  8.10.18 |     ----
13923  | Pte.     | Ivey, H.           |  2. 2.17 |     ----
63091  | Pte.     | Ivory, F.V.        |  2.12.17 |     ----
4765   | Pte.     | Jackson, S.S.      | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
63067  | L/Cpl.   | James, B.C.        |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
80171  | Pte.     | Jarrett, W.A.      | 12. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
23563  | Pte.     | Jarvis, W.E.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
78979  | Pte.     | Jeffery, A.        | 30. 9.18 |     ----
1818   | Pte.     | Jewell, J.O.       | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
2870   | Pte.     | Jinks, W.H.        |  3. 5.17 |     ----
245533 | Pte.     | Johnson, F.        |  3. 5.18 | Died of wounds.
17810  | Pte.     | Johnson, T.        | 17. 2.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 17.2.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 17.2.17.
48411  | Pte.     | Johnson, W.J.      | 31. 7.17 | Died of wounds.
48066  | Pte.     | Jolley, C.W.       | 23. 3.18 |     ----
81290  | Pte.     | Jones, A.R.        | 17. 4.18 |     ----
3419   | Sgt.     | Jones, C.          | 28. 4.18 | Died of wds. whilst
       |          |                    |          | P. of W. in War
       |          |                    |          | Hospital, Mons.
49364  | Pte.     | Jones, F.          | 17. 2.17 |     ----
4500   | Pte.     | Jones, F.          | 31.12.17 |     ----
80194  | Pte.     | Jones, W.          | 24.10.18 |     ----
78981  | Pte.     | Keeping, A.W.      |  4.10.18 | Died of wounds.
93404  | Pte.     | Kenny, J.          | 30. 9.18 |     ----
73413  | Pte.     | Kiff, A.           |  8.10.18 |     ----
1603   | Pte.     | Kildare, T.J.      | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
88716  | Pte.     | Killip, L.W.       |  5. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
1967   | L/Cpl.   | King, G.W.         |  2. 5.17 |     ----
93403  | Pte.     | Kinghorn, J.W.     |  7. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
51284  | L/Sgt.   | Kirkham, J.R.      | 17. 2.17 |     ----
3995   | Pte.     | Kirton, B.         | 14.11.16 |     ----
4382   | Pte.     | Kitchen, H.        | 15. 2.17 |     ----
661    | Pte.     | Knight, H.E.       | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
4785   | Pte.     | Knight, J.W.       | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 25.3.18.
82314  | Pte.     | Lamb, G.H.         | 24. 8.18 | Died of wounds.
1281   | Sgt.     | Laycock, P.G.D.    |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
73526  | Pte.     | Leach, B.H.        | 24. 8.18 |     ----
24775  | Pte.     | Leary, R.G.        | 29. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
1679   | L/Cpl.   | Lee, C.            | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
63494  | Pte.     | Lee, H.S.          |  7. 9.18 |     ----
66501  | L/Cpl.   | Lee, J.            |  8. 9.18 |     ----
61744  | L/Cpl.   | Leverick, A.       | 28. 1.17 |     ----
3929   | L/Cpl.   | Lilley, S.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
3852   | L/Cpl.   | Line, G.E.         |  5.12.17 | Died of wounds.
93405  | Pte.     | Longstaff, A.      |  8.10.18 | Died of wounds.
62009  | Pte.     | Lonnen, H.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
10183  | Pte.     | Lupton, G.A.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
6818   | Pte.     | MacDonald, H.A.    | 20. 7.17 | Shown on list of dead.
229456 | L/Cpl.   | Macdonald, J.      | 24. 3.18 | Died of wounds.
1675   | Pte.     | MacFarlane, H.     | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
229377 | Pte.     | Macklin, R.        | 25. 3.18 | Shown on P. of W.
       |          |                    |          | list of dead.
61986  | Pte.     | Madden, E.         | 29. 4.17 |     ----
4528   | Pte.     | Main, R.M.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
699    | Pte.     | Mann, H.V.         | 14. 8.18 |     ----
55240  | Pte.     | Mansbridge, R.     | 17. 1.18 | Died from heart
       |          |                    |          | failure.
21247  | Pte.     | Mansfield, H.      | 30. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
93419  | Pte.     | March, J.D.        |  8.10.18 |     ----
46364  | Pte.     | Marks, J.T.        | 21. 7.17 | Died whilst P. of W.
4279   | L/Cpl.   | Marshall, W.E.     | 14.11.16 |     ----
15888  | Cpl.     | Martin, P.         |  3.12.17 |     ----
229463 | Pte.     | Matthew, J.        | 28.11.17 |     ----
26231  | Pte.     | Mayhew, C.K.       |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
69410  | Pte.     | Mayor, T.F.        | 23. 8.18 | Died of wounds.
100296 | Pte.     | McDonnell, F.      | 30. 9.18 |     ----
49276  | Pte.     | McGooch, J.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
1883   | Pte.     | McGlone, J.        | 25. 3.18 |     ----
27545  | Pte.     | Merricks, F.       |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
93398  | Pte.     | Metcalfe, J.       |  8. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
49778  | Pte.     | Mickleburgh, S.G.  | 17. 2.17 |     ----
61658  | Pte.     | Miller, G.V.       |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
73173  | L/Cpl.   | Miller, R.         |  8.10.18 |     ----
7701   | Pte.     | Milne, F.          | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
81336  | Pte.     | Minter, G.         |  8.10.18 |     ----
49386  | Pte.     | Moogen, W.L.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
3844   | Pte.     | Morris, F.         | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
6140   | L/Cpl.   | Morris, H.G.       | 23.12.17 | Died of wounds.
50280  | Pte.     | Morris, J.         | 29. 4.17 |     ----
449    | Pte.     | Morrison, A.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
73408  | Pte.     | Mortimer, T.W.     | 26. 8.18 | Died of gas wounds.
82329  | Pte.     | Mottershead, A.    | 31. 7.18 |     ----
9656   | Pte.     | Muir, T.J.         | 21. 7.18 | Died of wounds.
42286  | Pte.     | Musk, H.E.         | 10. 3.17 |     ----
93397  | Pte.     | Myers, C.H.        |  7. 9.18 |     ----
16967  | Pte.     | Myers, H.          | 20. 7.17 |     ----
6312   | Pte.     | Nash, A.E.         | 17. 4.17 |     ----
21620  | Pte.     | Neale, W.          |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
37362  | Pte.     | Neale, W.H.        | 27. 9.17 |     ----
82333  | Pte.     | Neame, R.S.        | 26. 6.18 | Died of wounds.
1815   | Pte.     | Neil, D.A.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
1645   | L/Cpl.   | Newman, R.G.       | 27. 5.17 |     ----
446    | Sgt.     | Newman, T.B.       | 16. 5.17 | Wounded in action
       |          |                    |          | 17.2.17. Trans. U.K.
       |          |                    |          | 1.3.17. Subsequently
       |          |                    |          | died of wounds
       |          |                    |          | Alexander Hosp.,
       |          |                    |          | Cosham, 16.5.17.
42287  | Pte.     | Niblett, C.H.      | 17. 2.17 |     ----
61747  | Pte.     | Nicholls, G.A.     | 15. 2.17 |     ----
8003   | Pte.     | Nicklin, S.S.      |  3. 5.17 |     ----
4387   | Pte.     | Norris, J.H.       |  1. 3.17 | Died of wounds.
7911   | Pte.     | Norton, E.A.       |  8.10.18 |     ----
78995  | Pte.     | Notley, F.         | 28. 8.18 | Died of wounds.
205976 | Pte.     | Noyes, A.A.        | 30. 9.18 |     ----
3380   | Pte.     | Mutt, G.           | 13.12.17 | Died of wounds.
15208  | L/Sgt.   | O'Connor, F.       | 20. 3.17 | Died of wounds.
50283  | L/Cpl.   | Olding, J.L.       | 21. 4.17 | Accidentally killed by
       |          |                    |          | collapsed dug-out at
       |          |                    |          | Rodincourt 21.4.17.
52159  | Pte.     | Oswick, W.C.       | 21. 2.17 | Died of wounds.
1718   | Sgt.     | Paddon, G.W.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
3902   | Pte.     | Parkin, W.         | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing, 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
61739  | Pte.     | Parsons, F.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
49288  | Sgt.     | Parsons, J.L.      | 23. 2.18 |     ----
88698  | Pte.     | Parsons, W.F.      |  5. 9.18 | Died of wounds.
87747  | Pte.     | Patmore, A.E.      |  1.10.18 | Killed (S. 1).
81349  | Pte.     | Pearson, T.B.      |  6.10.18 | Died of wounds.
48509  | Pte.     | Perkins, A.        |  2. 5.17 |     ----
90174  | L/Cpl.   | Perrins, W.        | 30. 9.18 |     ----
7507   | Pte.     | Petty, T.S.        | 18.11.18 | Died from influenza.
       |          |                    |          | (Exposure while on
       |          |                    |          | military duty.)
7384   | Pte.     | Pickles, J.H.      | 18.11.18 | Died from influenza.
       |          |                    |          | (Exposure while on
       |          |                    |          | military duty.)
6232   | Pte.     | Pilton, C.H.       | 31. 7.18 |     ----
42289  | Pte.     | Pink, W.G.         | 24. 2.17 | Died of wounds.
48706  | Cpl.     | Pittaway, T.       |23-24.3.18| Reported died whilst
       |          |                    |          | a P. of W.
10460  | Pte.     | Pollard, G.        | 14.11.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 14.11.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 14.11.16.
500    | L/Cpl.   | Pollard, W.A.      | 27. 7.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
1965   | Pte.     | Poplett, J.J.      | 21. 6.17 |     ----
79395  | Pte.     | Porter, S.         | 24. 8.18 |     ----
1414   | L/Cpl.   | Powell, W.F.       | 28. 1.17 |     ----
64043  | Pte.     | Powney, A.F.       | 25. 3.18 | Shown on P. of W. list
       |          |                    |          | of dead. Reported
       |          |                    |          | missing 25.3.18.
23332  | L/Cpl.   | Prangley, N.C.     | 17. 2.17 |     ----
15563  | Cpl.     | Prescott, J.       |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
245380 | Pte.     | Price, C.          | 17. 4.18 |     ----
204    | L/Sgt.   | Prior, F.          | 18. 2.17 |     ----
27204  | Pte.     | Pryke, B.J.        | 29. 4.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 29.4.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | as having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 29.4.17.
68772  | Pte.     | Quantrell, C.R.    | 30. 9.18 |     ----
1656   | Pte.     | Rait, D.           |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
53091  | Pte.     | Randall, H.A.      |  7. 9.18 |----
4030   | Pte.     | Ransley, W.J.      | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
2026   | Pte.     | Ravenhill, H.H.    | 10. 3.17 |     ----
442221 | Pte.     | Rawlings, A.       |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
42292  | Pte.     | Reynolds, C.       | 10. 3.17 |     ----
223    | Sgt.     | Rhodes, H.S.       |  3. 5.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 3.5.17. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
61652  | Pte.     | Rhodes, J.         | 22. 2.17 |     ----
68774  | Pte.     | Rich, C.           | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18. Shown on
       |          |                    |          | German P. of W. list
       |          |                    |          | of dead.
488    | L/Cpl.   | Riddell, M.        | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16
81143  | Pte.     | Rider, H.          | 11. 3.18 |     ----
82349  | Pte.     | Ridge, R.C.        |  8.10.18 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 8.10.18.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 8.10.18.
75394  | Pte.     | Ridgway, W.G.      |  9.10.18 | Died of wounds.
4525   | Pte.     | Righton, E.D.      | 14.11.16 |     ----
75645  | Pte.     | Riley, A.W.        | 24. 8.18 |     ----
1985   | Cpl.     | Robbins, A.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
10899  | Pte.     | Roberts, E.        | 30. 9.18 |     ----
4458   | L/Sgt.   | Roberts, H.        |  3. 5.17 |     ----
48078  | Pte.     | Roberts, J.A.      | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18. Shown on
       |          |                    |          | P. of W. list of
       |          |                    |          | dead.
71677  | Pte.     | Ray, W.A.          |  1. 4.18 |     ----
37794  | Pte.     | Rayner, A.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
8556   | Pte.     | Read, C.E.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
1716   | Pte.     | Read, E.S.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
48077  | Pte.     | Reed, M.R.         | 21. 6.17 |     ----
856    | Pte.     | Reeves, H.D.       |  3. 7.18 | To U.K. (Pleurisy.)
       |          |                    |          | Subsequently reported
       |          |                    |          | by W.O. as died of
       |          |                    |          | sickness on 3.7.18 at
       |          |                    |          | War Hospital,
       |          |                    |          | Whitechurch.
75643  | Pte.     | Roberts, W.        | 10. 6.18 |     ----
1471   | Cpl.     | Robertson, D.M.    | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 27.7.16.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
65829  | Pte.     | Robinson, R.       |   8.10.18| Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 8.10.18. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 8.10.18.
87457  | Pte.     | Rochford, H.J.     | 21. 8.18 |     ----
3940   | L/Cpl.   | Roots, C.C.        | 10. 5.17 | Died of wounds.
51853  | Pte.     | Roper, A.          | 13. 7.18 |     ----
12463  | L/Sgt.   | Rowley, E.G.       | 27. 7.17 | Wounded in action.
       |          |                    |          | Trans. to U.K.
       |          |                    |          | 25.7.17. Reported by
       |          |                    |          | W.O. having died of
       |          |                    |          | wds. Uni. War
       |          |                    |          | Hospital, Southampton.
1773   | Cpl.     | Rumsey, F.G.       | 29. 4.17 |     ----
32591  | Pte.     | Ryan, J.D.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
87275  | Pte.     | Sadrgove, L.S.     |  7. 9.18 |     ----
7685   | Pte.     | Samuels, J.G.      |  2. 8.18 |     ----
38690  | Pte.     | Sanders, E.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
52151  | Pte.     | Saunders, P.       | 20. 7.17 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | and wd. 20.7.17.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 20.7.17.
68456  | L/Cpl.   | Sanderson, R.      | 25. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 25.3.18. Shown on P.
       |          |                    |          | of W. list of dead
       |          |                    |          | as died 25.3.18.
228471 | Pte.     | Sang, W.H.         |  5. 3.16 | Died of wds. 48 C.C.S.
61727  | Pte.     | Savill, A.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
49308  | Pte.     | Sears, H.R.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
673    | Pte.     | Seaward, H.        | 23. 2.18 |     ----
68802  | Pte.     | Self, G.A.         |  3.12.17 |     ----
37482  | Pte.     | Sewell, C.S.       | 30. 4.17 | Died of wds. 30 C.C.S.
8143   | L/Cpl.   | Sexton, E.J.       |  2. 3.18 | Reported missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 2.3.18.
3379   | L/Cpl.   | Seymour, H.A.      | 19. 4.17 | Died whilst P. of W.
       |          |                    |          | Official German list
       |          |                    |          | forwarded.
8141   | Pte.     | Shackleton, S.H.   | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
75649  | Pte.     | Sheaf, R.W.        | 28. 6.18 | Died of wds. 28.6.18,
       |          |                    |          | 19 C.C.S.
10667  | Pte.     | Skelton, R.W.      | 30. 9.18 |     ----
1325   | Cpl.     | Shute, W.E.        |  7. 9.18 |     ----
4766   | Pte.     | Sibbles, O.        |  2. 5.18 | Died of wds. 2 W.G.
       |          |                    |          | Hosp., Manchester,
       |          |                    |          | England, 2.5.18.
4255   | Pte.     | Sidebottom, J.H.   | 27. 7.16 | Missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
5726   | Pte.     | Simmonds, J.       |  7. 9.18 |     ----
80079  | Pte.     | Simmonds, F.       | 30. 9.18 |     ----
1612   | Pte.     | Simpson, A.B.      | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
61959  | Pte.     | Sinnott, P.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
73430  | Pte.     | Skinner, J.H.      | 21. 7.18 |     ----
1335   | Pte.     | Slaughter, R.F.    | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
1080   | L/Cpl.   | Smith, A.H.        | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
46583  | Pte.     | Smith, F.          | 17. 2.17 |     ----
1981   | L/Cpl.   | Smith, F.J.        | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
1720   | Sgt.     | Smith, R.          | 17. 2.17 |     ----
7483   | L/Cpl.   | Smith, R.L.        | 24. 2.17 | Died of wds. 11 Stat.
       |          |                    |          | Hospital.
3720   | Pte.     | Smith, S.          | 14.11.16 | Missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 14.11.16.
75655  | Pte.     | Smith, W.F.        | 22. 6.18 |     ----
68993  | Pte.     | Soloman, F.        | 30. 9.18 | K'd in action or d.
       |          |                    |          | of wds. received in
       |          |                    |          | action on or shortly
       |          |                    |          | after 30.9.18.
75709  | Pte.     | Spark, G.          | 19. 4.18 |     ----
7624   | Pte.     | Spright, C.        | 19.11.18 | Died from influenza
       |          |                    |          | and exposure while
       |          |                    |          | on military duty.
51184  | Pte.     | Squirrel, E.C.     | 20. 2.17 | Died of wds. 10 Gen.
       |          |                    |          | Hospital 20.2.17.
48502  | Pte.     | Starnes, A.E.      | 28. 5.17 |     ----
61982  | Pte.     | Stephens, W.       | 15. 2.17 |     ----
1579   | L/Cpl.   | Stepney, --        |  3. 5.17 | Missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
229474 | Pte.     | Stewart, J.W.      | 28. 1.17 |     ----
715755 | L/Cpl.   | Stone, H.P.        | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
4402   | Pte.     | Stone, W.J.        | 13.11.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 13.11.16.
46024  | Pte.     | Styles, W.R.       | 30. 9.18 | Missing. Reported
       |          |                    |          | killed in action or
       |          |                    |          | died of wounds
       |          |                    |          | received in action on
       |          |                    |          | or shortly after
       |          |                    |          | 30.9.18.
68799  | Pte.     | Sutton, L.V.       | 23. 3.18 | Died of wounds 48
       |          |                    |          | C.C.S. 23.3.18.
1892   | Pte.     | Tapp, J.H.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
23059  | Pte.     | Tattersfield, A.   | 22. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 22.3.18. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 22.2.18.
61742  | Pte.     | Taylor, A.         | 15. 2.17 |     ----
1410   | Pte.     | Taylor, J.         | 27. 7.16 |     ----
80131  | Pte.     | Taylor, J.         | 24.10.18 |     ----
15866  | Pte.     | Terry, A.E.        | 23. 3.18 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 23.3.18. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 23.3.18.
75661  | Pte.     | Thexton, J.        | 22. 6.18 |     ----
46598  | Pte.     | Thomas, G.H.       | 13. 4.17 |     ----
1234   | L/Cpl.   | Thomson, W.        | 17. 2.17 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing 17.2.17.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 17.2.17.
3775   | L/Cpl.   | Thorburn, W.G.     | 17. 2.17 |     ----
47981  | Sgt.     | Thorning, S.       | 20. 5.18 | Died of wounds.
18569  | Sgt.     | Thornton, F.W.     |  3.12.17 |     ----
1979   | Pte.     | Timmis, J.         | 14.11.16 | Reported missing
       |          |                    |          | 14.11.16. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 14.11.16.
63138  | Pte.     | Tinley, A.J.       | 17. 2.17 |     ----
87289  | Pte.     | Tompkins, J.A.     |  8.10.18 |     ----
80071  | Pte.     | Turner, F.         | 30. 9.18 |     ----
3818   | Pte.     | Turner, H.         | 27. 7.16 | Reported wd. and
       |          |                    |          | missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
9151   | Pte.     | Turner, W.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
61743  | Pte.     | Ury, A.F.          | 26. 2.17 | Died of wounds.
75690  | Pte.     | Varley, J.W.       |  8.10.18 |     ----
71842  | Pte.     | Walker, E.         | 27. 7.16 | Missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 27.7.16.
37418  | Pte.     | Walker, F.J.A.     |  3. 5.17 | Missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
47826  | Pte.     | Walsh, J.          |  3. 5.17 | Missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
76747  | Pte.     | Walton, H.S.       | 23. 9.18 | Died of wounds 12
       |          |                    |          | General Hospital.
80781  | Pte.     | Walton, L.         | 24. 8.18 |     ----
21020  | Pte.     | Warwick, W.        | 25. 5.17 |     ----
20870  | Pte.     | Watking, R.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
61657  | Pte.     | Watts, C.D.        | 24. 2.17 | Died of wounds 45
       |          |                    |          | C.C.S. 24.2.17.
1934   | Pte.     | Watts, G.          | 23. 1.17 | Killed accidentally.
1765   | Pte.     | Weal, C.A.         |  5. 3.17 | Died of wounds 12
       |          |                    |          | Gen. Hosp. 5.3.17.
1401   | Pte.     | Webster, F.A.      | 23. 4.18 | Died of wounds 3
       |          |                    |          | C.C.S. 23.4.18.
51269  | Pte.     | Welch, J.W.        |  9. 5.17 | Died of wounds 24
       |          |                    |          | General Hospital.
61757  | Pte.     | Welch, P.D.        |  3. 5.17 |     ----
63075  | Pte.     | Welham, P.         | 17. 2.17 |     ----
1361   | Pte.     | West, E.J.         | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
201    | L/Cpl.   | West, F.           | 29.11.17 |     ----
4216   | L/Cpl.   | West, V.J.         | 27. 7.16 | Reported killed in
       |          |                    |          | action or died of
       |          |                    |          | wds. shortly after
       |          |                    |          | or on 27.7.16.
74860  | Pte.     | West, W.           |  8.10.18 |     ----
68624  | Pte.     | White, A.E.        | 25. 3.18 | Missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 25.3.18.
50193  | Pte.     | White, B.S.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
49479  | Pte.     | White, C.          |  3. 5.17 |     ----
62001  | Pte.     | White, J.          | 17. 2.17 |     ----
10620  | Pte.     | White, G.          | 17. 2.17 |     ----
63165  | Pte.     | Whitrick, J.       | 20. 4.17 | Died whilst a P. of W.
1496   | Pte.     | Wild, A.H.         | 14.11.16 | Missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 14.11.16.
1829   | Pte.     | Wilkinson, H.      | 17. 2.17 |     ----
52161  | Pte.     | Wilkinson, J.C.    | 17. 2.17 |     ----
1401   | Pte.     | Wilkinson, J.F.    | 17. 2.17 |     ----
73172  | Pte.     | Williamson, J.     | 31. 5.18 |     ----
5966   | Pte.     | Willott, H.        | 28. 1.17 |     ----
4209   | Pte.     | Wilson, A.         | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
245549 | Pte.     | Wilson, F.         | 18. 4.18 | Died at Adv. Dressing
       |          |                    |          | Station, 100 F.A.
69248  | Cpl.     | Wilson, F.W.       | 23. 3.18 | Shown on P. of W.
       |          |                    |          | list of dead. Regarded
       |          |                    |          | as having died
       |          |                    |          | 23.3.18.
186    | Sgt.     | Wingate, T.C.      | 23. 3.18 | Missing. Accepted as
       |          |                    |          | killed on 23.3.18.
4712   | L/Cpl.   | Witham, D.H.       | 27. 6.17 | Died of wds. 6 F.A.
8222   | Cpl.     | Wood, W.L.         |  1.11.18 | Died from influenza
       |          |                    |          | 59 C.C.S.
1886   | Sgt.     | Wood, W.F.         | 19. 4.18 |     ----
79400  | Pte.     | Woodier, F.        | 24. 8.18 |     ----
61920  | Pte.     | Woods, H.H.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
68823  | Pte.     | Woolsey, W.        | 30. 9.18 | Killed in action or
       |          |                    |          | died of wounds.
229005 | Pte.     | Worsnop, H.        |  8.10.18 | Killed in action or
       |          |                    |          | died of wounds
       |          |                    |          | received in action on
       |          |                    |          | or shortly after
       |          |                    |          | 8.10.18.
2095   | Cpl.     | Wright, G.H.       |  3. 5.17 | Missing. Regarded as
       |          |                    |          | having died on or
       |          |                    |          | since 3.5.17.
4380   | Pte.     | Wright, J.         | 27. 7.16 | Wd. and missing.
       |          |                    |          | Regarded as having
       |          |                    |          | died on or since
       |          |                    |          | 27.7.16.
68825  | Pte.     | Wyatt, A.C.        | 25. 3.18 |     ----
7350   | L/Cpl.   | Young, C.W.        | 17. 2.17 |     ----
48101  | L/Cpl.   | Young, F.          | 30.11.17 |     ----
-------+----------+--------------------+----------+-----------------------




THE NOMINAL ROLL

NAMES AND NUMBERS OF THE ORIGINAL MEMBERS OF THE BATTALION WHO JOINED
EITHER AT THE HOTEL CECIL, LONDON, OR AT HORNCHURCH, ESSEX


[NOTE.--It is regretted it has not proved practicable to compile a
roll of all the officers, N.C.O's., and men who have served at any
time in the 23rd Royal Fusiliers.]




THE NOMINAL ROLL


Colonel Viscount Maitland.              2nd Lieut. A.G. Rees.
Lieut.-Col. A. St. H. Gibbons.          2nd Lieut. F.H. Brown.
Major G.H.H. Richey.                    2nd Lieut. A.J. Barr.
Capt. W.A. Powell.                      2nd Lieut. Hon. B. Yorke.
Capt. P. Suckling.                      2nd Lieut. F.E. Pearson.
Capt. N.A.L. Cockell.                   2nd Lieut. L.E. Eeman.
Capt. E. Cragg.                         2nd Lieut. R.O. Jourdain.
Capt. Stanley Holmes.                   2nd Lieut. N.A.L. Way.
Capt. H.J.H. Inglis.                    2nd Lieut. E.V. Hine.
Capt. B.A. de Bourbel.                  2nd Lieut. J.C. Fenton.
Capt. H.E.F. Richardson.                2nd Lieut. N. Firth.
Capt. H.V.C. Pirie.                     2nd Lieut. C.B. Hayward.
Lieut.-Quar. R. de Vere Stacpoole.      2nd Lieut. G.R. Nicolaus.
Lieut. H.V. Foy.                        2nd Lieut. W.J. Stevenson.
Lieut. R.N. Sealey.                     2nd Lieut. D. Godlonton.
Lieut. P.V. Hayes.                      2nd Lieut. C.R. Little.
Lieut. H.A. Taylor.                     2nd Lieut. R.M. Ritchie.
Lieut. E.E. Isaac, R.A.M.C.             2nd Lieut. N.R. Crum-Ewing.
Lieut. E.A. Winter.                     2nd Lieut. C.A. Moore.
Lieut. E.J. Cross.                      2nd Lieut. D. Rattray.
Lieut. Hon. A. Yorke.                   2nd Lieut. L.H. Colman.
Lieut. R.C. Hillcoat.                   2nd Lieut. R.B. Marriott.
Lieut. J.P. Roberts.                    2nd Lieut. L.H. Bayley.
2nd Lieut. F.H. Cox.                    2nd Lieut. R.O. Crookes.
2nd Lieut. G. Dixon-Spain.              2nd Lieut. F.G. Bull.
2nd Lieut. W.A. Rutherford.             2nd Lieut. Owen H. Williams.
2nd Lieut. J.J. Cameron.                2nd Lieut. N. Worship.
2nd Lieut. P.H. Cooper.                 2nd Lieut. R.H. Gregg.
2nd Lieut. A.C. Hobson.                 2nd Lieut. M. Fraser.
2nd Lieut. N.A. Lewis.                  2nd Lieut. E.G. Hayes.
2nd Lieut. A.J.H. Kennedy.              2nd Lieut. A.A. Humfrey.
2nd Lieut. E.F.H. Taylor.               2nd Lieut. F.S. Meeks.
2nd Lieut. G.C. Lovibond.               2nd Lieut. C.W. Burgess.
                                        2nd Lieut. P.A. Williams.


       *       *       *       *       *


   1 Mitchell, E.C.                   |    9 Devereux, L.
   2 Hyams, J.                        |   10 Kay, C.
   3 Drysdale, S.A.                   |   11 Taylor, J.H.
   4 Roberts, G.P.                    |   12 Dunn, C.H.
   5 Garnett, P.C.                    |   13 Preece, T.C.
   6 Wharton, A.S.                    |   14 Colston, F.J.
   7 Holloway, W.S.                   |   15 Bangs, E.R.
   8 Foy, H.V.                        |   16 Headland, W.
                                  ----+----
  17 Pennington, S.C.                 |   68 Thomas, J.L.
  18 Webb, A.S.                       |   69 De Burgh Thomas, A.
  19 Cobb, A.                         |   70 Lockwood, E.H.A.
  20 Andrews, W.R.                    |   71 Hackworth, H.J.
  21 Kendall, J.M.                    |   72 Jupp, G.E.
  22 Smith, S.                        |   73 Nicholl, E.B.
  23 Andrews, P.A.                    |   74 Logan, C.
  24 Drake, J.                        |   75 Rogers, V.H.
  25 Jefferson, J.                    |   76 Hayhoe, W.H.
  26 Stagg, E.                        |   77 Tudor, H.O.
  27 MacLarty, B.                     |   78 Bovill, F.H.
  28 Cadman, K.                       |   79 Hayward, C.A.
  29 Mussard, C.                      |   80 Mattingly, S.W.
  30 Ward, H.E.                       |   81 May, H.R.
  31 Lort, V.P.                       |   82 Wheildon, F.
  32 Ayres, H.S.                      |   83 Pledge, G.T.
  33 Haines, C.E.                     |   84 Payne, H.A.
  34 Phelps, J.                       |   85 Denton, C.
  35 Maynard, B.T.                    |   86 Keevil, C.H.
  36 Howe, D.H.                       |   87 Forrester, C.
  37 Wallis, W.T.                     |   88 Hawtrey, G.H.C.
  38 Sheffield, E.C.                  |   89 Green, H.
  39 Perkins, W.G.                    |   90 Bradfield, B.W.
  40 Townshend, W.S.                  |   91 Bridger, J.B.
  41 Sawden, W.W.                     |   92 Martin, C.W.
  42 Henderson, D.                    |   93 Hardee, F.
  43 Worthington, S.                  |   94 Moir, H.A.
  44 Scovell, T.S.                    |   95 Hodgkinson, A.H.
  45 Waters, F.                       |   96 Clarke, F.W.
  46 Dowsett, A.                      |   97 Barton, M.D.
  47 Aylward, C.B.                    |   98 Bellamy, B.D.
  48 Crum-Ewing, N.R.                 |   99 Anderson, W.C.
  49 De Grehl, F.S.C.                 |  100 Wedeymeyer, P.E.
  50 Leveson, W.C.                    |  101 McNeill, J.
  51 Curle, J.H.                      |  102 Halford, A.
  52 Wylie, R.E.                      |  103 Harvey, A.G.
  53 Hawkins, W.A.                    |  104 Nash, C.H.
  54 Farwell, C.W.                    |  105 Hopkins, J.C.
  55 Stone, H.P.                      |  106 Bacchus, W.A.
  56 Sullivan, E.                     |  107 Watson, C.
  57 Wood, M.                         |  108 Steele, F.J.
  58 Hepner, H.                       |  109 Bamford, E.
  59 Norman, J.C.                     |  110 Timperley, T.L.
  60 Smith, F.S.L.                    |  111 Thunder, M.P.
  61 Fraser, W.G.                     |  112 Wadham, H.F.
  62 Glendinning, G.G.                |  113 Makeham, E.
  63 Edouin, F.                       |  114 Aston, W.F.
  64 Watts, J.G.D.                    |  115 Albany, W.
  65 Dodman, A.W.J.                   |  116 Barff, W.H.
  66 Ropner, W.                       |  117 Wickens, E.T.
  67 Crabb, L.F.J.                    |  118 Guy, C.H.
                                  ----+----
 119 Lawes, A.E.                      |  170 Lewis, S.R.
 120 Benjamin, N.H.                   |  171 Moncrieff, J.B.
 121 Storey, T.H.                     |  172 Felton, A.H.
 122 Sharland, L.J.                   |  173 Burch, V.G.
 123 Shotton, J.S.                    |  174 Wilson, T.
 124 Chester, J.                      |  175 Rees, A.W.
 125 Troup, C.L.                      |  176 Wilkinson, D.S.
 126 Carew, H.F.                      |  177 McGregor, J.M.
 127 Medland, S.C.                    |  178 Terry, F.W.
 128 Lavarack, F.S.                   |  179 Bramley-Moore, A.
 129 Lavarack, A.W.                   |  180 Hadden, H.L.
 130 Denton, A.W.                     |  181 Muller, C.J.
 131 Houlden, J.W.F.                  |  182 Guntrip, E.
 132 Millen, A.                       |  183 Webber, A.E.
 133 Campbell-Colquhoun, A.C.         |  184 Cordery, G.D.
 134 Cooper, W.P.                     |  185 Heathorn, A.T.
 135 Hine, E.V.                       |  186 Wingate, T.C.
 136 Fordham, W.H.                    |  187 Field, C.W.
 137 Fordham, S.H.                    |  188 Crowhurst, T.O.
 138 Picken, P.W.                     |  189 Boote, E.R.
 139 Pinniger, W.L.                   |  190 Wallace, W.J.
 140 Robinson, T.H.                   |  191 Allen, A.L.
 141 Lyster, H.N.                     |  192 Page, H.
 142 Leuw, H.S.                       |  193 Oliver, H.J.
 143 Burmingham, S.H.                 |  194 Oxberry, H.
 144 Price, R.P.                      |  195 Reeves, H.E.
 145 Piachaud, G.                     |  196 Cook, H.
 146 Atkinson, W.                     |  197 Evans, R.
 147 Meeks, F.S.                      |  198 Peddar, E.A.
 148 Smith, R.                        |  199 Haine, L.G.
 149 Henri, P.R.                      |  200 Elphicke, B.
 150 Melbourne, S.W.                  |  201 West, T.
 151 Finch, M.S.                      |  202 Lovibond, G.C.
 152 Essex, P.C.                      |  203 Ellis, T.
 153 Head, P.T.                       |  204 Hooper, H.J.
 154 Marquardt, --                    |  205 McLeod, W.C.
 155 Hayward, E.                      |  206 McGregor, W.
 156 Robert, C.L.                     |  207 Purnell, J.J.
 157 Archbold, T.E.                   |  208 Rose, G.C.
 158 Buxton, F.C.                     |  209 Hooper, W.
 159 Rose, E.M.                       |  210 Waldron, E.A.
 160 Goodchild, A.E.                  |  211 Evans, J.H.
 161 Davison, J.                      |  212 Ramsden, H.C.
 162 Farquhar, J.E.M.                 |  213 De Jesse, R.
 163 Pope, E.W.                       |  214 Garner, H.W.
 164 Barker-Mill, W.C.F.V.            |  215 Batton, W.B.
 165 Woollett, C.                     |  216 Devitt, E.L.
 166 Hobson, A.C.                     |  217 Whitewright, W.A.
 167 Murray, H.F.U.T.                 |  218 Bannatyne, D.
 168 Smith, A.C.                      |  219 Hopper, T.
 169 Morton, F.                       |  220 Metcalfe, H.M.
                                  ----+----
 221 Brydon, C.J.B.                   |  272 Brown, B.
 222 Scott, H.P.                      |  273 Bewick, J.L.
 223 Rhodes, H.S.                     |  274 Jackson, G.
 224 Emery, H.D.                      |  275 Lewis, R.
 225 Huntley, E.                      |  276 Cockell, N.A.L.
 226 Darwall, J.R.                    |  277 Chick, W.D.
 227 Duncan, W.L.                     |  278 Starkey, W.E.
 228 Powell, A.                       |  279 Hemmerde, T.W.
 229 Thornber, G.R.                   |  280 Eeman, L.E.
 230 Cave, H.J.                       |  281 Morgan, J.W.R.
 231 Hignett, S.F.                    |  282 Sikes, B.H.
 232 Ward, L.                         |  283 Pierce, P.B.
 233 Holden, G.Y.                     |  284 Gardner, A.E.
 234 Barrett, J.H.                    |  285 Gordon, G.R.
 235 Woodin, W.G.                     |  286 Ewan, F.W.
 236 Watts, H.                        |  287 Donovan, E.L.
 237 Littlewort, H.C.                 |  288 Goodard, W.D.
 238 Harris, H.I.                     |  289 Heinemann, A.B.
 239 Dalyrimple, D.W.                 |  290 Lowcock, D.R.
 240 Wilson, J.A.G.                   |  291 Morgan, J.D.
 241 Richardson, H.                   |  292 Jourdain, R.O.
 242 Driver, G.D.                     |  293 Nash, V.E.
 243 Wills, C.G.                      |  294 Moore, H.
 244 Salveson, G.                     |  295 Bragg, V.
 245 Day, B.                          |  296 Oliver, T.L.
 246 Norton, C.A.                     |  297 Barber, H.
 247 Shammon, H.A.                    |  298 Moon-Ord, G.C.
 248 Prentice, G.D.                   |  299 Woodin, J.B.
 249 Haslam, E.S.                     |  300 Franey, G.T.
 250 Wright, G.F.E.                   |  301 Neal, L.A.
 251 Richards, R.                     |  302 Franey, S.H.
 252 Christie, F.                     |  303 Ovenell, R.
 253 Mackie, E.D.                     |  304 Moxon, F.
 254 Hepworth, N.                     |  305 Rogers, F.J.C.
 255 Wright, I.F.H.                   |  306 Reeves, C.R.
 256 Darlington, F.L.                 |  307 Harwood, G.
 257 Brookes, C.B.                    |  308 O'Shea, S.H.W.
 258 Taylor, R.J.                     |  309 Train, H.
 259 Watts, E.M.                      |  310 Haskew, F.J.T.
 260 Forrest, A.H.W.                  |  311 Newitt, L.D.
 261 Williams, L.                     |  312 Jervis, W.F.
 262 Tireman, G.W.                    |  313 Leigh, H.E.
 263 Davey, H.B.                      |  314 Leigh, Harold.
 264 Brookshank, P.                   |  315 Fenton, D.
 265 Curran, W.                       |  316 Garratt, E.V.
 266 Dobbin, W.                       |  317 Down, T.M.
 267 Taylor, W.E.                     |  318 Whitehead, A.E.
 268 Walker, A.W.                     |  319 Lafern, L.
 269 Pilkington, F.                   |  320 Allcroft, W.L.
 270 White, A.U.                      |  321 Prout, H.J.
 271 Firth, N.                        |  322 Parry, J.
                                  ----+----
 323 Read, F.W.                       |  374 Morris, T.C.
 324 Scott, R.C.                      |  375 Royston, E.
 325 Dalrymple, H.                    |  376 Lewis, G.S.
 326 Lee, L.S.                        |  377 Ewart, M.
 327 Lawford, A.R.M.                  |  378 Harris, F.G.
 328 Ritson, B.                       |  379 Bayley, L.H.
 329 Leuty, C.L.                      |  380 Franks, G.A.
 330 Smith, S.                        |  381 Walker, H.
 331 McArdell, H.                     |  382 Tattersall, R.R.
 332 Pearson, B. Hyde-                |  383 Simpson, V.J.
 333 Barr, A.J.                       |  384 Greening, E.L.
 334 Deacon, V.F.                     |  385 Harper, W.G.
 335 Rawling, L.J.                    |  386 Veacock, S.J.
 336 Ash, P.C.                        |  387 Mehta, J.R.
 337 Appleton, R.                     |  388 Cox, J.H.S.
 338 Jones, A.E.                      |  389 Sheffield, E.H.
 339 Oliver, E.                       |  390 Crozier, F.D.
 340 Smith, H.T.                      |  391 Bright, M.
 341 Kemp, F.                         |  392 Davidson, T.G.
 342 Sandham, A.                      |  393 Neville, N.J.C.
 343 Parks, H.                        |  394 Marsden, E.L.
 344 Stanning, J.E.                   |  395 Freer, C.C.
 345 Thompson, A.G.                   |  396 Beard, B.F.
 346 Thornley, E.P.                   |  397 Baillon, G.W.
 347 Hayes, E.G.                      |  398 Bradley, E.
 348 Hendren, J.M.                    |  399 Gabriel, A.
 349 Maw, F.D.                        |  400 Hill, J.A.
 350 Tomkins, F.O.                    |  401 Campbell, D.
 351 Clark, A.E.                      |  402 Fowler, F.
 352 Hitch, J.W.                      |  403 Rogers, W.C.
 353 Little, C.R.                     |  404 Yorke, B.E.
 354 Smith, F.E.                      |  405 Yorke, A.
 355 Beeson, W.V.                     |  406 Gibbons, W.
 356 Ringe, F.C.                      |  407 Barker, G.
 357 Payne, E.A.                      |  408 Richards, H.B.
 358 Brownrigg, A.H.                  |  409 Michie, A.
 359 Lowis, G.V.                      |  410 Webb, R.C.
 360 Persee, J.D.                     |  411 Hopkins, A.A.
 361 Taylor, L.E.                     |  412 Borwick, A.
 362 Vernon, B.T.                     |  413 Phillips, A.E.
 363 Ellis, J. St. John G.            |  414 Heron, W.H.
 364 Wright, R.                       |  415 Baker, H.C.
 365 Turnbull, J.M.                   |  416 Blevins, F.
 366 Lennep, E.V.                     |  417 Norton, W.C.
 367 Foster, W.                       |  418 Culverhouse, R.
 368 Beard, R.T.                      |  419 Streeter, A.
 369 Wyllie, J.A.                     |  420 Bolton, E.T.
 370 Williams, J.J.                   |  421 Wilson, D.
 371 Bailey, A.C.                     |  422 Yates, J.
 372 Hayes, P.V.                      |  423 Hill, W.
 373 Twaits, C.H.                     |  424 McCullum, A.
                                  ----+----
 425 Knight, F.B.                     |  476 Chilmaid, F.W.
 426 Palliser, A.J.B.                 |  477 Mouat, W.
 427 Walker, S.                       |  478 Farr, J.P.
 428 Times, J.W.                      |  479 Larter, A.C.
 429 Cooper, V.A.                     |  480 Harding, C.
 430 Turner, R.N.                     |  481 MacDonnell, E.R.
 431 Crowe, J.T.                      |  482 Defries, H.
 432 Goodhue, F.W.J.                  |  483 D'Oyley, R.
 433 Boys, S.G.                       |  484 Fulljames, T.
 434 Mitchell, W.                     |  485 Thomas, C.
 435 Higgins, D.                      |  486 Goodman, J.B.
 436 Harris, F.                       |  487 Jagger, J.J.
 437 Rowley, H.B.                     |  488 Walton, E.W.
 438 Peters, W.A.                     |  489 Clay, F.S.
 439 Fraser, P. Neil.                 |  490 Bradshaw, J.A.
 440 Rigby, R.L.                      |  491 King, P.E.
 441 Stapleton, G.F.                  |  492 Edwards, J.T.
 442 Chivers, H.                      |  493 Lewis, G.H.
 443 Harrison, J.P.                   |  494 Schofield, J.
 444 Wraith, H.D.                     |  495 Holiday, A.S.
 445 Mallorie, T.P.                   |  496 Bull, F.G.
 446 Newman, T.B.                     |  497 Ballard, J.J.
 447 Crust, J.A.                      |  498 Allan, J.T.
 448 Clark, T.R.                      |  499 Rowell, A.J.
 449 Morrison, A.                     |  500 Pollard, W.A.
 450 Leach, A.                        |  501 Whitelaw, W.H.
 451 Burton, H.                       |  502 Miller, J. McL.
 452 Wylde, T.E.                      |  503 Tringham, H.G.
 453 Warter, H.D.W.T.                 |  504 Hedger, C.A.
 454 Woodward, H.W.                   |  505 Stockting, C.
 455 Hayne, R.                        |  506 Clark, A.
 456 Saxon, F.                        |  507 Guntrip, F.A.W.
 457 Broughton, J.                    |  508 Sanderson, A.
 458 Meadows, W.                      |  509 Lillington, F.J.S.
 459 Norwood, A.                      |  510 Larking, A.G.
 460 Fraser, G.A.                     |  511 Cullen, G.
 461 Field, T.                        |  512 Spurway, G.V.
 462 Cadman, E.J.                     |  513 Evans, G.L.B.
 463 Goodall, A.H.                    |  514 Pearson, F.J.
 464 Beedle, W.H.                     |  515 Featherstonehaugh, C.F.C.
 465 Richardson, W.F.                 |  516 Jones, A.A.
 466 Murray, D.                       |  517 Dixon-Spain, G.
 467 Biggs, A.J.                      |  518 Osborne, E.
 468 Butler, B.D.                     |  519 Collins, H.E.C.
 469 Wellings, C.H.                   |  520 Clemetson, D.L.
 470 Harrison, A.E.                   |  521 Wellings, G.B.
 471 Baines, H.P.B.                   |  522 Walker, S.
 472 Walton, J.C.                     |  523 Beeching, R.
 473 Pippet, A.C.                     |  524 Averill, H.C.
 474 Birch, R.C.                      |  525 Bruce, A.G.C.
 475 Bentley, J.                      |  526 Price, F.
                                  ----+----
 527 Rushworth, J.A.                  |  578 Godlonton, D.
 528 Gandy, W.H.                      |  579 Jackson, W.
 529 Slaughter, A.E.                  |  580 Hickling, H.
 530 Clapham, J.P.                    |  581 Batt, F.J.
 531 Gason, R.                        |  582 Kirby, L.
 532 Webb, H.G.                       |  583 Griffiths, J.W.
 533 Lewis, M.                        |  584 Taylor, W.
 534 Rainbow, F.                      |  585 Thomas, A.A.
 535 Hilliar, E.J.M.                  |  586 Pearson, J.
 536 Fatt, C.F.                       |  587 Walton, W.A.
 537 Lewis, J.D.                      |  588 Eynon, L.
 538 Cooper, P.H.                     |  589 Davies, W.
 539 Broadribb, E.A.                  |  590 Gregg, R.H.
 540 Hertford, H.                     |  591 Hemmant, J.W.
 541 Haigh, J.J.                      |  592 Tooze, H.J.M.
 542 Pearce, R.                       |  593 Robinson, A.
 543 Leith, F.W.                      |  594 Hodgkins, H.
 544 Cooke, J.E.M.                    |  595 Taylor, T.
 545 Caulfield, G.B.                  |  596 Butler, J.F.
 546 Grant, J.L.G.                    |  597 Bray, E.P.
 547 Harvey, E.N.B.                   |  598 Williams, F.T.
 548 Perham, H.H.                     |  599 Cheshire, J.H.C.
 549 Mole, S.P.                       |  600 Holder, H.J.
 550 Morris, S.D.                     |  601 Marchant, C.T.
 551 Statham, B.C.J.H.                |  602 Pinkney, W.
 552 Penfold, C.                      |  603 Mundy, H.G.
 553 Wood, C.                         |  604 King-Webster, H.C.
 554 Hammond, W.S.L.                  |  605 Brown, O.S.
 555 Barrington, G.                   |  606 Bevan, T.
 556 Evans, H.C.                      |  607 Moore, C.A.
 557 Pratt, E.E.                      |  608 George, F.H.
 558 Wyse, J.                         |  609 Anderson, J.W.
 559 Thompson, E.                     |  610 Bland, E.L.
 560 Davies, M.                       |  611 Seabrook, W.G.
 561 D'Aeth, E.H.H.                   |  612 Healey, M.J.
 562 Hemingway, P.C.                  |  613 Love, C.J.
 563 Rivers, H.S.                     |  614 Mackie, A.H.
 564 Harding, J.T.                    |  615 Turton, E.
 565 Blake, L.L.                      |  616 Hall, C.A.
 566 Collier, F.                      |  617 Rumley, G.H.
 567 Wood, E.G.                       |  618 Bandy, A.G.
 568 Lawrence, W.F.                   |  619 Catley, C.K.
 569 White, W.H.                      |  620 Bleuchamp, E.J.
 570 Thomson, W.D.                    |  621 Branson, C.F.
 571 Atty, W.R.                       |  622 Bolton, W.S.
 572 Jones, D.G.J.                    |  623 Butler, H.E.
 573 Crippin, G.H.                    |  624 Brown, F.H.
 574 Goode, E. St. John.              |  625 Cunningham, T.L.
 575 Gunning, H.M.                    |  626 Berridge, J.
 576 Cragg, E.                        |  627 Connolly, J.A.
 577 Balme, F.N.                      |  628 Davies, B.E.
                                  ----+----
 629 Oglethorpe, C.O.                 |  680 Sennett, N.S.
 630 Bishop, F.C.                     |  681 Smith, J.M.
 631 Chambers, H.M.                   |  682 Sandland, G.
 632 Hicks, A.C.D.                    |  683 Gurney, T.H.
 633 Canton, C.F.                     |  684 Kirby, F.J.
 634 Toogood, A.H.                    |  685 Heffill, A.S.
 635 Nicolaus, G.R.                   |  686 Jacobs, I.
 636 Clark, C.E.                      |  687 Penfold, R.F.
 637 Flynn, M.F.                      |  688 Reynolds, A.
 638 Tozer, A.E.                      |  689 Worship, N.
 639 James, F.                        |  690 Dod, W.
 640 Donoghue, O.                     |  691 Reynolds, S.
 641 Collin, L.F.                     |  692 Lee, A.C.
 642 Rodwell, A.E.T.                  |  693 Plaistowe, E.
 643 Cannon, F.                       |  694 Ronaldson, C.R.
 644 Marriott, R.B.                   |  695 Brodrick, H.
 645 Stacey, C.R.W.                   |  696 Allen, H.E.
 646 Bowles, W.A.                     |  697 Pond, G.
 647 Smiddy, J.G.                     |  698 Barnes, L.H.
 648 Barclay, J.L.                    |  699 Woodthorpe, W.E.
 649 Harvey, W.J.                     |  700 Pine-Coffin, R.
 650 Roach, L.V.                      |  701 Miller, A.C.
 651 Usborne, E.F.                    |  702 Hopkins, H.
 652 Ancell, M.                       |  703 Hopkins, H.W.
 653 Finucanne, P.                    |  704 Humphreys, --
 654 Smeaton, J.H.                    |  705 Richards, H.J.
 655 Wailes, J.M.                     |  706 Bristow, S.R.
 656 Munyard, F.W.                    |  707 Lawton, J.W.S.
 657 Fairweather, J.                  |  708 Nutter, W.G.
 658 Wrixon, R.M.                     |  709 Tracy, P.J.
 659 Maguire, C.                      |  710 Nicholson, J.M.
 660 Wrottesley, W.D.                 |  711 Wright, Pte.
 661 Knight, H.E.                     |  712 Vyvyan, S.
 662 Ward, F.W.                       |  713 Berman, S.S.
 663 Brambley, H.J.                   |  714 Samson, A.W.
 664 Lownds, E.H.                     |  715 Junkison, S.
 665 Vickers, H.                      |  716 Coyne, E.J.
 666 Durham, J.M.B.                   |  717 Rice, W.E.
 667 Maulton, W.T.                    |  718 Ryan, G.E.
 668 Lake, F.S.                       |  719 Ramsey, N.
 669 Gedge, C.B.                      |  720 Gottwaltz-Burkett, B.
 670 Topham, J.W.                     |  721 Summers, H.
 671 Cox, F.H.                        |  722 Rundall, W.H.
 672 Hayward, C.B.                    |  723 Reeves, D.H.
 673 Firth, A.T.                      |  724 Edwards, F.J.
 674 William, R.W.                    |  725 Seymour, T.
 675 Hankin, G.H.                     |  726 Ablett, E.V.W.
 676 Parker, W.G.                     |  727 Fletcher, J.
 677 Battishill, J.H.                 |  728 Evans, F.L.
 678 Barlow, F.C.                     |  729 Dell, J.
 679 Colman, L.H.                     |  730 Hill, H.W.
                                  ----+----
 731 Diggs, W.L.C.                    |  782 Jones, J.L.
 732 West, T.J.                       |  783 Thorne, C.
 733 Meiggs, J.C.                     |  784 Lewis, N.A.
 734 Gibson, C.S.                     |  785 Mercer, J.
 735 Traynor, H.J.                    |  786 Folliott, L.
 736 Tolhurst, W.                     |  787 Flemyng, M.C.
 737 Linton, C.H.                     |  788 Armstrong, W.B.
 738 Stearns, H.                      |  789 Jennings, T.
 739 Topps, H.                        |  790 Browning, P.R.
 740 Smith, J.                        |  791 Hurst, S.G.
 741 Doyle, J.E.                      |  792 Burt, T.M.
 742 Stilwell, C.R.                   |  793 Nowling, E.R.
 743 Gladwin, T.                      |  794 Mills, H.O.
 744 Little, H.J.E.                   |  795 Bullock, P.M.G.
 745 Corbett, G.B.                    |  796 Christophers, G.C.
 746 Rowland, C.A.                    |  797 Longman, P.B.
 747 Stewart, C.                      |  798 Shearn, F.W.
 748 Fookes, A.C.                     |  799 James, H.J.
 749 Challenger, H.W.                 |  800 Gracewood, G.M.
 750 Webb, A.E.                       |  801 Blaauw, H.T.G.
 751 Westoby, C.F.                    |  802 Tanner, F.W.
 752 Bamkin, G.R.                     |  803 Perry, F.
 753 Hilson, A.E.                     |  804 Davis, W.M.
 754 Lynham, H.                       |  805 Hodges, W.J.
 755 Castle, G.P.                     |  806 Ewing, G.
 756 Ross, I.                         |  807 Perry, O.
 757 Way, H.A.L.                      |  808 Wright, M.J.
 758 Crundall, T.B.                   |  809 Austin, L.
 759 Eager, H.                        |  810 Lomas, G.H.
 760 Fenton, H.B.                     |  811 Shepperson, B.E.
 761 Taylor, E.F.H.                   |  812 Burditt, H.
 762 Ford, A.S.                       |  813 Wilson, W.C.F.
 763 Armstrong, S.                    |  814 Hadley, E.J.
 764 Reynolds, P.                     |  815 Collen, R.
 765 Dowker, F.H.                     |  816 Tully, W.C.
 766 Donahoo, M.G.                    |  817 Arnold, S.E.
 767 Dewar, D.D.                      |  818 Day, N.G.F.
 768 Watson, J.L.                     |  819 Jacobs, E.
 769 Harrison, G.                     |  820 Vernell, G.
 770 Butler, H.J.                     |  821 Clarke, L.
 771 Paton, J.                        |  822 Craven, J.
 772 Everatt, W.T.                    |  823 Winchcombe, F.
 773 Madgwick, F.C.                   |  824 Larner, D.H.
 774 Beckingsale, B.L.                |  825 Wylie, J.H.
 775 Hope, W.H.                       |  826 Brown, R.
 776 Miller, D.                       |  827 Rushforth, E.G.
 777 Humfrey, A.A.                    |  828 Bowman, H.
 778 Whalin, J.E.                     |  829 James, M.E.C.
 779 Carey, H.V.S.                    |  830 Almond, G.
 780 Faunch, T.S.                     |  831 Bucknal, B.E.
 781 Stockings, G.M.                  |  832 Thompson, P.
                                  ----+----
 833 Reynolds, T.                     |  884 Blunden, F.
 834 Brett, C.G.                      |  885 Alexander, A.P.
 835 Warner, D.R.                     |  886 Powney, F.
 836 Gaskell, C.E.                    |  887 Mance, H.G.
 837 Heal, W.G.                       |  888 Mason, J.H.
 838 Williams, R.S.                   |  889 Weekes, M.G.
 839 Dallow, C.B.                     |  890 MacMahon, P.H.
 840 West, W.C.                       |  891 McRedmond, R.J.
 841 Todd, P.G.                       |  892 Cole, T.
 842 Austin, R.E.                     |  893 Winter, E.A.
 843 Ward, J.S.                       |  894 Bretherton, W.
 844 Caris, S.                        |  895 Dunn, A.E.
 845 Lyons, J.L.                      |  896 Tannett, G.
 846 Gardner, A.F.                    |  897 Hall, T.
 847 Dale, R.P.                       |  898 Balkwill, R.
 848 Lane, R.                         |  899 Gilmour, H.H.
 849 Garnett, H.D.                    |  900 Waterman, W.H.
 850 Bufton, J.                       |  901 Young, M.C.
 851 Parkinson, J.                    |  902 Whitlock, A.E.
 852 Eccles, H.                       |  903 Temple, H.
 853 Brown, W.                        |  904 Kemp, E.S.
 854 Bates, G.                        |  905 Vaughan-Williams, B.G.
 855 Bennett, E.                      |  906 Williams, M.L.
 856 Diamond, J.A.                    |  907 Simpson, A.
 857 Welford, F.                      |  908 Dean, J.G.
 858 Shayler, J.H.                    |  909 Doux, C.A. Le.
 859 Davies, J.                       |  910 Stobbs, S.
 860 Waining, F.J.                    |  911 Simms, J.
 861 Doyle, J.J.                      |  912 Kingsmill, G.
 862 Roberts. J.                      |  913 Fraser, L.
 863 Duffy, T.                        |  914 Turner, E.G.W.
 864 Bee, J.                          |  915 Johnson, C.A.
 865 Seaman, W.D.                     |  916 Roche, P.
 866 Robins, I.J.                     |  917 Cufie, W.
 867 Burns, T.                        |  918 Franklin, J.
 868 Drew, C.                         |  919 Bates, W.E.
 869 Race, S.                         |  920 Backhouse, J.S.
 870 Young, J.W.L.                    |  921 Kendall, R.
 871 Cunneen, E.                      |  922 Carter, R.J.
 872 Beverley, J.S.                   |  923 Noyes, R.T.
 873 McIntyre, A.                     |  924 Knapp, F.G.
 874 Mortimore, R.J.                  |  925 Dolby, G.E.
 875 Joyce, R.                        |  926 Christie, W.T.
 876 Lloyd, H.T.                      |  927 Cox, A.
 877 Webb, S.W.                       |  928 Muskin, J.
 878 Williams, C.                     |  929 Smith, J.
 879 Tenniswood, J.                   |  930 Summers, J.C.
 880 Buckley, T.S.                    |  931 Wright, G.
 881 Watkins, H.                      |  932 Cairns, F.
 882 Merrick, J.J.                    |  933 Steward, J.S.
 883 Stacpoole, R. de Vere.           |  934 Pearce, H.E.R.
                                  ----+----
 935 Kent, F.A.                       |  986 Otter, W.H.
 936 Armstrong, C.                    |  987 Marsh, A.J.
 937 Kirton, W.                       |  988 Hardy, E.A.
 938 Clifford, S.                     |  989 Newman, R.A.
 939 Holden, W.                       |  990 Willcocks, N.
 940 Daniels, R.W.                    |  991 Bishop, S.M.
 941 Hartwell, G.A.                   |  992 Graham, J.
 942 Bellamy, G.W.                    |  993 Reddy, J.
 943 Morrison, S.J.B.                 |  994 Martin, J.G.
 944 Rutherford, W.A.                 |  995 McGinness, J.
 945 Michelsen, A.                    |  996 MacKay, D.
 946 Grove, E.A.                      |  997 Inglis, D.S.
 947 Hick, J.F.                       |  998 Macpherson, J.C.B.
 948 Gibson, E.                       |  999 Brett, W.H.
 949 Kennedy, A.J.                    | 1000 Whitehead, W.
 950 Walker, R.G.                     | 1001 Rowles, S.W.
 951 Hartley, A.G.                    | 1002 Cooper, W.F.
 952 Ross, G.S.                       | 1003 Rosamond, A.
 953 Gibb, R.A.                       | 1004 Mudd, G.E.
 954 Sievier, E.H.P.                  | 1005 Dunn, E.H.
 955 Baker, G.                        | 1006 Coleman, R.J.
 956 Hillcoat, R.G.                   | 1007 Broadribb, F.J.
 957 Richard, W.C.                    | 1008 Priestley, A.G.B.
 958 Brown, C.M.                      | 1009 Pipe, A.W.
 959 Taylor, H.A.                     | 1010 McCulloch, A.G.S.
 960 Green, C.L.                      | 1011 Campbell, P.
 961 Dowell, J.E.                     | 1012 Aikman, W.
 962 Alexander, H.D.                  | 1013 Smart, J.
 963 Cairns, J.A.                     | 1014 Borthwick, W.A.
 964 Younger, F.N.                    | 1015 Willett, E.A.
 965 Cooke, S.M.                      | 1016 Fergusson, D.
 966 Shearm, A.                       | 1017 Morris, J.
 967 MacLennan, A.                    | 1018 Watts, G.S.
 968 Thorp, W.E.                      | 1019 Alexander, A.
 969 MacKay, J.                       | 1020 Aitken, J.E.
 970 Challis, W.G.F.                  | 1021 Jones, C.C.
 971 Hawley, D.                       | 1022 Crookes, R.O.
 972 Thompson, J.                     | 1023 Stretton, W.J.
 973 Conolly, T.G.                    | 1024 Rhodes, M.L.
 974 Hutchinson, D.F.                 | 1025 Skuse, L.N.
 975 Dobinson, C.R.                   | 1026 Scott, P.B.
 976 Myers, C.                        | 1027 Turner, D.P.
 977 Turnbull, J.A.                   | 1028 Bourbel, D.A. de
 978 Mundell, W.                      | 1029 Dillon, C.
 979 Trusler, G.D.                    | 1030 Alexander, A.C.
 980 Woodard, A.M.W.                  | 1031 Foggo, W.D.
 981 McDonough, J.S.                  | 1032 Burnside, M.
 982 Kendall, R.                      | 1033 Mather, W.M.
 983 Walker, D.F.                     | 1034 Wilkinson, W.H.
 984 Stocken, T.H.L.                  | 1035 Richardson, G.
 985 Bagshaw, W.E.D.                  | 1036 Kirby, W.J.A.
                                  ----+----
1037 Erskine, A.D.                    | 1087 Gilmore, A.E.
1038 Anderson, J.J.                   | 1088 Lelen, J.N.
1039 Brooks, F.                       | 1089 Taylor, C.
1040 Ward, J.W.                       | 1090 Hamilton, J.
1041 Jull, W.C.                       | 1091 Greasley, G.
1042 Steggall, W.E.F.                 | 1092 Hartley, C.W.
1043 Maughan, W.                      | 1093 Fatt, C.H.
1044 Agnew, J.                        | 1094 France, C.
1045 Black, W.                        | 1095 Sinclair, F.K.
1046 Black, J.                        | 1096 Dunn, H.
1047 Steele, J.                       | 1097 Cochrane, W.E.
1048 Jones, W.E.G.                    | 1098 Lethian, A.
1049 Hodgson, J.C.                    | 1099 McWilliam, A.
1050 Stevenson, W.J.                  | 1100 Rae, E.
1051 Muir, W.                         | 1101 Black, W.
1052 Lees, W.A.C.                     | 1102 Lauder, L.
1053 Burgess, C.W.                    | 1103 Hockley, F.
1054 Greenstreet, T.W.                | 1104 Mansfield, E.
1055 Mason, S.H.                      | 1105 Smith, W.
1056 Vickers, J.S.                    | 1106 Hardaker, H.
1057 Ritchie, R.K.                    | 1107 Sayer, L.C.
1058 Golding, E.                      | 1108 Broomfield, J.C.
1059 Pitchford, E.E.                  | 1109 Mark, W.
1060 Notley, F.                       | 1110 Dunlop, C.
1061 James, B.E.                      | 1111 Curwen, C.
1062 Boston, W.                       | 1112 Jackson, S.
1063 Scovell, G.                      | 1113 Gille, F.M.
1064 Parkins, H.                      | 1114 Howarth, W.
1065 Dryburgh, J.                     | 1115 Stark, J.
1066 Currie, W.                       | 1116 Hamilton, J.
1067 Rattray, D.                      | 1117 Hardie, A.
1068 Clunas, C.                       | 1118 Moysen, G.
1069 Montgomerie-Fleming, J.B.        | 1119 Ballantine, A.
1070 Darrell, F.                      | 1120 Wallace, D.H.
1071 Moir, A.W.                       | 1121 Mackenzie, W.S.
1072 Cosnett, J.                      | 1122 McFarquhar, M.
1073 McKay, J.                        | 1123 Thomson, G.
1074 Kilpatrick, J.                   | 1124 Anderson, A.
1075 McRitchie, J.                    | 1125 O'Leary, C.E.
1076 Paton, J.                        | 1126 Kinsley, L.M.
1077 Henderson, D.                    | 1127 Addis, A.J.
1078 Wainwright, H.L.                 | 1128 Thompson, D.
1079 Cochrane, J.                     | 1129 Thompson, S.
1080 Smith, A.H.                      | 1130 MacKay, W.T.
1081 Blumenthal, M.A.                 | 1131 Fraser, A.C.
1082 Stockbridge, J.M.                | 1132 Hayward, A.B.
1083 Cumberland, W.J.                 | 1133 Smith, A.E.
1084 Thomson, P.H.                    | 1134 Smith, G.
1085 Hanbury, L.F.                    | 1135 McClunie, T.
1086 Parton, W.H.                     | 1136 Muirhead, J.
                                      | 1137 Wilson, J.D.
                                  ----+----
1138 Geach, P.                        | 1189 Tremfield, A.
1139 Walker, J.                       | 1190 Moffat, R.V.
1140 Kedey, A.H.                      | 1191 Scobell, W.B.
1141 Munro, A.                        | 1192 Whiting, M.P.
1142 Cockburn, J.                     | 1193 Chappell, J.C.
1143 Huggan, E.                       | 1194 Crafter, A.G.
1144 Smith, W.                        | 1195 Denniford, P.W.
1145 Denvers, R.N.                    | 1196 Haybittel, L. McC.
1146 Miller, R.S.                     | 1197 Gregor, A.
1147 Young, J.W.                      | 1198 Aspinwall, F.J.
1148 McMurtrie, J.H.T.                | 1199 Mellett, I.E.
1149 Gough, A.                        | 1200 Maclean, L.
1150 Monteith, P.R.                   | 1201 Munro, H.F.
1151 Anderson, J.C.M.                 | 1202 Eaton, H.
1152 McLaren, C.                      | 1203 Sampson, B.
1153 Bowes, W.                        | 1204 Webster, S.
1154 Buchan, W.G.                     | 1205 Cunnington, C.
1155 Cook, J.A.                       | 1206 Oesterlein, F.S.
1156 Ferguson, P.                     | 1207 Enderby, A.D.
1157 Johnstone, C.                    | 1208 Baker, G.F.
1158 Seaton, W.M.                     | 1209 Gillam, G.
1159 Payne, R.H.                      | 1210 Watkins, A.
1160 Tyler, H.                        | 1211 Lawrence, H.P.C.
1161 Whyte, F.J.                      | 1212 Philpot, H.
1162 Savile, H.M.                     | 1213 Hendren, E.H.
1163 Goodman, R.F.                    | 1214 Jeffreys, C.W.
1164 Wilson, W.                       | 1215 Appleford, L.G.
1165 Buchanan, J.M.L.                 | 1216 McCarnie, E.P.
1166 Harding, H.G.                    | 1217 Goodman, S.T.
1167 Beadle, C.                       | 1218 Wheeler, F.G.
1168 Waddington, T.T.                 | 1219 Conquest, H.E.K.
1169 Wale, A.                         | 1220 Smith, S.
1170 Foran, W.R.                      | 1221 Brown, C.H.
1171 Davies, H.                       | 1222 Simpson, W.
1172 Harling, E.                      | 1223 Cleaver, T.J.
1173 Cooke, Sir W.H.                  | 1224 Farrant, T.
1174 Lawson, F.B.                     | 1225 MacNaughton, A.
1175 Marshall, C.C.                   | 1226 Bell, R.D.
1176 Logan, J.T.                      | 1227 James, E.A.
1177 Tattam, J.                       | 1228 Herd, C.
1178 Blake, P.V.                      | 1229 Smith, H.E.
1179 Cook, J.                         | 1230 Steedman, R.S.
1180 Osborne, T.H.                    | 1231 Reid, R.
1181 Enderby, H.H.                    | 1232 Kemp, J.D.
1182 Cock, H.C.                       | 1233 Ritchie, G.
1183 Trickett, J.                     | 1234 Thomson, W.
1184 Hopkins, H.C.                    | 1235 Williams, P.A.
1185 Cross, E.J.                      | 1236 Fenton, J.C.
1186 De Vere West, H.                 | 1237 Reading, A.H.
1187 Weil, A.D.                       | 1238 Holley, H.C.
1188 Gordon, H.S.                     | 1239 Pitts, E.
                                  ----+----
1240 Johnson, G.A.W.                  | 1291 Owers, E.
1241 Williams, J.                     | 1292 Callaghan, J.
1242 Stanley, R.                      | 1293 Little, J.
1243 Trebilcock, J.R.                 | 1294 McDiarmid, J.
1244 Goodfellow, H.                   | 1295 Cairns, P.C.
1245 Fay, V.                          | 1296 Thomas, T.W.
1246 Faulkner, A.                     | 1297 Lovell, J.H.
1247 Buck, A.E.                       | 1298 Steer, H.E.
1248 Littlewood, F.                   | 1299 Haddon, J.
1249 Ashdown, W.C.                    | 1300 McDonald, D.R.
1250 Vernon, J.P.                     | 1301 Taylor, J.D.
1251 Anderson, S.D.                   | 1302 Milleken, C.
1252 McCulloch, R.S.                  | 1303 Remnant, P.W.
1253 Broadbridge, E.C.                | 1304 Saville, W.F.
1254 Garland, A.R.                    | 1305 Vincer, E.S.
1255 Rogers, T.H.                     | 1306 Davison, A.W.
1256 Scott-Tucker, H.B.H.             | 1307 Miller, C.J.
1257 Leith, E.                        | 1308 Cassini, H.
1258 Petrie, F.                       | 1309 Cross, W.
1259 Dalton, J.S.M.                   | 1310 Hutchins, G.
1260 Mowat, W.G.                      | 1311 Chinnock, C.
1261 Barker-Mill, T.R.S.V.            | 1312 Adams, F.
1262 Munro, A.W.                      | 1313 Parkinson, H.F.
1263 McPhee, J.A.                     | 1314 Nunn, H.E.
1264 Heron, J.                        | 1315 Osgood, F.
1265 Scott, G.G.                      | 1316 Harris, J.F.
1266 Deakin, C.                       | 1317 Cameron, A.S.
1267 Hughes, W.I.                     | 1318 Cran, C.F.
1268 Gowton, C.                       | 1319 Allan, W.
1269 Bennett, G.                      | 1320 Lindsay, E.
1270 Sullivan, D.H.                   | 1321 Strachan, J.
1271 Lawrence, B.E.                   | 1322 Fletcher, J.F.
1272 Attwood, C.                      | 1323 Cooper, S.A.A.
1273 Buckland, H.F.                   | 1324 Jones, B.
1274 Gibson, G.R.                     | 1325 Kirk, H.
1275 Hannah, R.                       | 1326 Mansfield, G.A.
1276 Galloway, S.                     | 1327 Legg, H.
1277 McFarlane, J.                    | 1328 Jones, W.H.
1278 Bryden, T.                       | 1329 Field, R.J.H.
1279 Grant, D.                        | 1330 Sylvester, J.W.
1280 Johnstone, W.                    | 1331 Wickens, E.J.
1281 Laycock, P.G.O.                  | 1332 Rogers, W.H.
1282 Laycock, R.A.                    | 1333 Wilson, J.
1283 Wedemeyer, P.E.                  | 1334 Green, G.H.
1284 Stewart, P.C.                    | 1335 Slaughter, M.F.
1285 Ferris, R.                       | 1336 McGeoch, J.
1256 Lemen, R.                        | 1337 Johnstone, C.
1287 Walker, J.V.                     | 1338 Kidd, G.
1288 Williamson, J.                   | 1339 Robertson, D.F.
1289 Gilmour, J.M.                    | 1340 Sutherland, W.
1290 Morgan, R.                       | 1341 Johnson, J.A.
                                  ----+----
1342 Bray, P.B.R.                     | 1393 Northcote, S.W.
1343 De Lara, G.                      | 1394 Kearns, S.C.
1344 Foreman, W.A.                    | 1395 Gwatkin, T.
1345 Suttie, W.F.                     | 1396 Goad, H.
1346 McCormach, W.J.                  | 1397 Scott, W.J.
1347 Gowton, T.W.                     | 1398 Steggall, R.F.
1348 Wake, J.                         | 1399 Ward, G.
1349 Travis, J.                       | 1400 Goomer, W.
1350 Macpherson, W.                   | 1401 Wilkinson, J.T.
1351 Anderson, T.A.                   | 1402 Davies, P.R.M.
1352 Lovering, W.R.                   | 1403 Smeaton, H.
1353 Crawford, H.A.                   | 1404 Field, E.
1354 Clarke, E.A.                     | 1405 Donn, R.
1355 Hollingsworth, E.                | 1406 Robertson, D.L.
1356 Kingston, N.L.I.                 | 1407 Gurteen, S.
1357 McDonald, J.D.                   | 1408 Galbraith, C.A.
1358 Carmichael, D.C.                 | 1409 Seton, S.
1359 Luke, A.T.                       | 1410 Taylor, J.
1360 Sullivan, R.H.                   | 1411 Hudson, W.
1361 West, E.J.                       | 1412 Wilkinson, W.C.
1362 Whelband, E.                     | 1413 Cooke, E.G.
1363 Pimm, E.J.                       | 1414 Powell, W.F.
1364 James, R.                        | 1415 Brown, J.
1365 Drury, J.J.R.                    | 1416 Moir, A.E.
1366 Robertson, W.                    | 1417 Hart, S.
1367 Mackrory, E.W.                   | 1418 Crabb, R.
1368 Martin, G.                       | 1419 Robbie, J.
1369 Carswell, D.                     | 1420 McNab, W.
1370 Dunbar, W.P.                     | 1421 McGregor, H.
1371 Lindsay, R.                      | 1422 Foster, H.
1372 Rosie, P.                        | 1423 Seath, D.
1373 Donald, G.R.                     | 1424 Dodds, W.J.
1374 Dunbar, T.M.                     | 1425 Lee, W.J.
1375 Beaven, F.L.                     | 1426 Banks, J.H.
1376 Spencer, A.                      | 1427 Walker, V.D.
1377 Broadley, C.                     | 1428 Naylor, H.S.
1378 Monour, J.                       | 1429 Watson, J.
1379 Chambers, T.                     | 1430 Coyle, J.
1380 Bell, R.                         | 1431 Delaney, J.
1381 White, C.                        | 1432 Forster, F.L.M.
1382 Gibson, J.M.                     | 1433 Smith, W.H.
1383 Thomson, F.                      | 1434 Batson, G.
1384 Neal, S.E.                       | 1435 Martin, W.J.
1385 Baker, L.F.                      | 1436 Wisdom, R.
1386 Niblett, W.F.                    | 1437 Hopley, C.F.C.
1387 Cummings, G.A.                   | 1438 Guy, A.
1388 Clark, N.                        | 1439 Bardell, W.E.
1389 Gotthardt, C.F.                  | 1440 Nicoll, J.H.
1390 Robertson, J.                    | 1441 Fraser, A.
1391 Fraser, M.                       | 1442 Packer, J.T.
1392 McKay, A.                        | 1443 Barnes, H.
                                  ----+----
1444 Grocott, G.N.G.                  | 1495 Anderson, D.
1445 Hopegood, F.L. Vere.             | 1496 Wild, A.H.
1446 Bullock, E.                      | 1497 Rogers, R.M.
1447 Hummerston, W.J.                 | 1498 Beath, H.W.
1448 Whiteside, H.                    | 1499 Ewing, A.D.
1449 Page, W.                         | 1500 Lawes, F.H.
1450 Hogan, P.L.                      | 1501 England, R.
1451 Eley, C.W.                       | 1502 Larkin, H.G.L.
1452 Orme, J.                         | 1503 Buckton, A.W.
1453 Bingham, C.                      | 1504 Bell, J.S.
1454 Dean, F.N.                       | 1505 Guest, E.F.
1455 Marnie, A.S.                     | 1506 Clark, W.W.
1456 Luke, W.T.                       | 1507 Marshall, H.C.
1457 Brown, H.C.                      | 1508 Clarke, A.H.
1458 Purgavie, F.                     | 1509 Simpson, J.
1459 Purgavie, W.R.                   | 1510 Taunt-Ward, G.
1460 Love, J.R.                       | 1511 Rudd, H.B.
1461 Senior, F.                       | 1512 Cameron, J.J.
1462 Crowley, E.T.                    | 1513 Brown, J.
1463 Sutherland, A.                   | 1514 Ion, W.
1464 Lort, W.V.                       | 1515 Watson, J.W.
1465 Taylor, J.H.                     | 1516 Price, H.O.
1466 Phillips, O.F.                   | 1517 Maddern, W.H.T.
1467 Harrison, J.                     | 1518 Nelson, W.
1468 McCarroll, J.                    | 1519 Downham, E.J.
1469 Albany, G.A.                     | 1520 Jones, T.W.
1470 Keillor, W.                      | 1521 Robinson, J.W.
1471 Robertson, D.M.                  | 1522 Smith, W.
1472 Brown, R.L.                      | 1523 Drake, J.W.
1473 Clarke, C.                       | 1524 Hodge, R.N.
1474 Coats, A.C.                      | 1525 Hodges, W.S.
1475 Vickery, G.H.                    | 1526 Walsh, W.M.
1476 Lord, G.H.                       | 1527 Seale, G.D.
1477 Kington, M.W.                    | 1528 Nops, R.A.
1478 Wilson, A.V.                     | 1529 Cook, J.
1479 Parr, H.E.                       | 1530 Gemmell, G.M.
1480 Farmer, W.                       | 1531 Le Butt, C.W.N.
1481 Randall, W.                      | 1532 Ward, A.
1482 Gay, W.                          | 1533 Walter, J.H.
1483 Carnochan, J.                    | 1534 Fryett, F.
1484 McFarlane, J.                    | 1535 Wilson, R.
1485 Bond, B.                         | 1536 Doig, W.
1486 Vines, J.                        | 1537 Goldspink, L.
1487 Phillips, J.H.                   | 1538 Pratt, H.W.
1488 Riddell, M.                      | 1539 Buptie, J.W.
1489 Arnot, J.S.                      | 1540 Sheridan, J.W.
1490 Green, H.                        | 1541 Smith, R.B.
1491 Townshend, C.                    | 1542 Took, E.A.
1492 Bradley, H.L.                    | 1543 Jones, T.C.L.
1493 Follett, G.                      | 1544 Lovibond, R.F.
1494 Crombie, H.                      | 1545 Cogswell, A.
                                  ----+----
1546 Moss, J.                         | 1597 Harbott, W.G.
1547 Cannon, E.                       | 1598 Bradford, S.
1548 Cheesman, S.F.                   | 1599 Harrington, A.
1549 Morris, G.                       | 1600 Fitzgerald, F.
1550 Howe, J.D.                       | 1601 Cooper, W.H.
1551 Strachan, J.                     | 1602 Lefever, J.F.
1552 Cook, J.K.                       | 1603 Kildare, T.J.
1553 McDougall, J.                    | 1604 Browning, E.
1554 Scherer, C.                      | 1605 Howell, W.R.
1555 King, D.                         | 1606 Maxwell, A.R.
1556 Misset, M.                       | 1607 Pinson, I.L.
1557 Watt, R.S.                       | 1608 Bradberry, T.R.
1558 Hurst, C.                        | 1609 Rubidge, H.W.
1559 Hurlbatt, E.                     | 1610 Barnes, S.
1560 Kloss, A.                        | 1611 White, L.T.
1561 Dowdswell, H.                    | 1612 Simpson, A.B.
1562 Duncan, W.                       | 1613 Argles, G.E.
1563 Smith, R.                        | 1614 Arbone, L.G.
1564 Jones, R.                        | 1615 Calderwood, A.
1565 Boycott, F.E.                    | 1616 Leigh, F.A.
1566 Miles, P.A.                      | 1617 Lamb, A.G.
1567 Miles, A.                        | 1618 Stafford, W.D.
1568 Lawrence, C.E.                   | 1619 Wilson, J.J.
1569 Banks, C.T.                      | 1620 Edwards, C.W.
1570 Bennett, W.                      | 1621 Walker, G.W.
1571 Penson, W.S.                     | 1622 Over, C.A.
1572 Levy, H.P.                       | 1623 Taylor, O.G.
1573 Cox, F.                          | 1624 Baker, J.
1574 Hardcastle, J.W.                 | 1625 Dean, F.
1575 Pearce, F.                       | 1626 Crone, W.C.
1576 Smith, A.W.                      | 1627 George, T.E.
1577 Stewart, T.A.                    | 1628 Wilkey, F.D.
1578 Barnett, F.T.                    | 1629 Kennelly, R.V.V.
1579 Pettit, W.                       | 1630 Whitehurst, A.
1580 Arnott, D.                       | 1631 Black, R.W.
1581 Wright, C.                       | 1632 Scott, W.B.
1582 Wright, S.C.H.                   | 1633 Middleton, T.S.
1583 Tracy, G.                        | 1634 Willcocks, J.C.
1584 Beckett, G.A.                    | 1635 Scott, E.
1585 Barrett, T.                      | 1636 Freeman, E.P.
1586 Edwards, E.                      | 1637 Hanwell, A.
1587 Ambler, R.                       | 1638 Prince, A.T.
1588 Bowen, H.C.                      | 1639 Whyte, W.E.
1589 Beaver, W.J.                     | 1640 Dobb, H.S.
1590 Ogle, A.H.                       | 1641 Manardo, T.S.
1591 Loveland, H.                     | 1642 Wright, G.M.D.
1592 Rider, W.                        | 1643 Cripps, F.
1593 Gardner, A.                      | 1644 Merwood, J.W.
1594 Cottrell, H.J.                   | 1645 Newman, R.G.
1595 Harvey, J.J.                     | 1646 Harding, J.
1596 Stirrups, A.T.                   | 1647 Littman, S.
                                  ----+----
1648 McGibson, J.                     | 1699 Grandin, J.W.
1649 Saywood, G.                      | 1700 Moulding, W.
1650 Martin, H.G.                     | 1701 Curryer, R.W.
1651 Fine, A.L.                       | 1702 Wilkin, W.
1652 Gaul, E.                         | 1703 Allen, A.
1653 Bradford, W.H.                   | 1704 Smith, A.
1654 Coupland, J.                     | 1705 Jeffery, A.E.
1655 Johnston, G.G.                   | 1706 Grout, H.
1656 Rait, D.                         | 1707 Gilbert, C.F.
1657 Bell, T.S.                       | 1708 Pepper, C.
1658 Gensey, C.                       | 1709 Wakefield, T.
1659 Cummins, G.                      | 1710 Brown, G.
1660 Clark, J.                        | 1711 Cook, S.
1661 Manning, E.                      | 1712 Anderson, A.J.
1662 Holmes, W.J.                     | 1713 Ferrier, J.K.
1663 Timms, D.G.                      | 1714 Atkins, S.A.V.
1664 Ellis, R.                        | 1715 Sorley, J.
1665 Wheatley, C.C.                   | 1716 Read, E.S.
1666 Thorning, S.                     | 1717 Skinner, C.W.H.
1667 Gilder, R.A.                     | 1718 Paddon, G.W.
1668 Herring, R.                      | 1719 Rutherford, P.J.
1669 Sutton, H.                       | 1720 Smith, R.
1670 Biggs, C.P.                      | 1721 Raymond, F.
1671 Slipper, R.S.                    | 1722 Harding, S.
1672 Fryett, A.M.                     | 1723 Elliott, B.D.
1673 Fraser, E.                       | 1724 Watkin, F.A.
1674 Walford, F.G.                    | 1725 Owen, H.
1675 McFarlane, H.                    | 1726 Walton, J.M.
1676 Saunders, S.                     | 1727 Collier, G.E.
1677 Wright, H.                       | 1728 Cann, H.E.
1678 Brown, R.S.                      | 1729 Bartlett, E.
1679 Lee, C.                          | 1730 Rayner, C.
1680 Procter, G.J.                    | 1731 Monkman, F.K.
1681 Crane, J.                        | 1732 Aldred, H.D.
1682 Galbraith, A.                    | 1733 Hyde, A.W.
1683 Simons, L.                       | 1734 Harrison, E.F.
1684 Ling, H.                         | 1735 Johnston, J.H.
1685 Kimpton, J.                      | 1736 Calder, J.H.
1686 Joyner, G.R.                     | 1737 Mock, K.A.D.
1687 Lowther, W.                      | 1738 Bristow, R.J.S.
1688 Jones, W.D.P.                    | 1739 Brown, A.E.
1689 Rogers, J.F.W.                   | 1740 Harrison, H.J.
1690 Lewis, A.                        | 1741 Hickson, W.G.
1691 Hodge, A.                        | 1742 Read, J.
1692 Anderson, W.                     | 1743 Tomalin, R.A.
1693 Gillett, W.R.F.                  | 1744 Podger, A.H.
1694 Partridge, E.                    | 1745 Fletcher, S.A.
1695 Cutler, W.E.                     | 1746 Rogers, B.F.
1696 Keeble, G.H.                     | 1747 Edwards, H.J.
1697 Cant, W.H.                       | 1748 Jewell, C.R.
1698 Fox, C.F.                        | 1749 Denyer, F.H.
                                  ----+----
1750 Bell, J.W.                       | 1801 Davies, C.A.
1751 Bullard, A.R.                    | 1802 Wilson, G.
1752 Deller, S.G.                     | 1803 Dodman, A.S.
1753 Bell, W.L.                       | 1804 Warman, W.C.
1754 Mostyn, F.                       | 1805 Luxton, W.
1755 Lemon, F.G.                      | 1806 Brown, H.G.
1756 Smith, H.E.S.                    | 1807 Burchett, J.G.
1757 Hall, A.M.                       | 1808 Horsley, W.E.
1758 Ashwood, W.                      | 1809 Brown, A.O.
1759 Baldock, W.P.                    | 1810 Snodgrass, A.E.
1760 Croxford, H.J.                   | 1811 Baker, F.
1761 Ford, F.H.                       | 1812 Dodman, C.A.
1762 Fright, E.G.                     | 1813 Taylor, F.
1763 Pay, S.                          | 1814 Macfarlane, A.
1764 Sharp, W.H.                      | 1815 Neil, D.A.
1765 Weal, C.A.                       | 1816 Beavan, J.R.
1766 Palmer, H.C.                     | 1817 Paget, F.F.
1767 Dunne, J.                        | 1818 Jewell, J.O.
1768 Cox, E.C.                        | 1819 Conquest, E.J.
1769 Titley, E.J.                     | 1820 Garnish, G.A.
1770 Sandland, C.K.                   | 1821 Curtis, A.E.J.
1771 Williams, R.G.                   | 1822 Hyde, A.G.
1772 Charlier, H.H.                   | 1823 Webber, T.E.
1773 Ramsay, F.G.                     | 1824 Ingham, H.G.
1774 Anderson, J.G.                   | 1825 Crisp, H.J.
1775 Gore, J.T.                       | 1826 Middleton, W.E.C.
1776 Morris, A.W.T.                   | 1827 Mackenzie, W.
1777 Taylor, A.W.                     | 1828 Call, W.S.
1778 Hunter, H.P.                     | 1829 Wilkinson, H.
1779 Briden, A.C.                     | 1830 Holmes, J.B.F.
1780 Tapping, C.F.                    | 1831 Fletcher, S.P.
1781 Leppard, S.                      | 1832 Brook, T.
1782 Tandy, S.T.                      | 1833 Abbott, G.H.
1783 Cotgrove, E.G.                   | 1834 Fowles, J.P.A.
1784 Scott, F.S.                      | 1835 Connolly, M.
1785 Ditchfield, H.                   | 1836 Pollard, H.J.
1786 Taylor, M.                       | 1837 Knight, L.D.
1787 McKercher, C.                    | 1838 Pollard, G.E.
1788 Read, J.                         | 1839 Sheppard, W.S.
1789 Wollnough, H.W.                  | 1840 Sheppard, W.J.
1790 Fox, J.W.                        | 1841 Heaver, P.G.
1791 Cooper, G.T.                     | 1842 Walker, E.
1792 Jennings, R.S.                   | 1843 Rollason, W.A.
1793 Martin, E.                       | 1844 McCarthy, W.E.
1794 Clarke, R.J.                     | 1845 Fisher, J.H.K.
1795 Wilks, E.L.                      | 1846 Cripps, R.
1796 Murray, C.F.                     | 1847 Brewer, A.H.
1797 Stokes, A.E.                     | 1848 Cromarty, R.R.
1798 Stokes, J.E.                     | 1849 Meldrum, A.J.
1799 Barham, T.G.                     | 1850 Fox, J.F.
1800 Bown, H.E.                       | 1851 Thomas, R.G.
                                  ----+----
1852 Simpson, W.                      | 1903 Smith, F.C.
1853 Fayrer, H.W.I.                   | 1904 Taylor, C.W.
1854 Fleming, S.J.                    | 1905 Taylor, L.H.
1855 Bibby, J.                        | 1906 Pike, W.T.
1856 Drage, E.G.                      | 1907 Ford, H.F.
1857 French, G.A.                     | 1908 Robins, E.G.
1858 Brett, S.A.                      | 1909 Hawkesworth, K.
1859 Haggis, S.G.                     | 1910 Webb, J.W.
1860 Hayes, L.H.                      | 1911 Sheppard, J.
1861 Davies, A.E.                     | 1912 Phipps, E.G.
1862 Nancarrow, C.W.                  | 1913 Martin, E.W.
1863 Jenkin, W.                       | 1914 Barnes, F.
1864 Pellymounter, W.J.               | 1915 Young, W.J.
1865 Prizeman, N.                     | 1916 Vanstone, H.A.
1866 Pearcey, J.C.                    | 1917 Hampson, H.
1867 Sim, V.D.                        | 1918 Hatchard, H.
1868 Burrow, R.J.                     | 1919 Hunt, W.
1869 Mayne, H.R.                      | 1920 Durrant, F.J.
1870 Blount, J.G.                     | 1921 Brayley, C.
1871 Bennett, F.J.                    | 1922 Robertson, J.H.
1872 Miller, F.N.                     | 1923 Watson, C.H.
1873 Older, H.E.                      | 1924 Niblett, H.
1874 Hamley, W.                       | 1925 Harden, C.A.
1875 Haywood, J.                      | 1926 Saltern, G.H.
1876 Hansell, S.G.                    | 1927 Barton, L.B.
1877 Wekks, T.A.                      | 1928 Monk, A.C.
1878 McPhail, P.                      | 1929 Naylor, J.M.
1879 Sampson, T.R.                    | 1930 Marshall, A.F.
1880 Fawns, J.M.                      | 1931 Billett, T.W.
1881 Boyce, F.J.                      | 1932 Fulcher, S.
1882 Summers, G.W.                    | 1933 McFarlane, T.
1883 Dielham, S.C.                    | 1934 Watt, W.J.C.
1884 Coyle, F.J.                      | 1935 Bangs, P.R.
1885 Stinson, T.H.                    | 1936 Ryan, W.A.W.
1886 Wood, W.F.                       | 1937 Kay, H.G.
1887 Newcombe, H.W.                   | 1938 Penchoen, E.T.
1888 Gunston, W.                      | 1939 Watson, T.M.
1889 Malcholm, P.R.                   | 1940 King, W.
1890 Broadbridge, S.H.R.              | 1941 Hartgrove, E.W.
1891 Woodward, G.T.                   | 1942 Cable, M.
1892 Tapp, J.H.                       | 1943 Freshwater, H.
1893 Blofield, --                     | 1944 Stains, J.J.
1894 Wilkins, H.                      | 1945 Frith, H.G.
1895 Cornish, A.                      | 1946 Carter, E.A.
1896 Read, F.C.                       | 1947 Squeaker, G. Pritchard.
1897 Hathaway, A.                     | 1948 Vokes, E.
1898 Grant, S.W.                      | 1949 Dickeson, W.G.
1899 Mitchell, A.L.                   | 1950 Hurst, J.
1900 Rundle, H.W.                     | 1951 Titchener, A.
1901 White, F.C.                      | 1952 Wilson, W.
1902 North, C.G.                      | 1953 Kavanagh, J.E.P.
                                  ----+----
1954 Glanvil, P.C.                    | 3414 Ward, H.W.
1955 Grover, V.E.                     | 3427 Williams, C.H.
1956 Smith, H.B.S.                    | 2768 Yates, R.
1957 Curtis, A.C.                     | 5915 Wheeler, --
1958 Sporne, A.R.                     |10810 Jones, E.T.
1959 Briggs, H.A.                     | 3840 Prior, H.L.
1960 Whitelaw, D.                     | 3888 Bibby, C.
1961 Parker, A.H.                     | 3913 Colton, R.
1962 Howett, F.                       | 3801 Hichie, G.
1963 Piper, C.                        | 3885 Mason, E.W.
1964 Cartlidge, J.A.                  | 2063 Ball, C.S.
1965 Dykes, G.F.                      | 3820 Whipps, J.
1966 Nettleton, A.                    | 4076 Adamson, J.
1967 King, G.W.                       | 3937 Sothcott, J.G.
1968 Dunn, F.W.                       | 3520 Moss, F.A.
1969 James, S.                        | 3853 Pearce, W.
1970 Collings, W.                     | 3827 Reeman, A.W.
1971 Denyer, A.E.                     | 2735 Tremayne, D.
1972 Bartram, F.A.                    | 3855 Hart, F.G.T.
1973 Deares, H.                       | 3836 Colbert, H.S.
1974 Browning, A.E.                   | 3856 Crafter, D.T.
1975 Hooker, G.H.                     | 3812 Dilloway, W.
1976 Eastland, F.C.                   | 3857 Gretton, L.
1977 Reynolds, R.                     | 3926 Rose, J.T.
1978 Heathcote, J.                    | 3904 Shawcroft, F.
1979 Dunn, E.E.                       | 3809 Hichie, G.D.C.
1980 English, E.W.                    | 3922 Willes, A.
1981 Smith, J.F.                      | 3892 Allenby, T.
1982 Fogerty, J.H.A.                  | 3894 Lindow, H.
1983 Bennett, N.C.                    | 3910 McCarthy, J.
1984 Meade, M.                        | 3905 Ottewell, J.W.
1965 Robbins, A.                      | 3902 Parkin, W.
1986 St. John, W.P.                   | 3903 Steed, S.
1987 Arnold, G.                       | 3819 Turner, F.
1988 Clitter, E.W.                    | 3011 Arthur, H.E.
1989 Chinn, F.H.                      | 3880 Bailey, H.
1990 Hart, C.J.                       | 3794 Baker, W.G.
1991 Prime, S.M.                      | 3225 Barker, A.R.
1992 Richards, E.W.                   | 3817 Beck, S.
1993 Buccleuch, C.                    | 2962 Bridgman, A.F.
1994 George, G.W.                     | 3843 Degerton, A.N.
1995 Maxwell, R.G.                    | 3253 Distin, T.
1996 Cottee, H.E.                     | 3933 Dobran, T.H.
1997 Baker, W.                        | 3492 Fowler, F.G.
1998 Crawford, J.E.                   | 3433 Fowler, H.W.
1999 Oaksford, H.                     | 3555 Thomas, J.F.
2000 Harwood, G.                      | 3559 Law, M.C.
2765 Kerr, W.H.                       | 3560 Simpson, C.
3318 Mitchell, T.P.                   | 3568 Perren, F.
3156 Mitton, R.W.                     | 3585 Ralph, F.C.
3528 Moss, F.A.                       | 3592 Kirk, H.
3145 Walkerley, F.J.                  | 3605 Stares, J.
                                  ----+----
3623 Lloyd, A.                        | 4001 Mellor, J.
3627 Gillham, A.                      | 4002 Alexander, T.
3729 Schobius, A.G.                   | 4003 Kitchener, A.J.
3630 McCarthy, D.                     | 4004 Osborne, J.T.
3631 Buxton, J.                       | 4005 Long, H.S.
3635 Parsons, J.L.                    | 4006 Robinson, T.H.
3640 Clark-Schroder, S.J.             | 4007 Benedict, F.W.
3643 Freeborn, B.                     | 4008 Mogford, A.C.
3657 Hart, R.O.                       | 4009 Underwood, H.
3660 Spencer, A.                      | 4010 Wood, L.
3667 Epstein, B.S.                    | 4011 Miles, F.J.
3673 Butler, C.                       | 4012 Edwards, E.B.
3683 Woodward, E.                     | 4013 Foan, W.D.
3684 Ulph, W.P.                       | 4014 Dingley, A.W.
3690 Page, G.W.                       | 4015 Monk, E.W.
3695 Towler, H.                       | 4016 Warrell, F.C.
3702 Redwood, W.                      | 4017 Miller, A.
3720 Smith, S.                        | 4018 Coutts-Hill, W.H.
3737 Chetminoki, H.                   | 4019 Benvie, A.S.
3738 McGowan, F.S.                    | 4020 White, A.J.
3740 McDonald, A.A.                   | 4021 Wood, W.G.
3742 Jolly, A.R.                      | 4022 Hackett, F.T.
3750 Brodie, C.F.                     | 4023 Hyslop, --
3780 Glasgow, M.R.                    | 4024 Beach, W.J.
3787 Banfield, A.F.                   | 4025 Howden, J.
3822 Gabbey, W.J.                     | 4026 Sellers, C.
3829 Cheers, D.H.                     | 4027 Hannay, A.
3830 Cornes, H.                       | 4028 Gibbs, G.J.
3842 Barrass, G.S.                    | 4029 Balls, E.
3851 Ayland, R.P.                     | 4030 Ransley, W.J.
3886 Collins, M.                      | 4031 Tomlinson, R.F.
3895 Grape, H.S.                      | 4032 Simmons, R.W.
3911 Piper, W.H.                      | 4033 Leat, F.C.
3930 Dutton, G.F.                     | 4034 Elley, C.H.
3935 Bardell, R.J.                    | 4035 Ashby, E.A.
3213 Ahronsberg, S.                   | 4041 Beech, T.
3546 Baptist, H.B.J.                  | 4042 Sniders, A.
3462 Barnbrook, A.E.                  | 4043 Budd, B.
2962 Bridgman, F.                     | 4044 Mills, A.E.
3474 Brook, H.                        | 4046 Caskie, F.J.
2329 Cocks, E.M.                      | 4051 Doe, H.
3190 German, W.H.                     | 4053 Smith, H.R.
3085 Hogg, D.A.                       | 4056 Wain, G.H.
3394 Gilbert, F.G.                    | 4057 Stevens, W.H.
3859 Godfree, C.S.                    | 4060 Cocks, J.E.
3844 Morris, F.                       | 4061 Hoile, D.H.
3906 Parr, C.                         | 4063 Bevan, H.C.
3907 Parr, E.A.                       | 4068 Cargill, W.R.
2886 Price, W.J.A.                    | 4070 Gilkerson, J.C.
3826 Randell, P.G.                    | 4073 Lewis, F.
3862 Vernall, F.A.                    | 4074 Chambers, R.S.
3250 Young, F.E.                      | 4075 James, H.




EDITOR'S NOTE.


    The Editor apologizes for a few omissions in the preceding
    pages, but they were unavoidable owing to the records of the
    Battalion being in some instances incomplete. He would welcome
    any additions or corrections for use in any further editions
    that may be issued.

    LONDON, 1920.




PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
BY BILLING AND SONS, LTD.
GUILDFORD AND ESHER


       *       *       *       *       *


    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page 63: Beaumetz-le-Cambrai replaced with                |
    |          Beaumetz-les-Cambrai                             |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+


       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The 23rd (Service) Battalion Royal
Fusiliers (First Sportsman's), by Fred W. Ward

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 23RD (SERVICE) BATTALION ***

***** This file should be named 20377.txt or 20377.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/3/7/20377/

Produced by David Clarke, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
