The Project Gutenberg eBook, Report of the Railway Department of the Board
of Trade on the London, Worcester, and Wolverhampton, and on the
Birmingham and Shrewsbury Districts, by Samuel Laing, et al


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Report of the Railway Department of the Board of Trade on the
       London, Worcester, and Wolverhampton, and on the Birmingham and
       Shrewsbury Districts


Author: Samuel Laing



Release Date: January 16, 2007  [eBook #20388]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT OF THE RAILWAY DEPARTMENT ***




Transcribed by David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org





RAILWAYS.
REPORT of the RAILWAY DEPARTMENT of the BOARD of TRADE on the _London_,
_Worcester_, and _Wolverhampton_, and on the _Birmingham_ and _Shrewsbury
Districts_.


(_Presented to Parliament by Her Majesty's Command_.)

_Ordered_, _by_ The House of Commons, _to be Printed_,
28 _February_ 1845.

83--2.

_Under 2 oz._

Railway Department, Board of Trade,
Whitehall, 28 February 1845.

The Board constituted by Minute of the Lords of the Committee of Privy
Council for Trade, for the transaction of Railway business, having had
under consideration the different schemes deposited with the Railway
Department for extending Railway communication between London, Worcester,
and Wolverhampton, and in the district intermediate between the London
and Birmingham and Great Western Railways, and also, in connexion with
the above, the schemes for extending Railway communication between
Birmingham and Shrewsbury, have determined on submitting the following
Report thereon for the consideration of Parliament.

The object of the first class of schemes in question is to supply Railway
communication to the great mining district of Staffordshire, lying south
of Wolverhampton, to the towns of Kidderminster, Stourbridge, Stourport,
Worcester, &c., and to the district north of Oxford, intermediate between
the Great Western and London and Birmingham Railways.

For this purpose two competing schemes are proposed; one, which is
promoted by the London and Birmingham Company, comprises a line from
Rugby to Oxford, and another from Wolverhampton, through Worcester and
Banbury, to join the London and Birmingham line at Tring; the other
scheme consists of a line from Oxford to Rugby, which is proposed to be
made by the Great Western Company; and of another line from Oxford to
Worcester and Wolverhampton, which is undertaken by an independent
Company, but in connexion with the Great Western Company, and which must
be considered as forming, with the Oxford and Rugby line, one scheme,
competing with the former.

For the sake of brevity we shall distinguish these as the "London and
Birmingham or Tring Scheme," and the "Great Western or Oxford Scheme."
Their general direction will be easily understood by reference to the
accompanying map.

In their general features and objects the two schemes are so nearly
identical that the two manifestly cannot stand together.  A further
scheme for the accommodation of the country between Worcester and
Wolverhampton, was proposed by the Birmingham and Gloucester Company, but
it is understood that arrangements have been made by which this scheme is
withdrawn in favour of the London and Birmingham scheme, to which it was
moreover inferior in several important respects, so that we may consider
the question as reduced to one of competition between the schemes of the
two great Companies.

The first point is, whether a sufficient public case can be established
to justify the construction of any Railway at all throughout the
districts in question.  As regards the South Staffordshire district, this
point has been disputed by various Canal interests, who urge that the
district is already sufficiently well supplied by water communication,
and that the introduction of Railways, by destroying the resources and
crippling the efficiency of such water communications, will be productive
of injury rather than of benefit to the Public.  Various special reasons
have been urged in support of this view, more especially with reference
to the mineral district of which Dudley may be considered as the centre.
It is said that the Birmingham Canal Company have, at a great expense,
created a very complete and efficient system of water communication
throughout this district; that a right is reserved of making branch
Canals to all mines and works within certain limits, which right would be
to a certain extent defeated by running a Railway parallel to the
existing Canal, to the injury both of the Canal Company, and of the
owners of the mines and works so cut off; that the management and charges
of the Canal Company have always been of the most liberal description;
and finally, that owing to the peculiar nature of the district, in which
great excavations have been made for mining purposes, Railways cannot be
carried through it without danger.

It will be readily conceded that the importance of the district in
question is such as to entitle it to require the best means of
communication, whether by Canal or Railway.  Between Wolverhampton and
Stourbridge there are at present about 100 blast furnaces in work,
producing about 468,000 tons of pig iron annually.  In order to produce
this quantity, nearly 4,000,000 tons of coals, lime, ironstone, and other
raw materials are consumed, which are raised from the mines of the
district, and transported to the various furnaces, forges and founderies.

The export of iron from the district is about 240,000 tons annually, in
addition to large quantities of heavy hardwares, tin plates, glass, and
other goods.  The export of coal is also very large, and might be greatly
augmented by increased facilities of communication.

The population, depending for support on the iron-works, mines, and
manufactories of the district, is estimated at not less than 230,000; and
the total population of the respective towns and places between
Wolverhampton and Worcester, which would be benefited by the proposed
Railway communication, is believed to exceed 300,000.

Among these towns may be mentioned Kidderminster, a place of considerable
manufacturing importance, and great intercourse with different parts of
the kingdom; Droitwich, with its extensive salt works; Stourbridge,
Stourport and Worcester.

The construction of a Railway in this direction will also lead, in all
probability, to extensions into the fertile agricultural district on the
west of the Severn, towards Leominster and Ludlow.

The claim of the district, therefore, to the most improved mode of
communication can hardly be disputed; and whatever claims Canal Companies
may have from benefits previously conferred, or from past liberality of
management, such claims cannot be considered by us in any other light
than those of other private interests, unless in so far as they may be
based upon public considerations.

Our Report will not, in any way, prejudice or affect the right of those
Canal Companies to have their vested interests, if any, carefully
considered by the Legislature.

Upon public grounds, therefore, we have merely had to consider the
allegation that the interests of the district will not be promoted by the
introduction of Railways, and that Railways cannot be constructed through
it without danger.

Upon the first point it seems sufficient to refer to the unanimous
opinion of the parties principally interested, and who have the best
opportunities of judging of the effects likely to follow from the
introduction of Railways.  The only difference of opinion has arisen from
the anxiety of the parties to obtain a Railway of some description or
other, which has led them to support different competing schemes; but all
parties have united in the strongest representations of the vital
importance to the district of obtaining a good Railway communication, in
addition to those afforded by the Canals.  A memorial signed by the
representatives of 46 iron-works, 57 furnaces, and 98 collieries, in the
Staffordshire mineral district, including the trustees of Lord Ward, from
whose estate alone upwards of 1,000,000 tons of coal and iron are raised
annually, in favour of the London and Birmingham scheme; and another
memorial, representing 37 iron-works, and 9 collieries, in favour of the
Great Western scheme, were presented to us; the memorialists in each case
urging in the strongest manner the advantages of Railway communication to
the district.

It is stated, that without such communication, they have to compete at a
great disadvantage with the iron districts of South Wales and Scotland,
which, from their readier access to the sea, can convey their products to
market at a cheaper rate.  The Canals are stated to be not only more
tedious and expensive, but subject to serious interruptions, often for
weeks together, from frost in winter and drought in summer.  In short, it
is urged that the apprehensions of the Canal Companies are the best test
of the further advantage of a Railway; since unless the latter obtained a
large proportion of the heavy traffic, which it could only do by
affording the public a better and cheaper means of transport, the
interests of the Canals could not be prejudiced.

With so strongly expressed a wish on the part of such an important
district for Railway communication, and with two great Companies
competing with one another to afford it, we do not think that, upon
public grounds, we should be justified in reporting that it ought to be
withheld on account of any apprehended interference with existing water
communications.  In the case of one Canal Company, special reasons
existed which might have weighed more strongly than those derived solely
from private considerations; viz. that a guarantee had been given to
assist the Severn Navigation Commissioners to raise money for the purpose
of carrying out a great public improvement authorized by Parliament.  From
this difficulty, however, as well as from the apprehension of that great
improvement being impeded by the introduction of Railways into the
district, we are relieved by the offer made by the Railway Company to
whose scheme we recommend that a preference should be given, to take upon
themselves the burden of the guarantee to the extent of any loss
sustained in consequence of the construction of the Railway, subject to
any reasonable conditions and arrangements.

With regard to the remaining point, that of safety, it is admitted that
portions of the soil being undermined, subsidences occasionally take
place; but there appears no reason to apprehend any peculiar degree of
danger to a Railway from this source, beyond what equally affects the
Canals, Roads, Tramroads, Founderies, Mills, and other buildings of the
district, and which has never been considered an impediment to the
introduction of Railways in other mining districts.  Some of the most
eminent engineers of the day, among whom may be mentioned Sir J. Rennie,
Mr. Brunel, and Mr. R. Stephenson, have proposed the lines which pass
through the district in question, and are clearly of opinion that they
may be worked without any unusual degree of danger.

We are of opinion, therefore, that some one line of Railway is required,
and may be properly sanctioned, for the accommodation of the district in
question, between Wolverhampton and Worcester.  This being conceded, the
sanction of a line in connexion with it, to connect Worcester more
directly with London, and to give communication to the large intermediate
district, appears to follow almost as a matter of course.  The supply of
coals to this district, where a great reduction of price will be
effected, is alone an important object; and, on the other hand, an outlet
will be afforded for agricultural produce.  A population of about 128,000
between Worcester and Tring would be accommodated by the line in that
direction; and on the whole, taken in connexion with the Worcester and
Wolverhampton Junction, the traffic seems sufficient to justify a fair
expectation of return on the capital to be invested, as also on the Rugby
and Oxford portion of the line, which will complete a chain of direct
Railway communication from the Northern and Midland to the Southern and
South Western counties, and will afford to those counties a valuable
supply of coal from the Derbyshire collieries.

We proceed, therefore, to investigate the subject, on the assumption that
one or other of the competing schemes promoted by the London and
Birmingham, and Great Western Companies, will be sanctioned, and that the
question is reduced to one of preference between them.

In regard to distance, the two schemes are as nearly as possible equal,
the distance from Worcester to London being 122 miles by the Tring line,
and 119 by the Oxford line; the former, however, terminating at the
Euston Square Station, and the latter at Paddington.  The number of miles
of new Railway to be constructed in either case is also nearly the same;
nor does there appear to be anything in respect of gradients or
engineering character calculated to give one scheme a decided preference
over the other.  The course of the Tring line accommodates a larger
population between Worcester and London than the Oxford line; but the
importance of the districts traversed by either line, and left out by its
competitor, is hardly sufficient to give a decided superiority on a
question of such magnitude.

A far more important feature of comparison is derived from a
consideration of the question of gauge.

The Great Western scheme is proposed to be constructed on the wide gauge
of seven feet, used upon the different Railways of the Great Western
system; while the scheme of the London and Birmingham Company is proposed
to be constructed on the narrow gauge of 4 feet 8.5 inches, common to all
the other Railways of the kingdom.

In order to estimate fully the importance of this question, it must be
borne in mind that the Bristol and Gloucester Railway is on the wide,
while the Birmingham and Gloucester is on the narrow gauge, and that the
inconvenience resulting from the break of the two gauges at Gloucester
has been so great as to lead to an amalgamation of the two Companies,
with a view to obviate it, by introducing uniformity of gauge throughout
between Bristol and Birmingham.  From the arrangements which have been
made with this view, it is perfectly evident that upon the question of
the Worcester lines depends whether this uniformity will be proposed to
be attained, by the Birmingham and Gloucester Railway adopting the wide
gauge, or the Bristol and Gloucester adopting the narrow.

The question, therefore, upon which we have had to form an opinion is,
whether it is better for public interests that the wide gauge should come
up to Birmingham and Rugby, or that the narrow gauge should go down to
Bristol and Oxford?

It would be difficult to overrate the importance of this question in a
national and commercial point of view.  If there is one point more fully
established than another in the practice of Railways, it is that the
inconvenience occasioned by a break upon a line of through-traffic,
occasioned by want of uniformity of gauge, is of such a serious
description as to detract most materially from the advantages of Railway
communication.

The following description of what has actually occurred at Gloucester
during the last few months, furnished to us by a gentleman who has been
practically engaged in the management of the traffic, will give some idea
of the working of the system:--

   "We experience the greatest possible inconvenience from the change,
   both as regards passengers and goods; coals we have not attempted to
   tranship.

   "In the first place as regards passengers and passenger trains:

   "The passengers and their luggage have to be hurried across from one
   train to the other, when there is a chance of the luggage being
   misplaced.  Gentlemen's carriages and horses have to be changed, a
   process uniting time and risk.  Valuable parcels have to be handed out
   in the confusion, and handed in.

   "The result is a delay, with the Mail-trains, for instance, of half an
   hour sometimes, just sufficient if the coming-in train is after time,
   to miss the Manchester or other train from Birmingham, or the Exeter
   or Bath train from Bristol; annoyance to the passengers, who are
   anxious about their parcels and luggage; risk, and expense, as a large
   body of porters have to be maintained, who are not fully employed, in
   order that no more time than is necessary should be lost in the change
   of trains.

   "With regard to goods, the inconvenience attending the change is far
   more serious.

   "Up to this day a great number of waggons laden with goods of all
   descriptions have been lying at Gloucester, which we have been unable
   to remove in spite of every exertion.  We keep an establishment of
   clerks and porters to superintend and effect the transhipment, but, in
   the hurry of business, mistakes occur; goods destined for Hull are
   perhaps put into the Manchester truck; boxes are bruised, packing
   torn, furniture and brittle articles damaged.  There is the chance of
   mistake in the re-invoicing of goods; the other day, for instance, a
   bale for Bristol was laid hold of by a carrier at Gloucester and taken
   to Brecon, a claim for some 30_l._ being instantly made upon us.

   "In short, all the inconvenience, delay, and expense attending an
   unloading and reloading of goods have to be encountered, and there is
   nothing the senders of goods so much dread as this.  The expense
   involved is very considerable: there is the expense of porterage,
   which varies from 3_d._ to 6_d._ per ton: the expense of clerks
   employed in inspecting and invoicing the goods, the expense of
   shunting the waggons, the waste of premises, the additional carrying
   stock it obliges the Companies on each gauge to maintain, and, above
   all, the loss of trade which is sure to result from the delay and risk
   attending the change, and the advantage which uninterrupted
   communications, whether by Water or Railway, are sure to have over you
   in competition.

   "Much of this expense and delay, it may be said, can be obviated by
   better arrangements and more care; by ample station accommodation, by
   abundant carrying stock.  No doubt some of it may be prevented, but
   this is only another name for expense.  The care, too, which is
   required must not be confined to the Railways immediately affected,
   but must commence on a Railway a long way off.  The goods from Leeds
   for Bristol, for instance, must be duly placed together at Leeds,
   packed in such a manner as will enable you at Gloucester to get at
   them in the best manner.  They must be forwarded from Leeds, and again
   from Birmingham, in such quantities as will be convenient at
   Gloucester.  The arrangements, in short, by which our interests at
   Gloucester will be best consulted, will have to be made by another
   Company, often not interested in the matter, and whose convenience may
   suggest another course.  You cannot, therefore, look forward to
   remedying many of the difficulties attending on change of gauge, which
   are of this nature."

To the above summary of the practical inconveniences mentioned, we have
only to add, that the numerous representations addressed to us by the
principal carrying and commercial interests which have been concerned in
the traffic affected by the change of gauge at Gloucester, have fully
borne out the statement of the evils experienced, more especially with
reference to the loss, delay, and misdirection of goods.  The principal
Railway Companies north of Birmingham have also made strong
representations as to the obstacle thrown in the way of a proper
development of the traffic by the break of gauge; an obstacle which, as
regards coal, iron, salt, corn, and every description of heavy goods,
they consider as amounting to a virtual prohibition.

The question may be raised how far it is possible to obviate the
inconvenience of two different gauges by mechanical arrangements?  These
arrangements may consist either--

1.  Of contrivances for transferring the bodies of waggons from the
wheels and axles adapted for one gauge to those adapted for the other;
or--

2.  The laying down of additional rails, so as to permit trains of either
gauge to run on without interruption.

With regard to the first, it is stated that the experiment has been
repeatedly tried on the Liverpool and Manchester, the Newcastle and
Darlington, the Leicester and Swannington, and other Railways, where
crossed by local coal Railways of a narrower gauge, and has never
succeeded.  The practical difficulties also are obvious, of securing with
waggons constructed with moveable bodies, the rigidity and solidity
requisite for safety, and to prevent excessive wear and tear, and damage
to the articles conveyed.  Even if we were to suppose, however, all
mechanical difficulties overcome, the serious objection would still
remain, that in addition to the expense of transfer, a large additional
stock would require to be kept by all Railway Companies, owners of mines,
and other parties who had occasion to send traffic sometimes in the
direction where the gauge was uninterrupted, and sometimes in the
direction where waggons of a special construction were required.  This
consideration is the more important as, under the system of the clearing-
house, the whole stock of the narrow-gauge Railways of the country may be
considered as becoming more and more common property, available wherever
there may be a press of business, and for as great distances as may be
required, in order to avoid the inconvenience of unloading.

The second arrangement, of laying down additional rails, may be
practicable under peculiar circumstances, and to a limited extent, but it
is open to great objections.

It is very doubtful how far the addition of a single rail only would be
consistent with safety, as in this case the centre of gravity of the
carriages of different gauge in the same train would not be in the same
straight line.  If a complete double set of rails were laid down the
expense would be very considerable.

The complication of switches and crossings that would be necessary would
involve considerable additional risk and great expense.  The difficulty
and expense of maintaining the permanent way, and of keeping the double
set of rails in proper adjustment, would be greatly increased; and on the
whole, the expense, inconvenience, and risk, would probably be so great
as to prevent the experiment from being tried to any extent.

We cannot therefore consider the plan of laying down additional rails as
applicable, unless perhaps to a limited extent and under special
circumstances, such as enabling, for instance, mineral waggons
constructed for the narrow gauge to pass for a short distance and at a
slow speed over a wide-gauge Railway; with which view alone it is
proposed to lay down extra rails upon the Oxford, Worcester, and
Wolverhampton line, for a few miles south of Wolverhampton.

On the whole, therefore, we cannot consider any of the mechanical
arrangements which have been proposed for obviating the inconvenience of
a meeting of different gauges (even if we could assume their
practicability, which in the present state of experience we should not be
warranted in doing,) as anything better than partial and imperfect
palliatives of a great evil.

Assuming this to be the case, and assuming also, as we are compelled to
do, that an interruption of gauge must exist somewhere, the question is
reduced to this: to ascertain at what points such interruption should be
fixed in order to occasion the least inconvenience to the traffic and
commerce of the country.  From the fact that nearly 2,000 miles of
Railway are already made or sanctioned on the narrow gauge, while not
more than 300 are sanctioned on the wide gauge, a disproportion which
will be still more largely increased by the new Railways now in
contemplation, an inference might be drawn in favour of confining the
gauge which is in such a decided minority within the narrowest possible
limits; and this inference might be strengthened by referring to the
obvious fact that the wide gauge has not realized those decided
advantages over the narrow gauge which were at one time anticipated.  The
actual speed of trains upon the Great Western Railway, as shown by the
published time-tables, and by official returns, is not so high as upon
some narrow-gauge Railways, and notwithstanding the excellence of its
gradients, very slightly higher than the average speed of other great
Railways on the narrow gauge.  In respect of safety, it is manifest that
both gauges are alike unobjectionable, with due precaution and proper
management; and in respect of convenience and of economy, including the
cost both of construction and working, the opinion of a great majority of
the most eminent authorities is unfavourable to the wide gauge.

Without wishing to express any positive opinion ourselves upon the point,
it is enough for us to say that we think there is nothing in the relative
merits of the two gauges in themselves materially to affect the question
between them, which turns upon commercial considerations.

In this point of view the question is, as we have already observed,
whether the points of junction between the wide and narrow gauge should
be at Rugby, Birmingham and Wolverhampton, or at Oxford and Bristol.  In
support of the first view, it is contended that the principle which
should regulate the choice of the points of junction ought to be to fix
them at great _foci_ of traffic, and centres of converging Railways,
where delay must take place and large establishments be maintained at any
rate; while on the other hand it is contended that such points are the
worst possible to select, and that the opposite principle should be
adopted, of confining an inevitable inconvenience within the narrowest
possible limits, by fixing the points of junction where there is least
through-traffic.

The correctness of the latter proposition seems perfectly obvious upon
general considerations; but the question is one of such great commercial
importance, that we have thought it right to inquire fully and in detail
into the practical effects that would result to the principal interests
concerned from an interruption of the gauge, on the one hand, at
Birmingham and Rugby, and on the other at Bristol and Oxford.

By either combination the traffic of places intermediate between
Birmingham and Bristol with each other, and with London, would not be
affected; uniformity of gauge being secured equally in the one case by
the wide, in the other by the narrow gauge.  By either combination the
traffic between places north and east of the line of the London and
Birmingham Railway and places south of the line of the Great Western
Railway would not be affected, interruption of gauge having equally to be
encountered in the one case at Bristol and Oxford, in the other at
Birmingham and Rugby.

By the former or wide-gauge combination, the traffic between Devonshire,
Cornwall and all places south of the line of the Great Western Railway,
and Birmingham, and all places between Birmingham and Bristol, would
gain, _i.e._ would escape an interruption of gauge; also such of the
traffic of South Wales, to Birmingham, and places short of Birmingham, as
in the event of the South Wales Railway being sanctioned, would take the
circuitous route by that Railway to the north of Gloucester.

On the other hand by the narrow-gauge combination, a break is avoided in
the whole of the traffic between Manchester, Liverpool, Hull, and the
Northern, Eastern, and Midland portions of the kingdom, and Bristol,
Gloucester, Worcester, and the whole district intermediate between the
London and Birmingham and Great Western Railways.

The paramount importance of this consideration has been strongly urged
upon us by parties practically acquainted with the traffic, and by the
principal interests affected by the question.

In the memorial already referred to, signed by the representatives of 46
iron-works, 57 furnaces, and 98 collieries, in the Staffordshire mineral
district, in favour of the London and Birmingham line, and narrow-gauge
system, it is stated that, of the total export of the district, only
eight per cent. is sent in the direction of Bristol, of which by far the
greater quantity is shipped from that port, and would therefore be
unaffected by a break of gauge there; while 37 per cent. is sent to
Liverpool and the north and north-west of the kingdom, and 13 per cent.
to Hull and the east, all of which would consequently suffer by a break
at Birmingham.

The wool trade between Bristol, where wool fairs are held annually, and
Leicester and the West Riding of Yorkshire, is very considerable, all of
which would escape a break of gauge by the narrow-gauge combination.

The export of salt from Droitwich, both to Gloucester and Bristol, and to
Hull and other parts of the kingdom, is already large, and likely to
receive very great increase, if an unbroken Railway communication is
afforded, which can only be done by the narrow-gauge combination.

The same combination affords the important advantage of an unbroken
communication to the traffic of Manchester and Liverpool with Bristol,
and indeed with the whole of the West of England, as a very
inconsiderable proportion of the goods actually dispatched require to be
carried in transit through Bristol.  The same remark applies to the trade
of the Potteries with the West of England; of Bristol and Gloucester with
the Midland Counties, where the imports of these ports now meet those of
Hull and Liverpool; of Worcester, Kidderminster, &c. with Liverpool,
Lancashire, and Yorkshire, and of various other branches of traffic that
might be specified.

As a proof of the importance of some of the branches of traffic that
would be thus inconvenienced by a change of gauge at Birmingham, it may
be mentioned that single carriers already send as much as 20,000 tons a
year in transit through Birmingham, by the Birmingham and Gloucester
Railway, and that the total quantity thus sent is estimated at from
50,000 to 100,000 tons per annum, and is considered to be capable of
great increase, the line of communication having been only very recently
completed by the opening of the Bristol and Gloucester Railway, and the
development of the traffic having since been greatly impeded by the
interruption of the gauge at Gloucester, and other circumstances.

With the low rates which it is now proposed to establish on coals, salt,
agricultural produce, and other heavy goods, the amount of traffic that
may be expected to pass from the west in transit through Birmingham, and
_vice versa_, if the advantage of an unbroken communication can be
secured, will be exceedingly great.  It has been represented to us that
Droitwich alone would send upwards of 250,000 tons of salt annually.

The same observation applies as to the coal traffic from the Midland
Counties through Rugby to Oxford.  The whole of the extensive district
between Rugby and Oxford, where coal is now usually at a very high price,
may be cheaply supplied by Railway; an object of great importance, which
could be only partially attained if the impediment of an interruption of
gauge were allowed to exist at Rugby.

Another important consideration which seems to point to Bristol rather
than Birmingham, as a proper point for the interruption of the gauge, and
which has been strongly urged upon us by carriers, merchants, and
practical men acquainted with the course of traffic, is, that Bristol,
like London, is a great emporium and shipping port, through which a
comparatively small portion of the goods which enter by Railway require
to be forwarded in transit without repacking and assortment.  The
facilities for water communication with Bristol also give the public a
better alternative than they would enjoy elsewhere of avoiding the
inconvenience of the change of gauge, and thus afford the best possible
security, that if the interruption be fixed there, the Railway Companies
interested will use every possible effort to reduce the inconvenience to
a _minimum_.

For all these considerations, we can have no hesitation in expressing our
preference, on public grounds, to the alternative that proposes to fix
the break of gauges at Bristol and Oxford, rather than at Birmingham and
Rugby.

Another important advantage offered by the London and Birmingham scheme,
and intimately connected with the question of the gauge, is the
arrangement by which it is proposed to lay down an additional double line
of rails throughout the mineral district, to be devoted entirely to the
accommodation of the mineral traffic.

We have already seen that the production of iron of the district requires
a continued interchange of coals, lime, ironstone, and other raw
materials among the different mines and works, to the extent of about
4,000,000 tons annually.

It is only by obtaining ready access to the Railway by means of short
branches or tramroads from those mines and works, that the benefits
contemplated from the introduction of Railway communication can be fully
realized.  But if this is to be the case, and if any considerable portion
of this immense local traffic is to pass by Railway, it is manifest that
the rails so used could not be rendered available without extreme danger
and inconvenience for the general traffic.  Even the export trade alone
in coals and iron could not be conducted with convenience upon the same
line of rails as the passenger traffic, and would require a separate line
of rails in order to allow the waggons passing and repassing from the
different works within the district to reach without interruption some
principal station at its extremity, where trains of the proper size could
be formed and dispatched to distant points.  This object would be very
imperfectly fulfilled by the plan proposed by the wide-gauge Railway, of
laying down an extra rail, or pair of rails, on the narrow gauge, inside
the principal rails, which would, in fact, obviate none of the objections
to the accumulation of slow mineral trains upon the main passenger line,
and would allow of no access by lateral tramroads, without cutting up the
main line by crossings.  It is represented also that the waggons of the
wide gauge are, from their greater weight and size, ill adapted for the
purposes of the mineral traffic.

The arrangement in question, of an additional double line of rails, is
equally proposed by the line from Birmingham to Shrewsbury, _via_ Dudley
and Wolverhampton, which traverses the same mineral district, and must be
considered as, to a great extent, identified with the Tring or London and
Birmingham scheme.

The case of the Shrewsbury line, as compared with the competing scheme of
the Grand Junction Company, which stops at Wolverhampton, depends very
much on the same arguments, of the importance of opening up the
Staffordshire mineral field by Railway communication, which have been
already adduced in favour of the Tring line; and the objections to it on
the part of the Canal and other interests are of the same description.
The arrangements proposed for supplying the local wants of the district
are also of the same nature, and the plans and sections of the two lines
correspond, so that the portion between Dudley and Wolverhampton is
common to the two; the understanding being that, if both are sanctioned
by Parliament, this portion is to be made by the Shrewsbury Company, and
used on equitable conditions by the other Company.

The Great Western scheme, on the other hand, introduces a different gauge
and different arrangements, and adopts a different line between Dudley
and Wolverhampton, so that its existence is hardly compatible with that
of the Shrewsbury scheme.

For the reasons stated we are therefore of opinion that, for the purpose
of accommodating the great mineral district of Staffordshire, the
combined scheme of the Tring and Shrewsbury lines is preferable to any
other that has been proposed.

The Tring scheme is equally superior for the local accommodation of
Kidderminster, Stourbridge, and Stourport, to which it gives better
stations, by pursuing a lower level along the bottom of the valleys, and
it admits of more easy extension towards Leominster, Ludlow, and the
West.  Between Worcester and London it accommodates, as we have already
seen, a larger population; and therefore, on the whole, both in these
respects and in the important particular of the gauge, it seems to us to
be in itself decidedly preferable to the competing Great Western scheme.

It remains to be seen whether there are any other considerations which
might modify this conclusion.

It is urged, that the concession of this line to a Company promoted by
the London and Birmingham Company, will constitute a great monopoly,
extending over a vast extent of country, while, by giving it to the Great
Western Company, a competition would be introduced, from which the Public
might derive benefit.  On the other hand, it may be said that, to allow
the Great Western Company to embrace, by their influence, not only the
whole western communications of the island, but also the whole of South
Wales, and the whole district up to Worcester and Birmingham, would be to
establish a monopoly much more gigantic than that of the London and
Birmingham.  This latter monopoly would also be more obviously
objectionable, inasmuch as an interest adverse to the Public would at
once be established if the line from London to Worcester and
Wolverhampton, and that from Bristol to Birmingham, were to be in the
same hands, and upon the same wide gauge, as the line now proposed
through South Wales.  The accommodation of Herefordshire, Worcestershire,
South Wales, and the important districts lying to the west of the present
lines of Railway, will evidently, at no distant period, require not only
a wide-gauge Railway along the Southern coast, to place them in
communication with London, but also a narrow-gauge Railway to place them
in direct and unbroken communication, through Birmingham, with the
manufacturing districts and the great Railway system of the rest of the
kingdom.

The extension of such a Railway would be greatly facilitated by the
establishment of the narrow gauge, and of an interest independent of the
Great Western, in the Worcester district, and, on the other hand, would
be greatly impeded if that district were assigned to the Great Western
interest and to the wide gauge.

In respect therefore of the general question of monopoly, it appears to
us that nothing would be gained by substituting that of the Great Western
for that of the London and Birmingham, which is the only alternative; at
the same time, if the latter Company had shown no disposition to meet the
fair demands of the Public by a reduction of rates, and to obviate the
objections of monopoly by the offer of reasonable guarantees, it might
perhaps have become necessary, notwithstanding the disadvantages of the
Great Western scheme, in respect of the gauge and other points, to adopt
this alternative.

This is, however, by no means the case; but, on the contrary, the London
and Birmingham Company have come forward voluntarily to offer guarantees
and conditions of a very advantageous character.

They offer, on condition of their Worcester scheme being sanctioned, at
once to meet the objections of monopoly, by inserting in their Act the
following provisions:

1.  The whole of the Railways under their control, including the existing
London and Birmingham Railway, to become subject to the options of
revision and purchase contained in the Act of last year: the option of
revision, however, at 10 per cent. to accrue at an earlier period than
that of 20 years, specified in the Act.

2.  A revised tariff to be framed for the whole of the said Railways,
including the London and Birmingham Railway, upon the principle of fixing
_maximum_ rates for passengers and goods lower than those at present
charged, and at as low a level as those charged upon any of the principal
Northern Railways.

3.  One article of such tariff to be, that coals and iron are to be
carried at rates not exceeding 1_d._ per ton per mile, including toll and
locomotive power.

4.  All differences with other Railway Companies, by which the public
safety or convenience are affected, to be referred to the Board of Trade,
or other competent authority for that purpose established by Parliament.

6.  The London and Birmingham Company to pledge the whole revenue of
their existing line for the completion of the proposed undertaking within
a reasonable time.

It appears to us that these guarantees hold out for the Public a prospect
of permanent and certain advantage greatly beyond anything that could be
expected from the competition of two great Companies, who would be urged
by every motive of interest to combine.

We attach the greatest importance to the security obtained for the cheap
transit of coals and minerals.  Not only will a great benefit be thereby,
as we believe, secured for the important mineral districts of
Staffordshire and the Midland Counties, but also a still more important
benefit for the poorer and industrious classes, and for the consumers of
coals generally throughout the Southern and Western Counties, and in the
Metropolis.

The charge of conveyance of coals by Railway from South Staffordshire or
Derbyshire to London will not exceed 11_s._ or 12_s._ per ton, and it has
been stated to us, that, after payment of all charges, good house coals
could be sold here, with a profit, at prices not exceeding 20_s._ per
ton.

During the recent frost and easterly winds the price of coals in London
has been as high as 40_s._ per ton; and during the winter the price
frequently exceeds 30_s._ for coals of ordinary quality.  When we
consider how materially the comfort of all classes, more especially of
those in humble circumstances, depends on a regular supply of cheap coal,
and also how much the employment of industry is affected by the same
circumstances, and when we bear in mind that a saving of every shilling
per ton on the average consumption of the Metropolis is equivalent to an
annual saving to its inhabitants of 150,000_l._, it is impossible not to
appreciate the importance of insuring low rates of charge upon the
principal Railways which are in connexion with the great inland coal
fields.

In other respects also we think that the introduction of a system of
moderate charges upon the London and Birmingham and its tributary
Railways, will be calculated to afford great advantage to important
commercial interests, and to the community at large, while we see every
reason to hope that it will not be unproductive of benefit to the Company
itself.  We must remember, however, that this latter point is, to a
certain extent, experimental, and that it is highly important to obtain
voluntarily from the Company guarantees of a permanent character.

It must not be forgotten that, without some arrangement of this sort, the
Company, if so disposed, has a perfect legal right to resort to charges
so high as greatly to inconvenience the Public, and that, under an
altered state of things, with a depressed money-market, and all fear of
immediate competition removed, it is by no means certain that it might
not find it for its interest to do so.

We have also the authority of the Select Committee of last Session for
attaching great importance to the prospective guarantee, for the future,
in the shape of options of revision or purchase, which are now
voluntarily offered by one of the first Railway Companies in the kingdom,
whose line could not be, otherwise than by their own consent, subjected
to the operation of any conditions not contained in their original Act.

On the whole, therefore, when we consider on the one hand the superior
advantages afforded by the London and Birmingham scheme in itself, and by
the adoption of the narrow gauge, and on the other the great advantages
offered by the London and Birmingham Company, in connexion with it, over
their whole system, and the ample guarantees given against any possible
abuses of monopoly, we can arrive at no other conclusion than that the
scheme promoted by that Company is preferable on public grounds to the
competing scheme, which is inferior in itself, and which holds out no
such collateral advantages.

Having already referred to the Shrewsbury, Wolverhampton, Dudley, and
Birmingham scheme, as connected, in a great measure, with those between
Worcester and Wolverhampton, it will be convenient to include this scheme
in the present Report.

We have stated that the general question involved in the comparison of
this scheme with the competing line proposed by the Grand Junction
Company is, that the latter joins the Grand Junction line at
Wolverhampton, and thus affords no accommodation to the mineral district
between Wolverhampton and Birmingham.

If the views which we have stated in regard to the importance of opening
up this district by Railway communication are correct, this consideration
alone is sufficient to give a decided preference to the more extended
scheme.  It also appears to us, that to entrust the branch to Shrewsbury
to the Grand Junction Company would be open to the objection which we
have stated in our previous Report upon the South Eastern schemes, when
discussing the general policy of giving a preference to lines proposed by
existing Companies for the accommodation of adjoining districts, viz.
that there may be danger in giving such preference where the scheme
proposed by the existing Company, although insufficient for the complete
accommodation of the district to be provided for, may yet be sufficient
to throw impediments in the way of other parties coming forward with more
extensive schemes.

A line to Shrewsbury, in the hands of the Grand Junction Company, would
manifestly be not unlikely to be used for the purposes of protection
against competition, rather than of encouragement to Extensions beyond
Shrewsbury, and to the legitimate development of the traffic.  It appears
to us, therefore, that, under the peculiar circumstances of the case, the
fact of the Shrewsbury and Birmingham line being promoted by a
substantial and independent local party, is a legitimate ground of
preference, in addition to that already pointed out, of the superior
advantages afforded by the independent line to the populous mining
district between Wolverhampton and Birmingham.

As regards the line between Shrewsbury and Stafford, of which plans and
sections have likewise been deposited by the Grand Junction Company, it
appears sufficient to say, that although as a mere line for the town of
Shrewsbury, it might afford considerable advantages, it accomplishes none
of the more important advantages for the district at large which are held
out by the line to Birmingham.

We are of opinion, therefore, that the latter line is preferable to all
the competing schemes proposed, upon general grounds of public policy;
and we are aware of no public reasons why it should not receive the
sanction of Parliament.

At the same time, there are points of detail connected with it, more
especially as regards the mode of passing through the town of Birmingham,
and of effecting a junction with the London and Birmingham Railway, to
which we think that the attention of Parliament should be especially
directed.  With regard to the first point, it depends to a great extent
upon considerations of private property, which we are precluded from
entertaining; but with regard to the second point, it appears to us of
the greatest importance that provision should be made for an
uninterrupted and convenient junction in Birmingham between the projected
line and that of the London and Birmingham Railway.

* * * * *

In conclusion, we beg to draw attention to the passage of the Fifth
Report of the Select Committee of last year, in which it is stated, in
recommending that Reports should be made to Parliament by this department
upon Railway Schemes, "That no such Report should be held to prejudice
the claims of private persons, the examination of which should be
altogether reserved to the Houses of the Legislature."

In submitting to Parliament, in conformity with the recommendations of
that Committee, the results at which we have arrived, with a view to the
information and assistance of Parliament in forming a judgment upon the
schemes in question, in so far as our Report may be available for that
purpose, we are anxious that it should be distinctly understood that we
have arrived at these results solely upon public grounds, and to the
exclusion of all considerations how far such results might require to be
modified by a due regard for private rights and interests.

DALHOUSIE.

C. W. PASLEY.

G. R. PORTER.

D. O'BRIEN.

S. LAING.

* * * * *

RAILWAYS.

MAP
OF THE SEVERAL
PROJECTED RAILWAYS,
IN THE
WORCESTER, WOLVERHAMPTON, &c,
DIVISION.

(Broad and Narrow Gauges.)

REFERRED TO IN THE

REPORT of the RAILWAY DEPARTMENT of the BOARD of TRADE on the LONDON,
WORCESTER, AND WOLVERHAMPTON, and on the BIRMINGHAM AND SHREWSBURY
DISTRICTS.

_Ordered_, _by_ The House of Commons, _to be Printed_,
28 _February_ 1845.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT OF THE RAILWAY DEPARTMENT ***


******* This file should be named 20388.txt or 20388.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/3/8/20388



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

