Project Gutenberg's The Laws of Euchre, by H. C. Leeds and James Dwight

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Laws of Euchre
       As adopted by the Somerset Club of Boston, March 1, 1888

Author: H. C. Leeds
        James Dwight

Release Date: February 2, 2007 [EBook #20506]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAWS OF EUCHRE ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Jonathan Niehof, Bill Tozier
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net










THE LAWS OF EUCHRE

AS ADOPTED BY THE SOMERSET CLUB
OF BOSTON, MARCH 1, 1888

With Some Suggestions about the Play

BY
H. C. LEEDS AND JAMES DWIGHT

[Illustration]

BOSTON
TICKNOR AND COMPANY
211 Tremont Street
1888

_Copyright, 1888,_
BY TICKNOR AND COMPANY.

_All rights reserved._

University Press:
JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE, U. S. A.

[Illustration]




PREFACE.


Euchre is played in so many different ways and under so many different
rules that there seems to be a necessity for more rigid and exact Laws
than exist at present.

The Laws of Euchre, as here appended, have stood the test of time and
received the attention of many scientific Euchre-players.

If any game of cards is worth playing at all, it should be played
according to rule in the strictest interpretation, and no favors should
be given or expected.

An attempt has been made in these Rules to make the penalties
commensurate with the advantage which _might_ be gained by the error. A
common instance of this is in the case of a lead out of turn. It often
happens that the exposed card is an advantage to the side so offending,
and the adversaries have no redress. Here the Whist Law has been
applied, allowing the non-offending side the option of two penalties.
See Rule 52.

Another instance occurs in a lone hand. An exposed card can only benefit
the adversaries, consequently no penalty is attached; but should the
lone hand lead out of turn, he is supposed to be attempting to gain an
advantage, therefore Rule 104 has been adopted.

[Illustration]




CONTENTS.


                                  PAGE

THE LAWS OF EUCHRE                   7
    The Rubber                       7
    Scoring                          7
    Cutting                          9
    Formation of the Table           9
    Cutting Cards of Equal Value    10
    Cutting out                     11
    Entry and Re-entry              11
    Shuffling                       13
    The Deal                        14
    A New Deal                      15
    A Misdeal                       17
    Cards liable to be called       18
    Cards played in Error           22
    The Revoke                      24
    Calling for New Cards           26
    Making the Trump and Playing    27
    The Discard                     30
    The Trump Card                  32
    Playing alone                   32
    Etiquette of Euchre             35
    Technical Terms used in Euchre  38
GENERAL REMARKS                     41
    Eldest, or First Hand           43
    Second Hand                     46
    Third Hand                      50
    The Dealer                      52
    The Bridge                      56
    Lone Hands                      57
    Coups                           61
      Case I.                       63
      Case II.                      65
      Case III.                     66
      Case IV.                      67
      Case V.                       68
      Case VI.                      70
      Case VII.                     72
      Case VIII.                    73
      Case IX.                      75

[Illustration]




THE LAWS OF EUCHRE.


THE RUBBER.

1. The rubber is the best of three games. If the first two games are won
by the same players, the third game is played; should the score of the
third game lap, a fourth game is played.


SCORING.

2. A game consists of five points. Should a player order up, assist,
adopt, or make the trump, and he and his partner take five tricks, they
score two; three or four tricks, they score one. If they fail to take
three tricks they are euchred, and the adversaries score two.

3. When a player plays alone and takes five tricks, he scores four;
three or four tricks, he scores one. If he fails to take three tricks he
is euchred, and the adversaries score four.

4. The penalty of a revoke takes precedence of all other scores.

5. An error in the score can be rectified at any time before the trump
card is turned in the next deal.

6. Points should be announced before scoring.

7. Each game won counts one unless the losing side has failed to score,
in which case the game counts two. Two additional points are taken by
the side winning the rubber. Thus it is possible to win ten points in a
rubber; that is, four double games, and two points for the rubber.


CUTTING.

8. The knave is the highest card, then the ace, king, etc.

9. In all cases every one must cut from the same pack.

10. Should a player expose more than one card, he must cut again.


FORMATION OF THE TABLE.

11. If there are more than four candidates, the players are selected by
cutting; those first in the room having the preference. The four who cut
the highest cards play first, and again cut to decide on partners. The
two highest play against the two lowest. The highest is the dealer, who
has choice of cards, seats, and counters; and having once made his
selection, he must abide by it.

12. When there are more than six candidates, those who cut the fifth and
sixth highest cards belong to the table.


CUTTING CARDS OF EQUAL VALUE.

13. Two players cutting cards of equal value, unless such cards are the
two lowest, or the two highest, cut again.

14. Three players cutting cards of equal value, cut again; should the
fourth (or remaining) card be the highest, the two lowest of the new cut
are partners, and their opponents have the deal. Should the fourth card
be the lowest, the two highest of the new cut are partners, and have the
deal and choice of seats, etc.


CUTTING OUT.

15. At the end of a rubber, should admission be claimed by any one, or
by two candidates, he who has, or they who have, played a greater number
of consecutive rubbers than the others, is or are out. When all have
played the same number, they must cut to decide on the out-goers, the
lowest going out.


ENTRY AND RE-ENTRY.

16. A candidate wishing to enter a table must declare such intention
before any of the players have cut a card, either for the purpose of
commencing a new rubber, or of cutting out.

17. In the formation of fresh tables, those candidates who have neither
belonged to nor played at any other table, have the prior right of
entry; the others decide their right of admission by cutting.

18. Any one quitting a table prior to the conclusion of a rubber may,
with the consent of the other three players, appoint a substitute in his
absence during that rubber.

19. Should a player leave a full table after he has played but one of
the two consecutive rubbers to which he is entitled, the candidate next
in order for entrance to the table takes his place, but must go out at
the end of one rubber, as his predecessor would have done.

20. A player cutting into one table while belonging to another, loses
his right of re-entry into the latter, and takes his chance of cutting
in as if he were a fresh candidate.

21. If any one break up a table, the remaining players have the prior
right to him of entry into any other; and should there not be vacancies
at such other table for all those candidates, they settle their
precedence by cutting.


SHUFFLING.

22. The pack must neither be shuffled below the table, nor so that the
face of any card can be seen.

23. The pack must not be shuffled during the play of a hand.

24. Each player has a right to shuffle once only, except as provided by
Law 27, prior to a deal, after a false cut, or when a new deal has
occurred.

25. The dealer's partner must collect the cards for the ensuing deal,
and he has the first right to shuffle that pack.

26. Each player, after shuffling, must place the cards, properly
collected and face downwards, to the left of the player about to deal.

27. The dealer has always the right to shuffle last; but should a card
or cards be seen during his shuffling or while giving the pack to be
cut, he may be compelled to re-shuffle.


THE DEAL.

28. Each player deals in turn; the right of dealing goes to the left.

29. The player on the dealer's right cuts the pack, and in dividing it
he must not leave fewer than four cards in either packet. If in cutting
or in placing one of the packets on the other, a card be exposed, or if
there be any confusion of the cards, or a doubt as to the exact place
where the pack was divided, there must be a fresh cut.

30. When a player has once separated a pack he cannot alter his
intention; he can neither re-shuffle nor re-cut the cards.

31. When the pack is cut, should the dealer re-shuffle he loses the
deal.

32. After dealing, the dealer should put the pack at his right hand.


A NEW DEAL.

33. There must be a new deal by the same dealer if during the deal or
during the play of the hand the pack be found to be incorrect or
imperfect; but all points scored on previous hands stand.

34. If any card be found faced in the pack before a lead is made, there
must be a new deal.

35. If, while dealing, a card be exposed by the dealer or his partner,
the adversaries can call for a new deal, provided that neither of them
has touched the cards. A card exposed by either adversary gives that
claim to the dealer, provided that his partner has not touched the
cards. If a new deal does not take place, the exposed card cannot be
called.

36. If, during the deal, a player touch any of his cards, the
adversaries may do the same without losing their privilege of claiming a
new deal, should chance give them such option.

37. If, in dealing, one of the last cards be exposed, and the dealer
turn up the trump before there is reasonable time for his adversaries to
decide as to a fresh deal, they do not thereby lose their privilege.

38. A deal made with the adversaries' cards is good, provided that the
trump card has been turned. If not, a new deal may be claimed. The
players thus losing their cards may reclaim them at the end of the
deal.

39. Should the dealer, in turning the trump card, expose any other card
of the pack, there must be a new deal.

40. A deal out of turn can be stopped, if the error be discovered before
the trump card is turned; otherwise the deal stands.


A MISDEAL.

41. A misdeal loses the deal.

42. It is a misdeal,--

I. Unless five cards are dealt to each player.

II. Unless the dealer begin by giving two cards to each player in turn
in the first round of the deal, and three in the second, or _vice
versa_.

43. A misdeal does not lose the deal if during the dealing either of the
adversaries touch the cards prior to the dealer's partner having done
so. Should the latter have first interfered with the cards,
notwithstanding either or both of the adversaries have subsequently done
the same, the deal is lost.

44. If the adversaries interrupt a dealer while dealing, either by
questioning the score or asserting that it is not his deal, and fail to
establish such claim, should a misdeal occur he may deal again.

45. Should a player take his partner's deal and misdeal, the latter is
liable to the usual penalties, and the adversary next in rotation to the
player who ought to have dealt, then deals.


CARDS LIABLE TO BE CALLED.

46. All exposed cards are liable to be called, and must be left on the
table; but a card is not an exposed card when dropped on the floor or
elsewhere below the table.

The following are exposed cards:--

I. Two or more cards played at once.

II. Any card dropped face upwards, or in any way exposed on or above the
table, even though snatched up so quickly that no one can name it.

III. The trump card if lifted from the pack.

47. If any one play to an imperfect trick the highest card on the table,
or lead one which is a winning card against his adversaries, and then
lead again, or play several such winning cards one after the other,
without waiting for his partner to play, the latter may be called on to
win, if he can, the first or any other of those tricks, and the other
cards thus improperly played are exposed cards.

48. If a player or players, under the impression that the game is lost
or won, or for other reasons, throw his or their cards on the table face
upwards, such cards are exposed, and can be called, each player's by the
adversary; but should one player retain his hand, he cannot be forced to
abandon it.

49. If all four players throw their cards on the table face upwards, the
hands are abandoned, and no one can again take up his cards. Should it
then be proved that the game could have been saved or won, no such claim
can be entertained unless a revoke be established.

50. In a lone hand, should either adversary abandon his hand by laying
it face upwards on the table, or by failing to play to every trick, the
party playing alone scores five points.

51. A card detached from the rest of the hand is liable to be called if
either of the adversaries can name it; but should an adversary name a
wrong card, he is liable to have a suit called when he or his partner
next lead.

52. If any player lead out of turn, the adversaries may either call the
card erroneously led, or may call a suit from him or his partner when it
is next the turn of either to lead.

53. If any player lead out of turn, and the other three have followed
him, the trick is complete, and the error cannot be rectified; but if
only the second, or the second and third, have played to the false lead,
their cards, on discovery of the mistake, are taken back, and there is
no penalty against any one except the original offender.

54. If a player who has rendered himself liable to have his highest or
lowest called, fail to play as desired, or if when called on to lead one
suit, lead another, having in his hand one or more cards of the suit
demanded, he incurs the penalty of a revoke.

55. In no case can a player be compelled to play a card which would
oblige him to revoke.

56. The call for an exposed card can be repeated until such card has
been played.

57. If a player called on to lead a suit have none of it, the penalty is
paid.


CARDS PLAYED IN ERROR.

58. Should the third hand play before the second, the fourth may play
before his partner.

59. Should the third hand not have played, and the fourth hand play
before his partner, the latter may be called on to win or lose the
trick.

60. Should any one have omitted playing to a former trick, and such
error be not discovered till he has played to the next, the adversaries
may claim a new deal. Should they decide that the deal stand good, the
surplus card at the end of the hand is considered to have been played to
the imperfect trick, but does not constitute a revoke therein.

61. If any one play two cards to the same trick, or mix his trump or
other card with a trick to which it does not properly belong, and the
mistake is not discovered till the hand is played out, he is answerable
for all the consequent revokes he may have made.

If during the play of the hand the error be detected, the tricks may be
counted face downwards, to ascertain if there be among them a card too
many; should this be the case, the trick may be searched, and the card
restored. The player is, however, liable for all the revokes he may have
meanwhile made.


THE REVOKE.

62. Is when a player, holding one or more cards of the suit led, plays a
card of a different suit.

63. The penalty of a revoke is three points, except in the case of a
lone hand, when it is five; and the penalty may be claimed as often as
the revoke is repeated in the hand.

64. A revoke is established if the trick in which it occurs be turned
and quitted; or if the revoking player or his partner, whether in his
right turn or otherwise, lead or play to the following trick.

65. A player may ask his partner whether he has not a card of the suit
renounced. Should the question be asked before the trick be turned and
quitted, subsequent turning and quitting does not establish the revoke,
and the error may be corrected, unless the question be answered in the
negative, or unless the revoking player or his partner have led or
played to the following trick.

66. At the end of the hand the claimants of a revoke may search all the
tricks.

67. Should a revoke be claimed, and the accused player or his partner
mix the cards before they have been sufficiently examined by the
adversaries, the revoke is established.

68. A revoke cannot be claimed after the cards are cut for the next
deal.

69. If a player discover his mistake in time to save a revoke, the
adversaries may call the card played in error. Any player or players who
have played after him, except his partner, may withdraw their cards and
substitute others; the cards so withdrawn are not liable to be called.

70. A revoking player and his partner may require the hand on which the
revoke occurred to be played out.

71. An equal number of revokes on different sides cancel each other.


CALLING FOR NEW CARDS.

72. Any player (on paying for them) before, but not after, the pack is
cut for the deal, may call for fresh cards. He must call for two new
packs, of which the dealer has the choice.

73. A card or cards torn or marked must be replaced by agreement, or new
cards called for at the expense of the table.


MAKING THE TRUMP AND PLAYING.

74. The trump card having been turned, the eldest hand may pass, order
up, or play alone; in either of the last two cases the third hand may
take it from him and play alone.

75. Should the eldest hand pass, the second hand may pass, assist, or
play alone; in either of the last two cases the dealer may take it from
him and play alone.

76. Should the second hand pass, the third hand can pass, order up, or
play alone; and after him the dealer must pass, take up the trump, or
play alone.

77. Should all four players pass, the trump is turned down, and the
first hand can name a suit, or pass; and so on in turn around the table.
Should all pass again, the deal is at an end, and the next player deals.

78. Should the player entitled to make a trump name a suit, he cannot
change; and should he name the suit turned down, he is considered to
have passed.

79. Should the player, after naming the suit turned down, or passing,
mention the suit he intended to make trumps, his partner also must pass.

80. Should a player pass, and then attempt to assist, or order up the
trump, his partner also must pass. The adversaries, however, may elect
that it shall be played.

81. Should a player make a declaration, and his partner not hear it and
pass, the declaration is not invalidated.

82. No player can take away another's right by passing, ordering up, or
assisting, out of turn; but should the dealer turn down the trump card,
or on the second round throw his cards on the table, such action is
binding on his partner.

83. If any one, prior to his partner's playing, should call attention to
the trick either by saying that it is or is not his, or by naming his
card or by drawing it without being asked to do so, or call on his
partner to take or not to take the trick, the adversaries may require
that opponent's partner to play his highest or lowest of the suit led,
or to win or lose the trick.

84. A player has no right to ask who played a particular card, but at
any time during the play of a trick, or after the four cards are played,
but before they are touched for the purpose of gathering them together,
may demand that the cards be placed before their respective players.

85. When a player and his partner have an option of exacting from their
adversaries one of two penalties, they should agree who is to make the
election, but must not consult with one another which of the two
penalties it is advisable to exact. If they do so consult, they lose
their right; and if either of them, with or without the consent of his
partner, demand a penalty to which he is entitled, such decision is
final.


THE DISCARD.

86. Should the card turned up be made the trump, the dealer must at once
discard one card from his hand. The discard is not complete until the
dealer has placed the card under the pack and quitted it; after which he
cannot change.

87. Should the eldest hand lead before the discard is completed, the
lead stands, and the dealer can change his discard if he wishes.

88. The trump card cannot be discarded.

89. Should the third hand play alone, and the second player lead before
the dealer has discarded, the latter can be called on to play his
highest or lowest of the suit led, or to win or lose the trick.

90. Should any player have more or less than five cards, or the dealer
neglect to discard before playing, the deal holds good, and the party so
offending forfeits two if all four are playing, and four if a lone hand
is played. They also are not entitled to score any point or points they
may have made on that hand.


THE TRUMP CARD.

91. The trump card must be left in view till played, and if removed or
lifted from the pack, becomes an exposed card.

92. After the trump card has been played, no player has a right to ask
what card was turned up, but can at any time ask what is the trump suit.


PLAYING ALONE.

93. A player may play alone when he orders up, assists, adopts, or makes
the trump, or when his partner does so, provided that he himself has not
already passed.

94. If a player declares to play alone, his partner may take it from
him, subject to the previous rule; in which case the form of declaration
must be, "I take it from you."

95. A player cannot play alone when he or his partner is ordered up, or
when his adversaries adopt or make the trump, or if before making his
declaration he exposes a card.

96. The dealer must announce his intention to play alone before quitting
his discard.

97. A player must announce his intention to play alone before naming the
trump, otherwise he can be required to play the hand with his partner.

98. In all cases a single declaration must be made. It is not permitted
to say, "I order it up and play it alone," or "I make it hearts and play
it alone." The declaration must be, "I play alone at hearts," or, "Alone
at hearts." Any other declaration precludes a lone hand.

99. Should the partner of the player playing alone offer to take it
from him after a lead has been made, or after he has himself passed,
neither can play alone.

100. Should a player announce that he will play alone, and his partner
play upon the first lead, the player loses his right to play the hand
alone, and must play it with his partner, unless his adversaries elect
that he play it alone.

101. Should a player announce that he will play alone, his partner must
place his own cards on the table face downwards, and not again take them
up. He shall have the right to gather and quit his partner's tricks, and
his action is binding on his partner.

102. Should a player expose the face of any of his cards, his partner
can score only two points, should he take every trick; but in case of a
euchre the adversaries score four.

103. After the partner of the lone player has placed his hand on the
table, either adversary may count the hand, to see if it contains more
or less than five cards.

104. A player playing alone is liable to no penalty for simply exposing
a card; but should he lead out of turn, the card is an exposed card, and
can be called.

105. Should an adversary play out of turn to the lead of a lone hand,
both opposing hands must be laid on the table, and can be called by the
player playing alone.


ETIQUETTE OF EUCHRE.

106. The following rules belong to the established Etiquette of Euchre.
They are not called "Laws," as it is difficult, and in some cases
impossible, to apply any penalty to their infraction, and the only
remedy is to cease to play with the players who habitually disregard
them.

107. Two packs of cards of different colors are invariably used at
Clubs, and this should be adhered to if possible.

108. A player having the lead and another winning card to play, should
not draw the second card out of his hand till his partner has played to
the first trick, such act being a distinct intimation that the former
has played a winning card.

109. No intimation whatever by word or gesture should be given by a
player as to the state of the hand or the game after the trump card is
turned.

110. A player who desires the cards to be placed, or demands to see the
last trick, should do so for his own information only, and not to
attract the attention of his partner.

111. No player should object to refer to a bystander who professes
himself uninterested in the game and able to decide any disputed
question of fact.

112. It is unfair to revoke purposely; and having made a revoke, a
player is not justified in making a second to conceal the first.

113. Until the players have made such bets as they wish, bets should not
be made with the bystanders.

114. Bystanders should make no remark, nor should they, by word or
gesture, give any intimation of the state of the game until concluded
and scored, nor should they walk around the table to look at the
different hands.

115. No one should look over the hand of a player against whom he is
betting.

116. Players should pass, assist, order up, etc., with as nearly as
possible the same manner at all times, and should be careful not to give
information by unusual quickness or delay.


TECHNICAL TERMS USED IN EUCHRE.

"Right Bower," or "Right,"--knave of the trump suit, which is the
highest card.

"Left Bower," or "Left,"--knave of the same color as the trump suit,
which is the second best card.

"Alone,"--playing without your partner.

"Assist," or "Help,"--ordering up the trump when your partner deals.

"Announce,"--to declare the suit which shall be trumps.

"Bridge,"--when the score of the eldest hand is four to one or four to
two in his favor.

"Crossing the suit,"--making the trump of a different color from the
suit turned down.

"Next,"--to make a trump of the color turned down.

"Euchre,"--when the party making the trump fails to take three tricks.

"Hand,"--the five cards dealt to each player.

"Ordering up,"--requiring the dealer and his partner to play the trump
turned up.

"Pass,"--declining to order up, assist, adopt, or make the trump.

"March,"--taking five tricks.

"Love Game," "Slam," or "Double,"--where the score is five to nothing.

"Lap,"--is where more points are made than are necessary to win a game,
and are carried to the next game.

"Rubber,"--consists of three games.

When, however, a lap is made in the third game, a fourth must be played.

A "Lay Card," or an "Outsider,"--is a card of a different suit from the
trump.

[Illustration]




GENERAL REMARKS.


The following points are written simply for the information of those not
thoroughly conversant with the game of Euchre.

It is not the intention of the authors to write a treatise on the game,
but merely to illustrate a few conventional plays, most of which are in
use among the best exponents of the game.

There can be no absolute rules about the play in Euchre, as in Whist, as
the number of cards is so few that the importance of each play is
intensified, and the score has so great an influence on the hand.

The exceptions also are perhaps almost as numerous as the rules; but if
the beginner will accept as a guide the appended hints, it is thought
they will not lead him far astray.

The play of the cards is governed by the card sense of the individual.

The refinement of the game consists in playing to the score, which is
quite peculiar to Euchre, since it is so constantly changing. The same
hand should suggest different ideas at different scores.

A player should school himself to notice the score before he picks up
his hand. No attempt has been made to go beyond the adoption of the
trump, passing, assisting, and the original lead or play, at the risk of
being confusing.

A beginner should follow these hints pretty closely. A good Euchre
player can make his own exceptions; but they should be made with careful
consideration, and not abused.


ELDEST, OR FIRST HAND.

When the right is not turned, order with three medium trumps or better,
and some strength in suit, _provided you have nothing to go to_; for
example, ace, queen, ten of the turn-up, and two cards of another suit.

Do not order (unless with great strength) if you can make it next; for
example, queen of clubs turned up, you hold right, ten, and nine of
clubs, and king and ten of spades; or left, ace and seven of clubs,
seven of spades, and seven of diamonds. In both of these cases pass, and
make it next.

Make it next when you can, and do not cross the suit, unless very
strong, especially when a bower is turned down; for example, the dealer
has turned down the king of spades, with ace, king, and seven of hearts,
knave of spades, and ten of clubs: make it next, and lead the left.

When making the trump with ace and two others (without the king), lead
ace in next, and small one when crossing the suit.

If the right is not turned, lead trumps through the assisting hand. The
exceptions to this are,--With left and small one; ace and small one;
with score four to three in your favor, and you play with certain
reasons to stop a march; and occasionally when short of a suit.

With a large tenace in trumps as right, ace, or right, king, and no
outside cards of any special value, play an off-suit, whether dealer
takes up with or without assistance.

With one or two trumps and two aces, lead trumps, whether through
assistance or not.

If the dealer adopts the trump, avoid, if you can, leading from suits of
king, seven; queen, seven, etc. If possible, lead an ace, or from a
short suit of king or queen, or from a suit of equals, as king, queen,
or queen, knave, or knave, ten.

In general do not lead trumps up to the dealer's adoption; but with
three trumps, and the score two points in your favor, lead a trump, if
the turn-up is not above the king. If you hold the two bowers and an
outside ace, always lead them in the order named.

Always lead a trump when your partner has ordered up, or made the
trump. If you have no trump, play your best card. Avoid leading the
turn-down until at least one round of trumps has been played. If you
have left and small one, lead the left and continue with small one if
both opponents follow. With any two others, lead smallest, unless
equals.

Score four to three in your favor is a position of caution, and
consequently your play should be very conservative.


SECOND HAND.

Do not assist too light. This is the most common error in Euchre.

Assist with three trumps.
    right and another.[1]
    left and another, and outside ace.

[Footnote 1: "Another" means "a small one."]

Assist with left and another; dependent upon the score,
    two trumps and two aces.
    ace and another, and outside ace; dependent upon score; always,
        however, if right is turned.
    two medium trumps, and one suit of three, headed by the ace,
        dependent upon the score.

Ace and another, and king and another, even when short of a suit, are
permissible only when justified by scores of four-all or four-love in
your favor.

Anything less than this is not good Euchre, except, of course, at the
two above-named scores.

Do not assist the right with two small ones. Your partner usually will
know what to do with the bower. By too light an assistance you may
tempt him into a lone hand, under the impression that one or two big
trumps are out of his way.

Remember that to be short of one or two suits is a great advantage to an
assisting hand.

When led through with right and another, play the right, except when the
ace is turned,--when it is permissible to finesse.

When led through, when assisting with left and another, play left,
unless right or ace is turned.

When assisting with three trumps, if you take the first trick in suit,
lead trumps at once. If you take the first trick by trumping a suit,
your play is then dependent upon the value of your remaining trumps and
the turn-up.

With two trumps and two aces, lead trumps as early as possible, if your
opponents have not done so for you.

If your partner adopts the turn-up without your assistance, and you hold
queen, seven; ten, eight, etc., in trumps, ruff as early as possible
with the big one, and lead the small one.

If you take the first trick in suit, and your partner throws away, do
not lead the suit he has shown, even if you have the ace of it.

If your partner turn down black, make it red if you can, especially if
he has turned down the bower.

When playing second to a small card, do not ruff with right alone if it
is the first trick. Ruff with left alone, especially with your partner's
make or adoption.

If your partner refuses to adopt the turn-up, and the third hand
declares to play alone, lead a card of the same suit as the turn-down.

With one small trump, ruff as soon as you can.

Do not finesse in lay cards.


THIRD HAND.

It requires a stronger hand to order or make the trump in this position
than in the eldest hand, since you cannot depend upon your partner's
lead, and he has displayed weakness by passing.

However, if you have a good hand at the turn-up, and are very strong at
next, it is better to order, since the stronger you are at next, the
greater the improbability that your partner will be able to make it
next.

It is wise to see your way absolutely clear to three tricks before
ordering the right.

There are certain hands, however, which by their strength compel you to
order,--the right not being turned; and here are most of them.

Order with four trumps.
    two bowers and another.
    two bowers and outside ace.
    three trumps and two aces.
    three trumps and one suit, headed by ace.
    right, ace, and another.
    left, ace, king, and outside ace.
    left, ace, king, and one suit.
    left, ace, king, dependent upon the score.
    left, king and another, and outside ace.
    left, queen and another, and outside ace.

Order with ace, king and another, and outside ace.

If you ruff, it is usually well to beat the turn-up.


THE DEALER.

Take up three trumps.
    right and ace.
    right and king
    right and queen.
    right and another, and one suit.
    right, another, and outside ace.
    left, ace, and outside ace.
    left, another, outside ace; and king, queen of the third suit.
    ace, king, and one suit headed by ace; dependent upon score.
    two trumps and two aces.

With the score at four-all or four-love in his favor, the dealer may
play a lighter hand than any mentioned above, especially if it is his
best.

Scores of three-all and four to two in dealer's favor require more than
ordinary caution.

With score four to three in dealer's favor he may play a shade lighter
than ordinary.

If it comes round to the dealer to make a trump, it is permissible to
make it with somewhat less strength than would be required in the other
three hands.

It is usually better with a fair hand to try for a point rather than to
turn down for a euchre. If, however, the dealer is better at next, and
holds both bowers of the cross-suit, it is good euchre to pass.

If the dealer adopts the turn-up without assistance and has right and
another, and takes the first trick with his small trump, he should not
lead the right unless he can follow with an ace.

Always be careful how you play your small cards, and never play false
cards.

If the dealer adopts the turn-up, he should discard the lowest card of a
short suit; for example, with three trumps, ace, seven of one suit, and
outside king, discard the king. Some prefer to keep the king with score
four-all with only two trumps in the hand. With two trumps (clubs), ace,
seven of hearts, and king, seven of diamonds, discard the seven of
diamonds.

With three trumps (clubs), ace, king of hearts, and ace of diamonds,
discard the king of hearts, except when playing a lone hand, in which
case discard the ace of diamonds.

When your partner assists, and you take the first or second trick,
always give him a trump if he has not played one.

Give all the information possible to your partner by your play; for
example, queen of clubs is turned up, and you are assisted and hold the
king of clubs in your hand. If you or your partner take the first trick
with a trump, play the king. If you hold both ace and king of clubs in
your hand, play the ace.

If you hold ace and king of an outside suit, throw away the ace as soon
as possible on your partner's trick, thereby showing him you have
command of that suit. If, however, you see by the fall of the cards that
your partner has no strength in his hand, you may conceal this
information, since it will do him no good, and can only benefit your
opponents. This, of course, applies to all four hands.


THE BRIDGE.

There is such a variety of opinion about the bridge that the writers do
not feel confident enough to express any decided view about the matter.

It is a complicated question from a mathematical point of view, and they
have never kept any record for a long enough period of time to be of any
practical value.

They doubt, however, the expediency of keeping the bridge strictly.

If, however, the bridge is to be kept at all, it should be kept always,
and in the same manner; otherwise you deceive your partner.

There is a growing tendency to abolish the bridge. The writers remember
distinctly not long ago when every one kept the bridge; now the same
players take their chances with two lay aces, or the ace and another in
trumps. This, however, is purely a matter of taste, and is not offered
here as an arbitrary rule.

Naturally, some hands will make four beyond a doubt; but it is much
harder to get an imperfect lone hand through against two good players
than against two inferior ones; hence the better the players, the less
is the value of the bridge against the ordinary lone hand.


LONE HANDS.

It is impossible to absolutely define a "lone hand." With the score
three-all, four-all, or any score in your favor, do not risk a light
lone hand. It is our opinion that a great many points are lost by not
taking your partner with you for a march.

With the score four-one or four-two against you, you may take a
desperate chance.

If your opponents keep bridges tolerably strictly, you must, of course,
be more careful if they have passed.

The eldest hand has the best position to play a lone hand, and the
dealer the next best.

The second and third hands have the weakest positions for lone hands,
especially the third hand, if the turn-up is the trump, since if the
third hand declares to play alone it has become an established custom
for the dealer to discard next in suit, and for his partner to lead it
to him. The third hand should take this into consideration before
playing alone. This is the only case when the original lead of next in
suit has any significance.

In playing against a lone hand, you should lead from a short suit or
suit of equals, if possible, and the fourth card you play (supposing
always the lone hand to take the first four tricks with trumps) should
inform your partner what suit you mean to keep. For example: Clubs are
trumps. Eldest hand has two small trumps, queen of hearts, and queen and
seven of spades. Lead the queen of hearts. The dealer, who is playing
alone, ruffs the heart and leads both bowers and the ace of trumps. On
the fourth trick you play the seven of spades; your partner, holding the
ace of spades and the ten of diamonds, should throw away the ace of
spades and keep the ten, thereby attacking the lone hand in all three
suits.

Example: Clubs are trumps. The eldest hand has the king of clubs, the
king of hearts, the ace and seven of diamonds, and the ten of spades.
Lead the king of hearts, throw away the ten of spades as early as
possible, and play the seven of diamonds on the fourth trick, thereby
informing your partner that you are keeping a diamond.

If you lead from equals,--as king, queen, or queen, knave,--and your
opponent takes the trick with a card of that suit, throw away all your
other cards, however high, and keep your second one of that suit. This
applies always against the dealer, and usually against any other player.

If the eldest hand holds the ace of hearts and the ace and king of
spades (the trump being a club), lead the ace of hearts and advertise
the command of the spade suit by throwing away the ace as soon as
possible.

An exception: For third hand, supposing the dealer to have taken the
first three tricks without showing a lay card and to have led a winning
trump for the fourth trick. If your partner's fourth card is a lay king,
and you hold one card of that suit and one of another, neither of which
suits has been ruffed, keep the card of the same suit as your partner's
king on the fourth trick.

With an assistance you may play a lone hand with less strength than
otherwise.

Should your partner declare to play alone, and you have a fair trump
hand with no weakness in lay suits, it is good play to take it from him.


COUPS.

The following cases are offered to illustrate some of the fine points in
the game. Opportunities for making some of these plays occur
frequently, and every ambitious euchre-player should be familiar with
them. The easiest way to follow them is to place the cards on the table
as shown below.

A coup is when you depart from the ordinary established rules of play,
with certain reasons for each special case. Do not hesitate when
attempting a coup. Consider what the play of your adversaries means, as
well as that of your partner.

Bear in mind that coups are justified only in exceptional cases.

In all these cases A and C are partners. A is the dealer, and the
discard is supposed to have been properly made.


CASE I.

Refusing to over trump.

                   A

            9 of clubs (turn-up),
            Knave of clubs,
            Ace, king of hearts,
            8 of spades.

       D                             B

King and 10 of clubs,         Ace of clubs,
Ace, 9 of spades,             Queen, 8 of hearts,
9 of hearts.                  Knave of diamonds,
                              10 of spades.

                   C

            7, 8, and 10 of diamonds,
            Queen of spades,
            10 of hearts.

Score, love-all. A adopts the trump.

_First Trick._--B leads knave of diamonds, C plays the seven, D ruffs
with the ten of clubs, and A throws away the eight of spades.

_Second Trick._--D leads the ace of spades, A ruffs with the nine of
clubs, and both B and C follow suit.

_Third Trick._--A leads the right bower and catches the ace and king
from B and D, while his partner throws his small diamond.

_Fourth Trick._--in this case A will win whether he leads the ace or
king of hearts; but his play should be the king, since his partner
cannot help him in any way, and B might hold the left bower and pass the
king of hearts, when he would ruff the ace.

REMARKS.--If A goes over the ten of trumps with his right in the first
trick, he will be euchred. This is the simplest coup, and is in constant
use. It is not good euchre to do this when your partner has assisted.


CASE II.

Leading through assistance. When to continue with trumps.

                  A

        King of hearts (turn-up),
        Queen of hearts,
        Queen, knave of spades,
        Queen of clubs.

      D                            B

8, 9, 10 of diamonds,      Knave, 8 of hearts,
10 of clubs,               Ace of clubs,
7 of hearts.               King, 9 of spades.

                  C

        Knave of diamonds,
        Ace of hearts,
        Ace, 8 of spades,
        7 of diamonds.

Score, love-all. C assists.

REMARKS.--B leads the right through the assisting hand, C plays the ace,
D the seven, and A should play the king. If A plays the queen to give
information to his partner, B should at once continue with the eight of
hearts, and thus effect a euchre. If A plays the king, B's natural play
would be to lead the ace of clubs, whereby A and C make their point.
Few cases arise when you should conceal information from your partner,
but this is one of them.


CASE III.

Ruffing a winning card in order to draw trumps and score two.

                     A

           9 of hearts (turn-up),
           Knave of diamonds,
           7 of hearts,
           Queen, 8 of clubs.

          D                        B

Ace, king of hearts,        Queen, 10 of hearts,
King of spades,             Ace of diamonds,
King of diamonds,           King of clubs,
10 of clubs.                9 of spades.

                    C

           Right, 8 of hearts,
           Ace of clubs,
           Ace, 10 of spades.

Score, four to three in favor of A and C. C assists.

_First Trick._--B leads the ten of hearts, C plays the right, D the
king, and A the seven.

_Second Trick._--C leads the ace of clubs, D plays the ten, A the eight
of clubs, and B the king.

_Third Trick._--C leads the ace of spades, D plays the king, A ruffs
with the nine of hearts, and B plays the nine of spades.

_Fourth and Fifth Tricks._--A leads the left, thereby drawing all the
trumps, and continues with the winning club.


CASE IV.

Leading a trump up to the right.

                  A

          Knave of hearts (turn-up),
          King of hearts,
          Ace of clubs,
          Ace, king of spades.

      D                          B

9 of hearts,            Knave of diamonds,
7, 8 of spades,         Ace, queen of hearts,
King, 8 of clubs.       9 of spades,
                        Ace of diamonds.

                  C

          10, 7, hearts,
          Knave, 10 of spades,
          King of diamonds.

A adopts the trump. Score, four to one in favor of A and C.

_First Trick._--B leads the left, C plays the seven of hearts, D the
nine, and A wins with the right.

_Second Trick._--A leads the ace of spades, B follows with the nine, C
with the ten, and D with the seven.

_Third, Fourth, and Fifth Tricks._--No matter what A plays, he is
euchred, since B wins the last three tricks.


CASE V.

Under-play in fourth hand with a large tenace.

                     A

           Ace of diamonds (turn-up),
           Queen, 7 of diamonds,
           9, 7 of hearts.

        D                          B

King, knave of clubs,        Knave, king, 10 of
Queen, 10 of spades,         diamonds,
8 of hearts.                 Ace, queen of hearts.

                     C

           Knave of hearts,
           King, 10 of hearts,
           King, 10 of spades.

Score, three-all. A adopts the trump.

_First Trick._--B leads ace of hearts, C plays the ten, D the eight, and
A the seven.

_Second Trick._--B continues with the queen of hearts, C covers, and
wins with the king, D throws the ten of spades, and A the nine of
hearts.

_Third Trick._--C leads the left bower, D throws the queen of spades, A
the seven of diamonds, and B refuses to win by playing under with the
ten of diamonds, thereby making a certainty of establishing the euchre
with the tenace of right and king in the fourth and fifth tricks.


CASE VI.

Trumping your partner's trick to put the lead through the strong hand.

                    A

            Ace of diamonds (turn-up),
            Knave of diamonds,
            10 of diamonds,
            King of spades,
            10 of clubs.

        D                      B

King, 8 of hearts,      Ace of spades,
9, 8 of clubs,          7 of spades,
Queen of diamonds.      Knave of hearts,
                        King, queen of clubs.

                    C

            Ace, 10 of hearts,
            Knave, 7 of clubs,
            Queen of spades.

Score three-all. A adopts the trump.

_First Trick._--B leads the king of clubs, C follows with the seven of
clubs, D with the eight of clubs, and A with the ten of clubs.

_Second Trick._--B continues with the queen of clubs, C plays the knave,
D the nine, and A wins with the ten of diamonds.

_Third Trick._--A leads the king of spades, B covers with the ace, C
plays the queen, and D trumps, and wins with the queen of diamonds.

_Fourth Trick._--D leads the king of hearts, A ruffs with the ace, and
is euchred by B's left bower.

REMARKS.--C in the third trick perceived that his queen was useless,
unless used to trump his partner's trick and put the lead through A,
with the hope that his partner had the left and might be able to get it
in. The ace was turned up, and A could have no card _lower_ than the
queen, since he had ruffed fourth hand with the ten.


CASE VII.

Refusing to ruff when you hold the high trump.

                    A

          Queen of clubs (turn-up),
          Right, ace of clubs,
          King, queen of spades.

        D                            B

Ace, 9 of spades,             Knave of spades,
King, queen of diamonds,      8 of clubs,
Knave of hearts.              Ace, 9, 8 of hearts.

                    C

          King, 10, 9 of clubs,
          7, 9 of diamonds.

Score, three to one in favor of B and D.

C assists, and A plays alone.

_First Trick._--B leads ace of hearts, D follows with knave, and A ruffs
with queen of clubs.

_Second Trick._--A leads the right, B plays the eight, and D the nine,
of spades.

_Third Trick._--A leads the king of spades, B refuses to ruff, having
the highest trump, thereby euchring A.

The opportunity for this coup of refusing to ruff occurs very
frequently.

The following coups, which occurred recently in play, serve to show the
possibilities of the game. They are offered here for the inspection of
experienced players only, and not for the emulation of beginners.


CASE VIII.

                        A

              9 of diamonds (turn-up),
              Knave of hearts,
              Queen of spades,
              Queen, 9 of hearts.

        D                              B

Ace, queen, 10 of clubs,   Ace, king, 10 of diamonds,
King of hearts,            Ace, 10 of spades.
9 of spades.

                        C

              Queen, 7, 8 of diamonds,
              Ace, 8 of hearts.

Score, game-all and four-all.

_First Trick._--B very properly orders up, and leads the ace of
diamonds; C follows with the seven, D throws the ten of clubs, and A
takes with left bower.

_Second Trick._--A leads queen of spades, B covers with the ace, and C
wins the trick with the eight of diamonds, D playing the nine of spades.

_Third Trick._--C leads the eight of hearts, D plays king of hearts, A
plays nine of hearts, and B throws ten of spades (not a sure winner) on
his partner's trick.

_Fourth Trick._--D leads ace of clubs, A ruffs with the nine of
diamonds, B covers with the ten, and C wins the trick and scores a
euchre with the queen of trumps.

REMARKS.--C makes the coup by leading the eight instead of the ace of
hearts. C recognized the fact, after the fall of the cards in the second
round, that B must have had three trumps to order with, and they must
have been the ace, king, ten; and after he had taken the second trick
he must throw the lead into D's hand, thereby making his queen against
the king, ten.


CASE IX.

                      A

            Queen of clubs (turn-up),
            Right and left bowers,
            Queen, knave of diamonds.

        D                             B

9 of clubs,               Ace, king of clubs,
10 of diamonds,           Ace, king, 7 of diamonds.
King, 7 of spades,
7 of hearts.

                      C

Score, A C one; B D three; and one game. A plays alone.

_First Trick._--B leads the ace of diamonds, D plays the ten, and A the
knave.

_Second Trick._--B leads the seven of diamonds, D trumps with the nine
of clubs, and A plays the queen of diamonds.

_Third Trick._--No matter what D leads, A is euchred.

B here makes the coup by recognizing what A must have for a trump-hand,
and leads his small and losing diamond, making it imperative for his
partner to ruff, thereby putting the lead through A, and establishing
the euchre.

[Transcriber's Note: "turn-up" was misprinted "turn up" in Case VI;
this typo has been corrected for this electronic edition.]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Laws of Euchre, by H. C. Leeds and James Dwight

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAWS OF EUCHRE ***

***** This file should be named 20506.txt or 20506.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/5/0/20506/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Jonathan Niehof, Bill Tozier
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
