The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Master-Knot of Human Fate, by Ellis
Meredith


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Master-Knot of Human Fate


Author: Ellis Meredith



Release Date: February 17, 2007  [eBook #20615]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MASTER-KNOT OF HUMAN FATE***


E-text prepared by V. L. Simpson and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/c/) from digital
material generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/masterknotofhuman00mererich





THE MASTER-KNOT OF HUMAN FATE

by

ELLIS MEREDITH







    Up from Earth's Centre through the Seventh Gate
    I rose, and on the Throne of Saturn sate,
      And many a Knot unravel'd by the Road;
    But not the Master-knot of Human Fate.

    OMAR KHAYYAM




Boston
Little, Brown, and Company
1901
Copyright, 1901,
By Little, Brown, and Company.
All rights reserved.
University Press John Wilson and Son Cambridge, U. S. A.


    Up from Earth's Centre through the Seventh Gate
    I rose, and on the Throne of Saturn sate,
      And many a Knot unravel'd by the Road;
    But not the Master-knot of Human Fate.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Ah Love! could you and I with Him conspire
    To grasp this sorry Scheme of Things entire,
      Would not we shatter it to bits--and then
    Re-mould it nearer to the Heart's Desire!

    OMAR KHAYYAM




I



    To-night God knows what things shall tide,
        The Earth is racked and faint--
    Expectant, sleepless, open-eyed;
    And we, who from the Earth were made.
        Thrill with our Mother's pain.

    KIPLING.


Along one of the most precipitous of the many Rocky Mountain trails a
man and a woman climbed slowly one spring morning. The air was cold,
and farther up the mountains little patches of snow lay here and there
in the hollows. Two or three miles below them nestled one of the most
famous pleasure resorts of the entire region. Three or four times as
distant lay the nearest town of any importance. Over the plain and
through the clear atmosphere it looked like a bird's-eye-view map
rather than an actual town. Far away to the left, gorgeous in coloring
and grotesque in outline, could be seen the odd figures of many
strangely piled rocks.

The two pedestrians stopped now and then to rest and look away over
the matchless scene and take in its wonderful beauty. The woman was
tall and slender, with a superb carriage. Even on that steep ascent
she moved with the grace and freedom of one who has entire command of
her body. She was well gowned also for such an excursion. Her short,
green cloth skirt did not impede her movements, and high, stout shoes
gave her firm footing. She had removed her jacket, and in her bright
pink silk blouse and abbreviated petticoat, with the glow of the
morning on her usually pale face, she looked almost girlish; but her
face was not that of girlhood. It was without lines, and the heavy
masses of her golden-brown hair were quite unstreaked with silver; but
her white forehead was serene with the calmness that follows
overcoming, and her dark gray eyes saw the world shorn of its
illusions. In her there were, or had been, unrealized capacities for
life in all its height and depth and breadth. In studying her one
became vaguely aware that, having missed these things, she had found a
fourth dimension which supplied the loss.

Her companion was younger by several years, and so much taller that
she seemed almost small in comparison. In his eyes there danced and
shone the light of truth and courage and hope, and he walked with the
buoyancy of joy and youth. Israfil, Antinous, Apollo,--he might have
stood as the model for any of them, or for a fit representation of the
words of the wise man, "Rejoice, oh, young man, in thy youth, and let
thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways
of thine heart."

The relation between the two was problematic. Certainly there was no
question of love on either side. Equally certainly there existed
between them a rare and exquisite camaraderie, a perfect comprehension
that often made words superfluous. A look sufficed.

They toiled up the steep, narrow path until they reached a wide trail,
a carriage road that had been laid out and abandoned. It swept around
the mountain-side, miles above the little city on the plain, and
terminated suddenly at an immense gateway of stone. Here the mountain
had been torn asunder, and two palisades of gray-green rock rose grim
and terrible for hundreds of feet, while between them, dashing over
boulders and trees and the impedimenta of ages, a little stream rushed
along in the eternal night at their base. Far away to the west, range
upon range piled themselves against the intense blue sky. Beyond a
rustic gate, standing across the path that narrowed to a few feet
before the wall of stone, a park, sparkling and green in the sunlight,
was visible. They stopped and regarded the two gateways,--one the work
of nature, the other the feeble counterfeit of man,--and then swinging
open the creaking wooden affair, passed into the peaceful valley. A
few yards away stood a small log cabin, but the chimney was smokeless,
and though the chickens clucked in the yard, and a collie lay on the
doorstep, it seemed desolate and deserted.

Passing along an almost invisible trail, they found themselves in the
wildest and most remote part of that wild and remote region. They saw
a few stray animals, but no human beings. This was one of the few
places where mining was not a universal pursuit, and it was too early
to do much in the few mines that did exist. There are entire sections
in the Rockies that are deserted for more than half the year, and this
was one of them. That day there was no one at the signal station. The
keeper had gone down to the valley for fresh stores, and to learn
something of the terrific disturbances that were said to be
threatening the entire Eastern coast with annihilation. Perhaps the
owners of the log cabin had made a similar pilgrimage.

The scene was flooded with moonlight when the travellers passed the
gate on their homeward way, and sat down on a boulder a few yards
without the frowning portal. The night was cold, and the woman had put
on her jacket, and sunk her numbed fingers in its pockets. In spite of
her weariness she was troubled and restless, and turning looked first
at the beetling crags back of them, then away over the plain at the
twinkling lights of the town below. They heard indistinctly the sounds
of bells ringing wildly, and overhead flocks of birds circled and
called with shrill, uncanny voices. Yet the moonlight was so bright
that they saw each other as plainly as if it were day, and its placid
radiance seemed strangely at variance with the disturbed wild-fowl,
and certain weird and fitful sounds that seemed to be sighed forth
from the bosom of the earth.

"It is a pity," she said, "that we cannot pass through this gateway
into paradise without descending to earth again."

"I don't believe you are half as tired of life as you say," he
answered with an impatient movement of his head. "You may not shrink
from death as I do, or enjoy life so keenly, but isn't it a good thing
to be alive to-night? Isn't it fine to be a mile or so above the rest
of humanity and the deadly conventionalities? Aren't you glad you
came?"

She did not answer, but presently said dreamily, "Suppose that plain
was the sea."

"It isn't hard to suppose," he answered. "I have seen the Pacific when
it looked just so."

"Oh, no," she said quickly. "Nothing is like the sea but itself. You
will never persuade me that I love the mountains so well. And the
plains,--just imagine if all that gray green silver were gray blue,
with here and there a gathering crest of foam, racing to break in
spray about these mountains--"

"Why, look," he said, drawing her a little to one side, "there is your
liquid blue, with its white crest moving toward us. Could the real sea
look more wonderful than that? It is blotting out everything. Now it
recedes,--was it not real?"

She started to her feet. "This is a very strange night," she said
irrelevantly, in a rather strained voice. "Listen,--and see how many
birds are flying about us; I never saw them fly so at night. What does
it mean?"

They stood together, looking at each other with startled faces. The
whole mountain, all the mountains, seemed to be alive and trembling
under them. Overhead thousands of birds wheeled and screamed with
terror in their mingled outcries. The little creeping things scuttled
away up the mountain. The silver-blue wave widened and spread over the
plain from north to south, and the air was full of a dull, terrible
roar, as if the fountains of the great deep had broken up, and a
thousand white-crested waves rushed toward the hapless city before
them. They covered it, and with a wild jangle of bells, faintly
audible over the tumult, it sank out of sight, all the gleaming,
dancing lights disappearing in an instant. The white crests came on
and broke about the mountains, and receded and came on again with a
deafening roar. Then the crust of the earth between the mountain range
and the spot where the city had been, seemed to crack like a bit of
dried orange peel, and the flood rushed over the abyss, and there
arose a blinding steam that hid the whole scene below, and ascending
circled the mountain peaks in mist.

All about them on the mountain-side rose the cries of terrified wild
things, and along the narrow pathway into the park a herd of cattle
and horses rushed and disappeared among the aspens that trembled as
never before. The collie, scenting their presence, came and crouched
whining at their feet, and a bird fell exhausted into the woman's
arms. She closed her hands over it, unconsciously giving it the
protection none could give them, and in the fog moved toward the
figure of her companion. His arm closed about her convulsively.

"Shall we go farther up the mountain?" he asked.

"'If it be now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
now,'" she answered, insensibly finding it easier to use another's
words than to coin phrases while holding death-watch over a continent.

They sat down on the boulder. After what seemed like countless hours,
she said, "I wonder how long we have been here. Perhaps it is years."

He looked at his watch. "I do not know whether we are in time or
eternity," he answered simply. "It is nearly four o'clock by this
watch."

Through the dense vapor they saw the sun rise, red and sullen, but the
mist was so impenetrable that they dared not move about. The day and
night passed, almost without their knowledge, and the second morning
found them, as the first, by the great boulder. The wind rose with the
sun, and when it blew aside the veil of mist, far as the eye could
reach, there rolled a sea, white-capped, turbulent, fretful, as if
unwilling to leave a single peak to tower above its lordly dominion.

The man and woman followed the collie to the cabin, and there found
some food, then they retraced their way until they could look down
over the valley where the town had slept. Nothing was left. There was
not even a prospector's cabin. The shock which had succeeded the first
wild dash had been volcanic. The very canons looked strange, and
though they called again and again there came no answer.

"Come," the man said imperiously. "Let us go to the Peak. There must
be some one there."

They reached the signal station late in the afternoon; no one was
there. Looking down from that awful eminence, they saw on the other
side of the range the same desolation, the same watery waste. They
seemed to be on an island, alone on a wide, wide sea. Nowhere curled a
friendly wreath of smoke; nowhere was there sound of any human thing.

They went wearily back. There was nowhere else to go. If the gateway
had been awful in its solitude, the Peak was still more desolate.
There was nothing living there, except themselves and the dog that
followed closely at their heels, making no excursions of its own. The
hour was wearing toward midnight when they sank down by the boulder
once more to watch the darkness disappear, and wait for they knew not
what. The man built a huge fire, so that if any other waifs had been
left by this wreck of a world they might see the beacon, and reply in
some fashion. They did not talk, except now and then, in a half
whisper, they gave monosyllabic queries and replies. The shock that
had obliterated a continent seemed to deprive them of all active use
of their senses. They moved only in circles, returning always to the
place from which they had watched the cataclysm.

It was almost sundown when, with a superhuman effort, they again
entered the sunny, beautiful park. The air was balmy, and there all
remained quite as before. In front of the cabin stood an Alderney; as
they approached her, she lowed uneasily. The woman looked up, and then
spoke aloud with the quick sympathy that had always been her greatest
attraction. She seemed to understand so readily, whether it was a
man's head, a woman's heart, or an animal's wants.

"She needs to be milked," she said, and pushing open the door she
entered the cabin. There were two rooms, the farther of which was
evidently a bedroom. There was a large fireplace at one end of the
main room. At one side of it was a primitive dresser, with such
utensils and china as the place afforded; on the other were some
miner's implements and a shovel. There was a small table and beside it
were placed two chairs. There was a rocker by the one window, and a
pot of geraniums on the sill; forming a kind of window seat was a long
seaman's chest. At the other end of the room there was a desk covered
with green oilcloth, and above it was a shelf containing some books
and a clock.

The woman took off her hat and jacket and brushed back her hair, then
turning back her sleeves went outdoors again. Under the rude porch on
a slab table stood a number of buckets, and there was a stool by the
door. She took a bucket and the stool and walked away a few paces, the
Alderney following. As she began milking she looked over her shoulder
at the man watching her and said, "Won't you build a fire?"

He gathered some wood and went into the cabin. She threw out the first
pint or so of milk, then finished milking and strained the foaming
contents of her pail into some crocks left sunning by the door, and
went into the house. She found some cornmeal and salt, and deftly
mixed the dough, and arranging the shovel in the hot ashes, set her
hoe-cake to bake. In the mean time the man had brought water from the
brook, and as the woman swung the crane over the blaze, he filled the
iron kettle hanging therefrom. There was some sour milk, and by a
mysterious process she converted it into Dutch cheese. There was some
butter and a few eggs, and she found a white cloth and spread the
table with the few poor dishes, placing the geranium in the centre. As
the water steamed and boiled, she caught up a tin canister.

"See," she said with forced gayety; "let us eat, drink, and be merry,
for there is just enough tea in the world for two people to drink
once!"

She made the beverage and poured it into the thick cups, and breaking
the yellow pone and piling it on a platter, they sat down to the
strangest meal they had ever known.

The man watched her with fascinated eyes. He had never before seen her
do anything for herself, yet she presided over the simple meal she had
prepared as graciously as over the course dinners of her chef. How
should she know how to make hoe-cake?

All through the singular feast the sparkle and play of her fancy kept
them in hysterical laughter. Afterwards, as she cleared away, the same
wild mood possessed her. The man wondered if her mind was going with
all else; but as she hung up the towel, her humor changed, and she ran
out of the cabin into the dusk as if she could not bear the simple,
homely tasks in a homeless world, the firelight and the bounds of a
dwelling when doom must be at hand. The man put a fresh log on the
fire, and covered the coals with ashes. He would have preferred to
remain there, but he knew why she was hurrying back to the
mountain-side, and he took her coat and followed her. She was standing
by the boulder, looking out over the waters with a despair on her face
that made him groan. It was so like what he felt in his heart. She
pointed weakly toward the water, but her lips formed no words.

"Yes," he answered, "it was not a dream."

Dawn found them still sitting by the boulder. The man shook her half
roughly.

"Come," he said, "let us go back to the cabin."

"No," she answered. "I cannot believe it; we are both mad. We are
dreaming the same mad dream; let us go down, and when we feel the
spray on our faces, and taste the brine, it will be time enough to
believe."

She began the descent with reckless rapidity, and he followed,
checking and holding her back. The roar of the surf grew momentarily
louder, but though she looked at him with wild, grieved eyes, she went
on. A monster wave dashed up over the rocks and wet them to the skin.
She flung out her arms, and would have fallen headlong into the
greedy, crawling water, but he caught her and made his way back. The
hot, bitter tears on her face brought her to herself, and with one
great sob she broke down, clinging to him and crying till from sheer
exhaustion she fell asleep.

He carried her back to the cottage and laid her gently on the bed in
the tiny room. Her hair was falling about her, and he removed her
dusty shoes, and covered her over as if she had been a child. Then he
went out into the sunlight and sat down on the doorstep and tried to
grasp the situation.

He had been a very ambitious man, and she had been as ambitious for
him as he was for himself; that had been the main bond of union. He
was to have made a great place in the world: the applause of
listening senates was to have been his; wealth, fame, position,
all the possibilities of life were gone; nothing but barely life
itself remained. A living might be wrung from nature, but for
ambition,--what? Surely somewhere on earth there were other human
beings; the destruction, if irreparable, was not universal. Sooner or
later some hardy sailor would find the surviving peaks of this new
Atlantis. At least, if the woman within was not his world, he was
thankful that no one else was; and having looked the grim truth in the
face, he too slept.

It was long past noon when the dog wakened him, and he started to his
feet, determined that, having lost all else, they should keep their
sound, clear brains. He walked about the park, which contained perhaps
five hundred acres. There were half a dozen cows, as many horses, some
burros, and a few chickens. There was a rude stable and a few farm
implements. There was a large tunnel in the mountain-side, and some
mining machinery lying about its entrance. The dog, seeming to realize
some of the responsibilities of life, herded the cattle and drove them
toward the cabin. When they reached it, she was standing in the
doorway. She had made her toilet, and looked fresh and calm.

"These are our flocks and our herds," he said in greeting. "What shall
we call them?"

She smiled rather wanly. "Wasn't it Adam who named the animals? You
shall have that honor."

"Very well," he answered; "but if this is the garden, there is an
angel with a flaming sword at the gateway. Do not pass it again. Our
life is here, here,--do you understand? We must give ourselves time to
get used to it, time to realize that we are alive. We must be very
patient, for whatever has befallen us, whether we are in the body or
out of it, this through which we have passed is a miracle, and only
time can tell if it is more. Do not look upon the change again, at
least not now. You will stay here, and we will work together, and be
content for awhile?"

"Content?" she said, "content? We will be happy."




II


                There is always work,
    And tools to work withal, for those who will;
    And blessed are the horny hands of toil!

    LOWELL.


"Do you remember Gabriel Betteredge?" asked Adam, a day or so later,
as he watched her set the house in order after their breakfast. "You
know in times of great mental perturbation he always sought comfort
and counsel from the pages of 'Robinson Crusoe.' When in doubt he
waited until to-morrow, as Robinson advised; and no matter what his
perplexities, he always found just what he wanted in that infallible
book. If I remember correctly, but it's years since I read it,
Robinson goes on a voyage of discovery the first thing."

"He built a raft to get away from the wreck first, I think," she said
reflectively. "Or did he build the raft to get to the wreck? I can't
remember. And then he built a house. Somewhere along there he wrote
down his situation in a deadly parallel; I have sometimes wondered if
he was the inventor of that style. But he offset the debit of being
cast away with gratitude for having escaped with his life. We're not,
at least I'm not, sure that belongs on the credit side."

"We don't want to do much exploring yet," he answered. "If we have no
wreck to supply us with all sorts of things, we have a house ready to
hand, not exactly as we would either of us have ordered it, I fancy,
but better than we could build. Do you know what there is in it? We
might begin our investigations here."

"'With lamp in hand we will explore,'" she hummed, "but two rooms and
a cellar do not promise much. There is nothing to see in this room,
except what we do see, and the contents of that chest, which is
locked."

Adam tried the lock, then shook the chest. "There's nothing in it,
anyhow," he said.

"As to the other room," she went on, "there is a bedroom set,--a
better one than I should have expected to find in a place like
this,--and a closet with some clothes in it. The man was about your
size, but the feminine garments--well--they are all about the length
of my bicycle skirt, and on the shelf there is a pile of bedding.
There is no trap door leading into either subterranean or overhead
apartments. In fact, there is nothing else, except a chair. It's very
uninteresting."

Adam had been moving about the room, and stopped before the bookshelf.
He wound the clock mechanically, and read the titles of the books
aloud. A chemistry, a book on electricity, a Bible, a worn copy of
Tennyson, the "Yankee at King Arthur's Court," and a patent medicine
almanac made up the list.

"There is one mysterious thing," he said, "and that is the packing
cases out under the shed. I can't make up my mind what they contain,
and I don't quite feel that we ought to open them; I should like to;
they look as if they might hold--"

"Canned goods?" she said interrogatively.

"I was going to say books, but I suppose we need canned lobster more,"
he assented. "If you are sure they contain oats, peas, beans, or
barley, or anything that the farmer knows, that would justify me in
opening them." He took up a hatchet, and they went out and inspected
the boxes, which were very large and strong.

"Let's not open them yet," she said. "There is one other treasure in
one of the bureau drawers; it is a box with seeds of almost every
kind. They ought to have known most of those things wouldn't grow up
this close to timber-line."

"Probably they were sent by the congressman from this district," Adam
said dryly. "But I'm not so sure they won't grow. Have you noticed how
warm it is, how very unlike what it has always been? Let us go to the
stables, and see what we can find there."

They went up a path, past a garden, fenced with woven wire, through
which the chickens looked longingly. Under some sashes forming a
primitive greenhouse, lettuce and radishes were making good headway.
Nothing else had come up, though there were many beds, with small
slips of board, like miniature tombstones, showing what had been
planted. The stables and cow-barn were all under one roof, and would
accommodate several horses and a few cows. There was hay and fodder in
a lot adjoining, and a few ordinary farm implements, a plow, a harrow,
and a cultivator in a shed addition.

"Do you know what it is for?" she asked mischievously, as he pulled
out the plow.

"Do you think I never remembered the granger vote in my ambitions?" he
answered. "I can plow, and I have planted and snapped corn, and cut
fodder, and dug potatoes--I wonder if there are any here?"

"Yes," she answered; "in the cellar, at least a bushel, mostly gone to
eyes, but I forget how thick to cut them. If we were only 'The Swiss
Family Robinson,'" she went on, "we should find yams and pineapples
and oranges and sugar-cane and bananas coming up between the rocks. As
it is, I am thankful to the congressman who sent the peas and
morning-glories."

"There is only about enough wheat and corn to plant fifteen acres,"
Adam said, making a rough calculation in his mind. "I will plow a
little over that, so as to have a patch for the potatoes, and get it
ready as soon as possible."

"I know how to plant corn and potatoes," she said eagerly. "Just as
soon as you get part of the land ready, I will begin. You didn't know
I was brought up on a ranch, did you? I never was very fond of
recalling it. It is a perpetual round of conditions unlike any theory
ever heard of." She shrugged her shoulders, and stopped at the rude
table under the porch to crumb some slices of what looked like a kind
of cornbread.

"What is it?" he asked curiously.

"That is to enable us to make light of our troubles," she replied
solemnly. "Or, for thy more sweet understanding it is, or at least I
hope it will be, yeast. I found a Twin Brothers yeast cake, and from
it, behold the brethren! I know that raised bread is unhealthy, and
that to get the worth of your money you ought to eat the bran also,
and that the best bread, from the hygienic standpoint, is made from
wheat-paste, and is about the consistency of sole leather; but even if
yeast does shorten our lives, I don't know that I shall give it up on
that account."

The planting of their crops took several weeks, and was very hard
work, for neither of them was an expert farmer. When the corn and
wheat came up there were almost no weeds, and the stand was better
than usual for sod land; but they were kept busy warding off the
horses and cattle that preferred the fresh young corn and wheat to the
indifferent natural grass.

"I thought," she said wearily, after driving away the intruders for
the third time,--"I thought fences were a sign of civilization, but
they seem to be the first necessity of the wilderness."

She was sitting on a rock, fanning her flushed face with her sombrero,
when Adam came to her assistance.

"You should have waited," he said. "I was coming, but I had to hitch
the team." He turned and looked at her, and laughed boyishly. "The run
hasn't hurt you," he said; "you look like a wild rose. I believe I
shall call you so; may I? I can't call you by the old name."

She colored hotly, then turned quite pale, and there was a touch of
reserve in her voice as she answered rather too indifferently, "If you
choose, still I think, O Adam Crusoe, that Friday or Robinson would be
a better name."

"We'll compromise on Robin," he said. "A rose by any other name is
just as sweet."

"I wish we had a fence," she said turning the subject hastily.

"We have," he answered. "If we were to build one ourselves, it would
have to be of rocks, but Nature has provided a magnificent stone
barrier. We have only to drive the animals we are not using through
the gateway, and fasten that little wooden concern after them. There
is good pasture outside, and if we need them we can go after them.
Lassie will look after Daisy and Lily, won't you, little dog? I will
go and open the gate and drive them through. You help Lassie keep
those two back."

She stood undecidedly, and he turned and said gently, "I will come
back without passing through the gateway. I will never pass it without
you. I wouldn't dare. Now see how nicely Lassie will conduct this
round-up."

As he went toward the gateway, her eyes followed him with a look he
would hardly have comprehended, it was so full of relief and
gratitude. He understood and reassured her without noticing her fears
or smiling at her weakness. Every day and many times she thanked God
that, of all the men who might have been left by this modern deluge,
it was Adam who had been with her and was with her in this terrible
experience.




III

    It might be months, or years, or days, I kept no count,--I took no
    note.

    BYRON.



They had been on the island nearly four months. The corn was waving in
the soft breeze, and the sun shone down hotly. Indoors sweet corn was
boiling in the same pot with new potatoes, while in an improvised
milk-boiler on coals, at one side of the fireplace, peas were
simmering. The table was spread, and there was white bread and jersey
butter and raspberries. Adam, with Lassie's puppies crawling over him,
sat in the doorway, and watched Robin put the finishing touches to
their Sunday dinner.

His apparel was somewhat picturesque, and he had a brown and
thoroughly healthy look. Robin was dressed in a costume of blue
denims. The skirt was rather short, and the waist was a blouse,
finished at the throat with a broad collar that turned away from a
neck still white in spite of much sunlight. Their months of roughing
it had not harmed them, and only the intense sadness in Adam's eyes,
the pathetic droop of Robin's mouth, when they thought themselves
unobserved, told a story different from that of pastoral content.

Their meal was unusually silent. Sometimes they fell into long lapses
of silence; there was so much not to say. In all the weeks of the past
they had worked, almost feverishly, allowing as little time as
possible for thought, and never speaking of what was oftenest in their
minds. Much of the time Adam seemed to be in a dream, only half
realizing the flight of time, that made hope more and more hopeless.
Robin said nothing. One would not seek to console the sky with phrases
if all the stars were wiped out. She half reproached herself at times
for the peace, the something akin to happiness, that had crept into
her life. She had long before grown very weary of the world and all it
had to offer.

She was stung at the sight of Adam's quiet face, with the repressed
suffering that had somehow touched it with a beauty it had not
possessed, and she said impetuously, "Let us go out, Adam; let us go
quite away somewhere, and talk. There is so much I want to ask you,
but I have not dared."

He looked up with such a hurt expression that she went on quickly,
"Not that; I mean I couldn't. I have been afraid to put things in
words. They grow so much more real then. But now I am afraid to keep
my thoughts longer."

They went past the wheat and corn fields, through a narrow canon that
led them to a valley they had never seen before. It was very
beautiful, and the play of the sunlight on the high walls of rock, the
murmur of the stream below them, the trembling aspens, the white peaks
in the distance, made a scene worthy their attention, but they were
blind to it.

They sat down on a broad stone seat; presently Adam said, "Now, tell
me; tell me how it seems to you."

"No," she answered, "you must tell me. What has happened to us, Adam?
Where are we, and why were we left?"

"God knows," he said reverently.

"Do you think it possible," she said slowly, "that we are dead?"

"Oh, I don't know!" he broke out, with a return to something of his
old childlike impatience. "Sometimes I think it is all a dream, and
directly I shall wake up and find myself in my dingy old law office.
But you are not a dream. These mountains are not a dream. Lassie
barking down below there is not a dream; and these callous spots on my
hands are real enough in all conscience, and no dream could last so
long. Sometimes I think we have been hypnotized and carried off and
left on an island somewhere. Sometimes--do you remember the man who
computed the vast number of 'mysterious disappearances,' and formed a
theory that the earth was being sorted out before the opening of the
last vial, or some such stuff? Do you think we can be simply another
disappearance?"

"I don't know," she said. "It seems easier to believe that, easier to
believe anything than that the whole world has disappeared."

"Then I think sometimes," he went on, "that there are evil powers,--I
know this sounds as if I had lost my mind, and maybe I have, I'm not
sure of anything,--but it seems as if there might be an explanation if
we believed in genii who have power over us. Perhaps you and I, who so
often found fault with the poor old earth, are being punished by
banishment from it. Perhaps we are being prepared for some great work.
I haven't very much religion, and yet I suppose I do believe in a
divine purpose back of things, a directing power that wastes nothing.
I have tried to think why this thing should come upon us, you and me,
of all the world; and while it seems an evil thing, a terrible and
overwhelming disaster, when I realize that it might have befallen me
alone, then just the fact that you are here makes it seem almost good.
Do you understand?"

"Yes," she said quickly. "I have felt just so. When, at first, I felt
as if I should curse God and die, I had only to remember you to fall
on my knees for thankfulness. Even if a dozen other people had been
left instead, no one would have understood as you have. Oh, I would
infinitely rather be alone with you than in the utter loneliness of
the society of a lot of men and women who would drive me mad with
their complaints and inefficiency. I don't know whether it is a dream,
or heaven or hell, or the work of some black magic; I only know that
if it is a punishment it has been commuted, in that you share it. And
yet how selfish that sounds, as selfish as love itself. I ought to
wish you were in a better, happier place, where you could carry out
your ambitions--" She stopped, and her eyes filled.

"Don't mind," he said grimly. "If that is selfishness, I am selfish to
the core. I have gone over the whole list, and I don't know any one I
would rather sacrifice to companionship with me in this exile than
you. My parents were old; they could never have borne the shock. My
sisters would be unhappy without their families; my women friends
could none of them have met the exigencies of such an existence as you
have; and as for men, by this we would all have been barbarians
together. You have kept me sane and alive, for that matter."

"But are we sane?" she said slowly, "I think I could stand it if I
only knew we were sane and alive. It is the feeling that I don't know
anything, that this valley, these mountains, may fade like the
baseless fabric of a dream. And sometimes I think that it may be real,
all real but you, and that I shall find myself here all alone, dead or
alive, sane or mad. God! how horrible it is!"

"That thought has never troubled me," he said. "Whatever has put us in
this dream together will keep us together to the end. You have not
wanted me to go far away from you, so we have worked together; I have
even let you do work that was unfit for you because I knew you would
prefer it. You were more frank about it, but you didn't feel any more
strongly than I did. I couldn't, I can't bear to have you out of my
sight."

"Have you ever thought that it may be so?" she asked hesitatingly.

"What? That it isn't a dream, and that we are sane and alive? Yes, I
have thought of that too. If it be true, how universal is the
destruction? We know now, pretty well, from the time that has
passed,--by the way, how long is it?" He stopped with a sudden dazed
look, and turned to her.

"It was the first of May," she said softly. "Now it is nearly the last
of August."

"Four months!" he said in a shocked tone. "I did not realize it; I
must have been worse stunned than I thought. In that case it seems as
if there can't be anything left of this continent, unless it be
detached peaks here and there, where other mountain ranges have been.
There may be other men and women waiting as we wait for a sail, a
sign, a message, and they do not know any more than we do whence it is
to come. The alteration in the climate has convinced me that the
waters on our West are those of the Pacific; it has been so warm and
pleasant. I have tried to imagine what kind of a winter we may expect,
or will the winter of our discontent be made glorious summer--"

"By three crops of strawberries, like California?" she interrupted.

"Perhaps," he said, smiling. "As to the East, that may be the
Atlantic, or the Gulf; it seems more probable that it is the latter.
The St. Lawrence district was said to be the oldest section of this
continent, and it is reasonable to suppose the earth's crust thickest
there, and along the mountain ranges. I suppose the continent has gone
to make another layer, a stratum, on top of the pliocene, and after
awhile the waters will subside, or some volcanic action will raise up
a new continent. If there are any ships anywhere, on any seas, they
will search every degree of latitude and longitude. Our flag floats,
did float, all over this globe; if it still flies anywhere, we shall
see it again."

"If I did," she said irreverently, "I should feel sure we were in
heaven. It was beautiful before, but what wouldn't it mean now, Adam?
But have you any one left on earth; if this continent is all gone, who
would look for you? There are people of my blood, or there were, but
they did not even know of my existence."

"There is not a soul," he answered. "Indeed, in this country it would
have been one chance in ten million. You might have done it," he said,
half jestingly, "but you are here."

"Yes," she echoed; "I am here. Adam, how long will it be before you
are satisfied that no one is left, no one in the sense of any
civilized people, with a country and means of circumnavigation?"

"A year," he answered, "perhaps more, but a year anyhow. I shall not
give up hope until then."




IV


            How gladly would I meet
    Mortality my sentence, and be earth
    Insensible! How glad would lay me down
    As in my mother's lap!

    MILTON.


The corn hardened, and the wheat ripened, and was harvested in truly
primeval fashion. Adam cut the wheat with a scythe, and Robin followed
him, binding it as best she could. They shocked it together, and then
began hauling it to the barn with the horses and bob-sleds, their only
vehicle. The stacking was weary work and progressed slowly. Adam
watched his co-worker toil over the sheaves, and then took them from
her and pitched them on the stack haphazard.

"You shall not bother over it any more," he said, "not if we live on
hominy all winter. Have you ever been in Mexico? Well, Hawaii was
called the land of poco tempo, but Mexico was the land of manana.
There isn't any work there for the work's sake. I mean there wasn't,
and we can take a lesson from them. We need not hurry; the legislature
will not meet this winter, and there will be no grand opera before
spring. Daisy and Lily shall do our work for us. We will find a bit of
hard, smooth ground, and then we will not muzzle the cows that tread
out the grain."

"Willingly," gasped Robin, climbing down from her slippery eminence on
top of the load of grain; "but do you think we are going to have any
winter?"

"That is pre-eminently one of the things that no fellow can find out,"
he answered. "In a dream you are likely to have any kind of weather,
and on a submerged planet we have no precedents at hand to tell us
what to expect. By replanting the vegetables right along we have had a
perpetual crop. As long as we have this kind of weather things will
grow, and I suppose we would better let them. Shut in as we are, it
doesn't seem likely that any very fearful winds are apt to trouble us;
and if there is a wet season, on this slope we shall have good
drainage. If the worst comes to the worst, there's the tunnel. Could
you make that cheerful and homelike?"

Robin smiled rather sadly. "It will do to put the grain in," she said,
and they walked on silently.

The spot finally selected for the threshing floor was brushed as clean
as twig brooms would make it, and the wheat spread out upon it. Adam
and Lassie drove the cows over it leisurely, and between times Adam
experimented on a flail. When he finally had one that answered the
purpose, and found he could use it without fracturing his skull, the
cows were released, and he went on with the work. Seated on a boulder
close by, her sombrero tipped well over her eyes, Robin fanned the
grain, and converted it into a coarse cracked wheat with a venerable
coffee-mill.

"I will make you a Mexican mill, when I get through with this," said
Adam, "but you cannot use it, because it is too hard work; I shall
have to be the miller. It is a rather simple affair, and dates from
before the days of Noah; it is made with two stones, sandstone
preferred, the lower of which is hollowed out bowl-fashion, with a
hole in the centre; the upper stone is rounding, and fits in the bowl,
and has a hole in it about four inches from the edge, in which a stout
wooden handle is inserted, with which to turn it. The two stones are
ground together until they become smooth. Then they are placed on four
other stones as rests, and a blanket or cloth is spread underneath to
catch the meal. The grain is poured around the edge of the upper
stone, and works down. It makes a very tolerable flour."

"How handy you are!" she said. "Isn't it a good thing we hadn't
civilized the whole world to such a degree that only patent high-grade
flour was used? Where should we be now without the simple devices of
the good people of the Stone Age, and their survivors on whom we
looked down with so much scorn?"

The snapping of the corn was an easier matter, and it was piled in the
tunnel till they should be ready to shell it. Then Adam did what he
called his "fall plowing," and left the bare brown sod to lie fallow.

So far as possible, they had retained the manners and customs of the
world that had left them. There was a tolerable supply of clothing,
and a good deal more household linen than could have been expected.
Robin concluded that the owners of the cabin had not been long
married, and the bride, knowing to what kind of a place she was
coming, had thought more of her house than of herself. All the
feminine garments had to be re-fashioned. Robin made her skirts short
enough for mountain climbing, and dreading the time when her one pair
of shoes should give out, she wore sandals fashioned from yucca leaves
by Adam's clever fingers. As the hair-pins lost themselves, she
braided her hair in a long queue, the curling ends of which fell far
below her waist.

The little house was kept as neat and clean as if it were headquarters
for all the labor-saving inventions in the world, and their meals were
as well served as if a corps of servants had been in attendance. They
were simple, and often a little monotonous, as meals must be where
there is nothing save what grows on one's own plantation. They had no
tea, coffee, sugar, spices, or foreign fruits. However, the hardship
of manual labor and plain food would cure most cases of dyspepsia, and
they did not suffer.

One day early in December, Robin woke to the consciousness of a steady
drip, drip of rain, accompanied by an indescribably mournful wind. In
the other room she heard Adam piling on the logs, and shivered.
Perhaps the winter had come. It had been hard enough when there was
plenty of work, and the free outdoor life; if they should become
prisoners, how should they, how would _he_ endure it? She dressed
quickly, and met his cheery "good-morning" in kind, and over their
breakfast they discussed the possibility of this storm being the first
of many. They decided that they must get the corn into such shape that
the tunnel would be available for the hapless cattle, or even for
themselves, if need be.

"We will go up there and shell corn all day," said Adam. "It isn't
really cold, and you can wrap up a bit. I wish I had thought to take a
lot of stone into the tunnel to build a bin at the end to put the corn
in. I don't know how we are to manage it."

She disappeared into the bedroom and came back presently with a few
grain sacks. When Adam opened the door he was nearly ready to abandon
his plan.

"You will be wet through," he said; "I cannot let you go."

"Then you cannot go either," she answered.

"But I must," he said. She was standing by him, hardly reaching his
shoulder, the sacks over her head. Catching her up in his arms, he
banged the door behind them, and ran up the slope to the tunnel, where
he deposited her laughing, and shaking the water from her curly hair.
As he had said, it was not cold, and they sat down near the mouth of
the tunnel, turned the tops of their sacks back over corncobs, and
shelled the corn in silence. At last a little sigh from Robin made
Adam look up quickly. Her hands were bleeding.

"Robin," he cried angrily, "how can you be so cruel! I don't want you
to do this work; there is no need. I forgot to watch you; besides, I
know you are tired. You did not sleep last night; I heard you moving
about."

"Then you did not sleep either," she responded quickly.

He flushed through the tan, and scooping some dry leaves together into
a bed, took off his coat and folded it for a pillow.

"Lie down and rest a little now," he said, "while I go down to the
house and see what I can find for lunch. Then you can have a good
sleep this afternoon."

He was gone several minutes, and when he came back with some
sandwiches in a tin bucket, and a dozen scarlet radishes dripping in
his hand, he stopped appalled. Robin was at the extreme end of the
tunnel, sitting on the ground, laughing and crying and talking
extravagant nonsense. Had she really gone mad, at last? Adam put down
the bucket, and walked toward her unsteadily. She did not stir, but
went on chattering in the same absurd way, until she saw him; then she
cried excitedly, "Oh, look! it's kittens, real little tame kittens,
though their mother won't come near me yet. She is over in that
corner."

Adam saw her green eyes, and though distrustful she was not
unfriendly. Emptying the bucket, he ran down to the sheds, and came
back with some milk which he poured into the top of the pail, and set
down before the kittens. They lapped it eagerly, and as the two human
beings withdrew discreetly, the cat crept out of her corner and joined
in the feast. When it was over, Robin took possession of one tiny ball
of fur, and Adam of another, while they made their own meal. Then
Robin curled up among the dead leaves, and slept like a child.

It was growing dusk when Adam awoke from his day-dreams. The tunnel
looked like a small grain elevator. On one side Robin still slept, but
the old cat was nestled contentedly at her feet, and the kittens were
playing sleepily over her.

"What is she dreaming?" Adam asked wearily. "All day I have sat here
and dreamed dreams that can never come true. I know it; I feel it. I
told her a year, but I am as sure now as I shall be in six years, that
there is no hope. The watch-fire is out to-night,--the first night in
eight months. I shall re-light it for her sake; not that she is any
more deceived than I, but she will be happier to believe me still
hopeful. What will be the end of it all? How can it end?"

"The same old way," came a sleepy voice from the leaves, "with the
'got married and lived happily ever after' formula." She sat up and
rubbed her eyes, and stretched lazily, to the discomfort of the
kittens, who retreated hastily. As she struggled to her feet and a
knowledge of her surroundings, her face changed pitifully, and she sat
down again and cried miserably.

"Oh, it was so real!" she sobbed. "I can see it now. We were back in
the old house, in the library, don't you remember it? and Walter was
at the piano, and Louis had just asked me how to finish his last
story. Did I answer out loud? Oh, which is the dream, for that was as
real as this!"

Adam stood and watched her. He tried not to think of that apropos
answer. He heard the beating, steady patter of the rain, and the
lowing of the cows, and there was not even a star in heaven to look at
him from its accustomed place with a friendly, twinkling promise for
the future. There was nothing left. So far as he was concerned, the
earth was without form and void. There was nothing to wait or hope
for. There was nothing to live for, neither cheerful yesterdays nor
confident to-morrows. What was the use in living? He looked down at
the slender creature lying outstretched almost at his feet, shaken
with the agony of long-repressed grief, and then at his long, muscular
hands. How little it would take to end it all for both of them! A mist
came over his eyes and he stooped, his hands outstretched toward her
white throat. They fell on the rounded curve of her shoulder. He
checked the caress as he checked the other impulse and shook her
instead.

"Let us go home," he said.

They went into the storm.




V


    Why wilt thou take a castle on thy back
    When God gave but a pack?
    With gown of honest wear, why wilt thou tease
    For braid and fripperies?
    Learn thou with flowers to dress, with birds to feed,
    And pinch thy large want to thy little need.

    FREDERICK LANGBRIDGE.


The next morning dawned clear and warm, and Adam, coming in with his
milk-pails, held out his hand to Robin. There were three ripe
strawberries.

"See," he said, "they are the harbingers of spring, or a California
climate, and either way makes our gain. California without fogs and
fleas is heavenly enough for most people."

Nevertheless, they completed the shelling of the corn, and made a bin
for it at the end of the tunnel, removing the cat family to the house,
where Lassie viewed their advent with jealous eyes. One day when they
had been hulling corn for nearly a week, Adam sat down and began
laughing. "Do you know how much corn it takes to plant an acre?" he
asked.

"No," said Robin, blankly. "I know something about the number of
kernels to the hill,--'one for the cutworm, and one for the crow, and
one for something-or-other else, I forget what, and one to grow.'
Why?"

"It takes eight quarts to plant an acre. We have raised about thirty
bushels to the acre, which is very well for sod. That will make over
fifteen thousand pounds of meal and hominy, and will feed us for seven
years, even if we eat six pounds daily. Unless there is a winter
season, when we must do something for the animals, there is not the
slightest use in planting more than an acre. As to the wheat, even
with a light yield, there would be fifteen hundred pounds to the acre.
We have fresh vegetables all the time, and there will be any quantity
of potatoes and cabbage and beans."

"And yet people starved everywhere, and it seemed to me that the
farmers were the worst off of all."

"They farmed to make money, not to live, and they had no control over
the markets. They had to sell or build barns. It is only Dives who can
afford to tear down the old ones and build greater. It was easier for
them to sell cheap to a man who took their wheat and held it until it
could be sold back to them as dear flour. They were eaten up with
mortgages and pests and interest. Have you noticed that there are
almost no insects here, not even flies and mosquitoes? They were never
so bad in the mountains, and apparently they have been wiped out with
the rest."

"Truly, Adam," she said, "speaking just of the physical part of it,
would you regret this year?"

He stood up and stretched out his arms, a splendid type of manhood,
smooth-shaven, with clear-cut features, bronzed, square-shouldered,
and powerful.

"Oh, you are magnificent!" she cried involuntarily. "It has done you
good, great good. You are twice the man you were in strength and
health and resource; and if only we had been cast away on an island,
knowing we were sure to be rescued some day soon, I should not be
sorry at all."

He colored and answered frankly: "Without the mental strain, I should
not regret this year. Sometimes, when I am sure it is a dream, and
that presently we shall waken, I can't help wondering whether we shall
not wish we had fretted less and enjoyed it more. When I come to think
of it, I believe it is the first time since I was a child that ways
and means have not troubled me. It was a good thing to work as we
have, to keep our minds employed, but now that we are sure that
starvation is five or six years away, we might as well drop the old,
headlong rush to get more than we need. That has been the trouble ever
since men began to make history. It was the same thing,--power,
conquest, riches, everything; too much to eat, too much to drink, too
much to wear--"

"Well, you can't say that of us," said Robin ruefully, looking down at
her made-over gown.

"Well, perhaps not, and I don't mean that there ever was a time when
there was a general surfeit, but I mean that was the tendency. There
would have been plenty for all, if part had not taken more than their
share; as for the other part who had not enough, they only longed for
the opportunity to simulate their unwise betters. When they could,
they took too much, too, if it was only to drink and forget their
misery. We could have lived so well and so easily, if we had lived
more simply, coming more directly in contact with nature, as we have
this year."

She shook her head doubtfully. "This has not been real life at all. We
have only kept alive. We haven't read anything or done anything or
helped any one--"

"Except each other and the animals dependent on us. On the whole, I
don't know but that we have accomplished about as much as when we were
devoting most of our attention to paying board and rent bills. We have
helped each other more than we can measure. We should have died had we
been left alone with our thoughts. All of life is not in cities, nor
even in books."

She did not answer for some moments, and then said slowly, "If it were
a dream, and we were going back to the old life, what would you regret
most?"

"If we were going back to the world we know, I should regret a good
many things; first, I suppose, that I did not realize sooner that we
must be going back, instead of letting myself be utterly overwhelmed.
Then I think I should be sorry that I didn't practise, a la
Demosthenes, when I had a whole coast to myself, and most of all I
should regret that we have not kept a record of our lives from day to
day. There is other writing I should want to do,--but there is no
paper, and I don't know how to make any."

"There is plenty of time to do all that yet," she said. "What else
would you wish you had done?"

He looked at her, for there was something in her voice he did not
understand, but her eyes were turned from him. "I should regret that
we had not talked more. Do you know, we have been very silent? And we
used to have so many things to talk over in the old days. I should
have twinges of remorse that I did not make more of your companionship
when I had it, instead of raising more corn than we can eat in half a
dozen years, and letting you tear your hands shelling it." He stooped
and kissed one of her slender hands. She withdrew it quickly; there
had never been even a touch of the sentimental between them.

"What would you regret?" he asked suddenly.

She shrank a little, and her eyes looked far away, past the gateway.
"Some of the things you mention; very much that I had not encouraged
you more to go on with your work, but mainly--"

"Well, mainly?"

She jumped down from the rock where she had been sitting, and answered
evasively, "I don't think there is any mainly, unless it is that when
I had such a good chance to be a hermit, I couldn't remember all those
wonderful Mahatma practices that make one so good and so wise. The
only formulas I have really tried hard to recall are for cooking
without sugar, or spice, or fruit."




VI


    Heap on more wood!--the wind is chill; But let it whistle as it
    will, We'll keep our Christmas merry still.

    SCOTT.


It was Christmas Eve, and the night being in a reminiscent mood, was
chillier than usual. Adam piled up the logs till the whole room was
full of the warm glow. "Let us hang up our stockings," he said, with
an attempt at gayety.

Robin spread out her hands with a gesture of comic distress. "If only
I had a pair to hang!" she said. "But they gave boxes in England,
didn't they? I noticed that the rain the other day seemed to have come
through the shed roof, and I fear the contents of those packing cases
may be the worse for it, especially if they happen to be sugar. Do you
think it would do to make ourselves presents of them? If you do,
please give me the smaller box; I am sure it has hair-pins and needles
and darning-cotton in it."

Adam laughed. "We will give them to each other," he said, "and perhaps
you'll find some stockings in your box, if there is no box in your
stockings. We can dream of their contents all night, and--who
knows?--we may have a merry Christmas, after all."

Robin hardly knew the place next morning. Adam had risen early and
decked every available spot with kinnikinnick until the room fairly
glistened. "I wish I knew how to thank him," she said.

"Do you like it?" he said, as he came in. "I was afraid I should waken
you putting it up."

"Like it!" she answered, "Why, Adam, it is beautiful. You are just an
ideal Santa Claus."

When they had finished their breakfast they went out and looked at the
boxes.

"You must open yours first," she said; "it's so big I know it doesn't
contain anything nice, so we would better save mine till the last, and
then I can divide with you. What do you think it is? You shall have
three guesses."

"It might be a piano from its size," he ventured.

"No," she said decidedly. "It's not the right shape."

"Or perhaps it's a feather-bed; I don't know of anything I want less."

"It's too large for that; now guess, really."

"As a matter of fact, I expect it is mining machinery, which will be
about as much use as another chimney; but here goes to find out." He
brought his hatchet down vigorously between the boards at one end,
where a slight crevice promised some leeway.

"Oh, do be careful," she cried "even if there's nothing in it but
stove-polish and excelsior, the nails and the boards are absolute
treasures!"

He proceeded more gently. There was any amount of hoop-iron, which he
removed carefully, and the nails were drawn with as much caution as if
they had been teeth, as they well might be, considering there were no
more on earth to draw. When the top of the box was finally off, and a
quantity of papers removed, they gave a simultaneous cry of delight.
The box was full of books. They took them out, one at a time, with
little exclamations of pleasure, as an old friend came to light.
Sitting down on the ground they piled the books about them on the
papers, and opening favorites here and there read to each other and
themselves till long after noon. It was really a fine library, well
chosen, covering a wide range of subjects and including an
encyclopaedia and an unusually fine edition of Shakespeare.

"Isn't it the most beautiful Christmas present you can imagine, Adam?"
she said. "If you are not suited with this it must be because, in the
old slang, you 'want the earth.'"

"But we haven't even opened your box," he said.

"I don't want to," she answered slowly. "Somehow I feel as if we would
better stop now and let well enough alone. Let us enjoy this awhile.
Perhaps the other box may spoil this one, or at least the day."

Adam laughed with good-natured tolerance. "How absurd!" he said. "Let
us see what there is. You know you said yours would be the nicest;
besides, if it contains sawdust and last year's almanacs, I shall have
to divide with you, and we may quarrel over the Shakespeare." He
opened the box while she stood watching him with a strange
unwillingness. It had been labeled, "This Side Up," and on the very
top there was a wooden case. He put it in Robin's arms, and she opened
it with trembling fingers. She replaced the broken strings, adjusted
the bridge, tucked the violin under her chin, tuned it, and
straightway escaped from every sorry care of earth.

Adam went on unpacking the box. It contained chiefly materials for
writing,--all the paraphernalia that the fastidious student requires.
There were many note-books, and at the bottom a large, handsomely
inlaid writing-desk. The name on the cover made him start and call
her. She put down the violin reluctantly, and then stooped and kissed
the vibrating wood with sudden feeling.

"It is a Steiner," she said. "You know the story of Steiner's violins,
do you not? No? Some day, perhaps, I may tell you. Can you open the
desk?"

He found the key and unlocked it. There were some letters, a few
papers and memoranda, and a journal. Adam turned to the last page
written, and read:--

    "Have just completed arrangements for transportation of my
    effects to the mountains. Close study of various phenomena
    convinces me that I may have been in error, and that the
    cataclysm is much closer at hand than I have thought. Within
    a few months I shall burn this book, and confess that I
    should be written down an ass, or turn to it to prove myself
    a prophet. From the eyrie I have chosen I expect to be able
    to write the story of the coming deluge. It will be of great
    value to posterity to have a calm, scientific account, quite
    free from any tinge of superstition or religion. I have
    to-day written my Boston skeptics, forwarding copies of my
    calculations, with references to former inundations, and
    reasons for believing the Rocky Mountain region the safest
    at this time. All geologists agree that--"

Here the journal terminated abruptly.

Robin hardly seemed to comprehend its full significance; or possibly
she was not surprised. She touched the book as gently as if it were
the napkin over the face of the dead.

"It is not to the wise that God has revealed himself," she said
softly. "Where is the hand that wrote this? You must finish it, Adam.
Here are the blank pages waiting for such a chapter as was never
written on earth."

But Adam only looked at the half-written page unseeingly. "It is all
true, then," he muttered to himself; "it is all true." He walked away
with a painful precision of motion, almost as if he were drunk; he
neither heard nor saw anything, yet was conscious of everything, and
while he thought he had been hopeless before, he knew now that he had
never given up hope, never until that moment ceased to expect a
rescue.

Robin took her violin and went indoors. Presently he heard its liquid
notes stealing out to him, like a power unknown and divine, brushing
its fingers across his heart, the harp of a thousand strings. She
played for a long time, and when she ceased, in some strange way he
felt that he was comforted.




VII


    The World is too much with us; late and soon
      Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers;
      Little we see in nature that is ours;
    We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon.

           *       *       *       *       *

                  Great God! I'd rather be
      A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn,--
    So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
      Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
    Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea;
      Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn.

    WORDSWORTH.


They had been sitting by the fire in silence for a long time. Robin
had been sewing, but the blaze had sunk too low to see by it, and her
hands were folded idly upon her mending. She put it by, and went to
the window. It was a very dark night, and the stars shone brilliantly.
The stars had come to mean a great deal to them both, howbeit neither
had ever said so. The stars only were unchanged. "The thoughts of God
in the heavens" were the same, whatever might be His thought on earth.

She sighed so heavily, that Adam asked quickly, "What is it?" and she
answered, with a nervous laugh, "I was thinking of the old legend,
that the souls on other planets call ours 'the sorrowful world.' What
made it so sorrowful, Adam?"

"Ignorance would cover it all," he answered, "but to be specific,
intemperance, sensuality, avarice, and poverty. I don't mean
drunkenness only, when I say intemperance. I have known a few
prohibitionists in my time who were as intemperate in their eating as
any one could be in the matter of drink. I think intemperance in its
widest sense was the great curse of our time anyway; drink and tobacco
and tea and coffee; and as to our eating, there was too much, of
almost everything on earth that was not food, but which could be
over-salted and over-peppered, and treated with tabasco sauce. We
over-stimulated every activity of the body, and spent our lives doing
all kinds of things in which there was no sense. Think of reading one
or two morning and evening papers every day. To be sure we said there
was nothing in them, but we used up our eyesight over them, and let a
stream of silliness and scandal dribble through our minds. As to the
things we wore--"

Robin laughed. "I know," she said. "The sewing-machine didn't save
work; it only made ruffles. A dressmaker once said to me, 'It's a good
thing for me that these women haven't sense enough to spend their time
and money on themselves, in making their bodies free and strong and
beautiful. But no; they would rather have a stylish dress than a
graceful body. They don't care to be beautiful themselves; all they
want is a handsome gown to cover their ugliness.' Isn't it strange
that we never seemed able to realize that the Greek fashions were
immortal because they were beautiful?"

"Still, I don't think the dress of the Greek women would be very
convenient for housework," ventured Adam.

Robin shook her head. "You only say that because some woman has said
it to you. The Diana of the Stag wore the first rainy-day gown. The
Greek dress was capable of ever so many modifications. If I were
making a handbook of proverbs for women, I should say, 'A good
complexion is rather to be chosen than many fine dresses, and glossy
and abundant hair turneth away wrath.' I believe in the simplification
of life. I understand just how Thoreau felt when he threw out that
specimen because it had to be dusted daily. There are very few things
beautiful enough to pay for that amount of trouble. But perhaps that
is because I don't care for specimens, and I loathe dusting."

"You ought to have been a Jap," said Adam. "There was one in college,
in my class, and one day when I was fretting over something I could
not afford he said, in that immensely polite way of theirs, 'You I
cannot understand. With all American people it so is, even as by
Ruskin said was it; whatever you have, of it you more would get, and
where you are, you would go from. You happy are only when something
you get, and never that you yourself are.' But I think the Celestial
was wrong there. When a man is self-conscious of illy-made garments, a
mean domicile, a poor kind of half education, he is uncomfortable; he
hasn't accomplished his evolution from the conscious, the
self-conscious, to the unconscious. It was this very discomfort and
inequality that used so to enrage me, for it need not have been."

"I wish," said Robin, "we knew how to make paper; of all the
fascinating things in Bellamy's 'Equality,' there was nothing I liked
so well as the idea of paper garments, to be burned when one got
through with them. Think of never having any washing and ironing, and
always having new clothes."

"I wonder whether we could invent some of those things over again,"
said Adam, reflectively.

"I couldn't spare you any of my precious rags, if you could," said
Robin.

"Most of the paper was made out of wood, anyhow," answered Adam, "and
the ash that grows here in any quantity was considered particularly
fine for that purpose."

"'God made man upright, but he hath sought out many inventions,'"
quoted Robin, "and now we are going to seek them over again. I can't
imagine how anyone could ever make a lineotype, but the type and the
hand-press are easy enough, and if you can make paper, we may yet live
to read our 'published works.' You probably do not know that I used to
have a Wegg-like facility for dropping into poetry."

"Did you? That is another of the things you never told me; but your
speaking of Thoreau," answered Adam, "recalls what he said of the
amount of work necessary to sustain life beside Walden Pond. It took
six weeks out of the year, and that was in a most forbidding country.
In such a valley as this two months ought to be sufficient to more
than feed and clothe us; but then he didn't have to make his own
clothing."

"And out of nothing particular," interrupted Robin.

Adam laughed and went on. "Did you ever hear of a man called Hertzka?
He was an eminent Austrian sociologist, and he figured it out, that if
five million men should work a little less than an hour and three
quarters a day they could produce all the necessities of life for the
twenty-two million people of Austria. By working two hours and twelve
minutes daily for two months beside, they could have all the luxuries
also. And that not for a few, not for the Court and the nobility, but
for all. There could have been music and pictures and books and
theatres, and sufficient food and clothing. Isn't it strange that when
we might have been so happy we preferred to be so wretched? For even
if we had all we wanted ourselves, we could not escape the sights and
sounds that told of abject misery."

"It was always so," Robin answered moodily. "The poor we had always
with us. History always repeated itself."

"Still, it didn't exactly repeat itself," Adam said. "Our dark age
would have done for a golden age in the past. Greece was glorious for
a little while, but her literature tells us of her ideals. The isles
of Greece, where Byron contracted his last illness, would have left
him to die among the rocks twenty-five hundred years earlier, because
he had a lame foot. We at least were kinder to animals, and that means
a great deal."

"I don't know," she answered. "Perhaps; it seems to me I have read of
a hospital for sick animals on the island of Ceylon a long sometime B.
C. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu--or was it Lady Hester Stanhope?--said
she had traveled all over the world, and had never found but two kinds
of people,--men and women. I fancy the same thing is true of all the
ages as well as all the countries."

"No," Adam said, shaking his head; "our ideals change. The scheme of
life laid down by Christ was to the Greeks foolishness and to the Jews
a stumbling-block, and there were plenty of Greeks and Jews in our
day. By Greeks I mean people whose ideals were purely intellectual,
and by Jews those who saw no good save a material good, no God but the
God of Mammon. They would not hear either Moses or the prophets, and
the statute of limitations was as near as they could come to the
Sabbatic year. The Greek and the Jew have stood ready with their cup
of hemlock, their crown of thorns for every Christ-spirit that has
ever come to earth. Yet more people read Socrates, and believed on the
Nazarene every year. I don't mean in the church; the working-man did
not go to church, but he uncovered his head at the name of Christ, the
first lawgiver who confounded the scribes and Pharisees, and ate with
publicans and sinners."

"But Moses was the first lawgiver to forbid taking the nether
millstone as a pledge," objected Robin.

"True," he admitted, "and the laws of Moses would have made the world
over. He was the greatest writer on political economy this earth has
ever seen. His absolute fiat against the alienation of the land would
have done more for the common people than all Adam Smith's theories of
free competition, and Fourier's dream of a perfected communism. But
who would have known of Moses, save for Christ? The Old Testament
would have been merely the sacred book of the Hebrews, and save as a
literary and historic work, of very uncertain historic value, would
have been unread, as the Koran and other books of a similar nature
were unread."

"And yet you do not believe in the divinity of Christ," she said
slowly.

"No," he answered. "Is that necessary before one can believe in his
teachings? The truth is always divine. What difference does it make
whether the one who utters it be human or divine, bond or slave, AEsop
or Marcus Aurelius? the truth remains the same. A fable is only
another name of a parable. We have the story of the lost sheep; that's
a parable; and that of the lamb that muddied the stream, and that's a
fable. One is sacred, the other profane, but both are fables, both
parables. When you take them away from the context it is as easy to
feel for the lamb eaten by the wolf, as for the one that was rescued,
and has been immortalized in picture and song."

"Probably you are right," she said. "I never thought of it in just
that way before," and saying "good night" she went to her room.

Adam thought he heard her humming, "Away on the mountains cold and
bare."




VIII


    When we mean to build
    We first survey the plot, then draw the model,
    And, then we see the figure of the house,
    Then must we rate the cost of the erection.

    SHAKSPERE.


The discovery of the incomplete journal made a subtle change in Adam.
He had been silent and self-absorbed from the first, but he had never
quite given up hope. Even now, Robin sought to keep up the pretence,
and dreading the despair which she saw creeping over Adam, she began
artfully to seek some means of interesting him in something else. The
question of a proper place for the books gave her an opportunity, and
Adam suggested that he build an addition to the house.

They planned it as eagerly as if it was to be a castle, and spent days
in looking for adobe, but finally decided that logs would be better,
and Adam's ax could have been heard ringing from morning till night. A
log house is not exactly a work of art, but it requires no little
skill to build one, and takes a good deal of time when the logs for
the floor must be planed and squared, so as to make a matched board
floor. Sometimes Robin went with Adam, and worked or read; sometimes
she took him his luncheon at noon, for the trees were at some little
distance from the house. The logs had to be "snaked" across the rough
ground and down the mountain, and when the floor had been laid, and
the location of the window decided upon, Robin planted morning-glory
seeds where it was to be. By dint of much pushing and hauling the logs
were finally put in place, and the roof battened down. The window was
truly worthy of a mediaeval castle, for it was simply an oblong hole,
boxed in with a casement made from some scraps of boards, while a slab
shutter, swung on leather hinges, shut out the elements.

The chinking was a simple matter, and when it was all done, including
a doorway into the main room, Robin was unfeignedly delighted. They
made rows of shelves with the packing-cases, and arranged the books
thereon. It was not an extensive library, but it occupied one side of
the room, and was a godsend to them. Under the window Robin placed the
green covered desk, and placed on it Adam's writing materials. Along
the inside wall Adam built a bunk, after the fashion in miners'
cabins, and with a mattress stuffed with the soft inner cornhusk, and
a pillow from the other room, and blankets from the one tiny closet,
the couch looked sufficiently inviting. On the floor Robin spread mats
made from plaited cornhusk, and in the doorway hung a portiere, woven
from the same material on a loom that a Navajo might not have utterly
despised.

Adam's scanty wardrobe was transferred to pegs in one corner of the
room, one or two stools were set first here, then there, until Robin
was sure the best effect had been secured, and when all was done that
they could accomplish with the means at hand, and the morning-glory
blossoms came peeping in at the window, the room was by no means
unattractive.

Then Robin's housewifely soul took refuge in house-cleaning, and she
scrubbed and arranged and re-arranged, while Adam repaired or invented
furniture, until inside and out their little domain was as perfect as
they could make it.

Between them there had again fallen one of those long silences they
dreaded, but seemed powerless to prevent. As the voice of the
turtledove was lifted in the plaintive notes of nesting time, Adam
harrowed three acres of the plowed land and planted it in wheat and
corn. The perennial garden was flourishing, and there was nothing to
do. Adam said so one day, with an air of calm finality.

Robin regarded him uneasily. The time had not yet come when he could
sit down and write, though she had brewed an excellent ink, and the
paper waited on the desk in his room. She considered for a moment,
then said brightly, "Don't you remember what Myron used to say? How
when his friends got rich they first built a beautiful house, and then
went abroad for three years? Let us go traveling; wouldn't you like
it?"

The alacrity with which he acquiesced proved how well he liked it, and
he started out at once to get the burros, and make ready for the
expedition.

Robin baked and prepared as well as she could.

"It's a good thing I had a Southern grandmother," she soliloquized, as
she put her beaten biscuit in the Dutch oven and pulled the coals over
it. "And it's a good thing my mother crossed the plains and learned
how to make biscuit in the mouth of her flour sack, and," as she
rolled out some crackers, "it is a blessed good thing I went to
cooking-school, but I wish that, instead of being so particular about
the knobs on the candlesticks, the Pentateuch had given Sarah's recipe
for making cakes with honey. Not that I have any honey, but I am sure
we shall find some on this trip."

When they were all ready, and the burros stood waiting at the door,
with Lassie jumping wildly about them, Adam wrote a placard which he
stuck in the framework of the door. The stock had been turned loose on
the mountain-side, and the house and stables secured as well as
possible against any storms that might arise. The kittens had
possession of one of the sheds. The puppies were to accompany them.

Robin had put on her long unused shoes, and a new gown that she had
made out of a dark blue serge found hanging in her room. Adam looked
at her approvingly from under his wide sombrero. She turned back,
after going a few paces, and read the card.

    WAIT!

    APRIL 5th.

    Back in two weeks.

    Look for smoke.

As she passed into the canon that hid their home from sight, Adam saw
her brush her hand across her eyes.




IX

    I pity the man who can travel from Dan to Beersheba and cry, "'Tis
    all barren."

    STERNE.


They traveled a due west course, crossing the two ranges, wending
their way through dim defiles and along precipitous canons, until they
saw the sea. Here its mood was summer-like. Even in the short time
that had elapsed it had worn itself a broad, smooth beach, and wide
tracts of land between the sand and the base of the mountains proved
that the earth had been thrown up, or that the water had receded. They
had not looked upon the ocean before for many months.

They picketed the burros on the rank, salt grass, and built their
camp-fire early, and while Robin set the potatoes baking, and began
her supper preparations, Adam went scouting along the coast. In less
than half an hour he came back with a quantity of clams which he threw
down before her as proudly as if they had been foreign battle-flags.
She gave a little feminine shriek of delight.

"Now I know why we brought that inconvenient iron pot," she said;
"bring it here, please."

Adam brought it, and watched her slice up onions and potatoes and stir
in the various ingredients.

"It is going to be the best chowder you ever tasted," she said, "even
if we haven't any bacon. When you write the veracious tale of our
adventures, Adam, don't put in how many things we ate."

"They might think it a voracious tale if I did," he answered, dropping
some more butter into his mealy potato. "Do you remember how the Swiss
Family were always worrying for fear they wouldn't have enough to
eat?"

"Yes, and how they went out and killed an elephant for breakfast, and
a herd of wild pigs for dinner, and had a buffalo apiece for supper.
And don't you remember how, when the boa constrictor killed one of
their zebras, little Fritz asked pathetically if boas were good to
eat?"

They laughed over their supper, and then having made sure that they
were out of reach of the tide, and the fire would keep, and the rifle
was close at Adam's elbow, they spread their blankets and said "good
night." It had been an exciting day.

It was past midnight, and the moon was waning when Adam was wakened by
Lassie's cold muzzle against his face. He sat up and called to Robin.
There was no answer, and her blankets lay tossed on the other side of
the fire. He started up and listened. At first he heard only the sound
of the sea; then there came mingled with it the clear notes of her
glorious voice. Holding Lassie in check he went down to the beach.

Robin stood well out on the shimmering sand, the waves lapping softly
almost at her feet, and he heard the plaintive music, and caught the
words,--

    "Oh, for the wings, for the wings of a dove, Far away,
     far away, would I fly, and be, and be at rest."

Her voice quivered when she came to the words, "In the wilderness
build me a nest," but she sang on, and Adam recalled the words of hymn
after hymn, anthem after anthem, for she sang nothing else. He heard
the bitter cry of the De Profundis, Handel's triumphant "I know that
my Redeemer liveth," and then she began, "He watching over Israel
slumbers not nor sleeps."

His eyes filled, and he saw the tents of his regiment. She had written
by every mail, and across her letters, at the top or bottom, she had
put those five bars from "Elijah." Though he did not believe it, for
he had not the early Hebrew ability to see Israel in his own race, and
the to be spoiled Philistine in every Filipino, it had comforted him
in that sickening campaign. Surely, surely if he, an American
"non-com," had spared a Filipino now and then, He watching over Israel
had not been less merciful.

Her voice died away; it was the first time she had sung that year,
though she was a very perfectly trained musician. Indeed in the old
days, Adam had first sought her acquaintance because of her music.

Adam returned to the camp; he knew instinctively that she preferred to
keep this to herself. He was lying quite still when she came back, and
controlled every muscle when she bent over him. She regarded him
intently for a moment, then went to her blankets with a heavy sigh
that Adam knew was for him. She had sung out her own sorrows.

Their vigils seemed to do them both good, for they shook off their
melancholy tendencies, and before the end of the first week their tour
was beginning to be thoroughly enjoyable. They did not find cocoanuts
and bananas, but they did find plenty of strawberries, and long,
prickly vines that would be covered with raspberries, and wild grapes
and choke-cherries and currants, which they planned to transplant, for
though the Western coast was more beautiful, and in some respects more
convenient than their hedged in valley, they preferred the valley.
Already it had come to mean home.

They traveled about fifty miles southward, to the end of the island,
making desultory trips up into the mountains to see if anywhere, on
land or sea, there was a friendly wreath of smoke, and every night
their watch-fire glowed from the highest peak in their vicinity. The
island narrowed to a single range, detached peaks rising here and
there from the sea. As they rounded the southernmost point, Adam said,
"We ought to name it; that remarkable Swiss family always named
places."

Robin looked at the bare, stone walls rising sheer above the waves
three hundred feet, and her lip curled.

"Let us call it the Cape of Good Hope," she said.

"In the name of wonder, why?" asked Adam, and she answered, "Because
we are past it," and then would have given anything to have recalled
the bitter words.

The Eastern coast was wilder and more picturesque, but the traveling
was correspondingly slower. Something in the formation of the coast
caused a terrific surf, and at many places there was scarcely any
beach, and they found themselves compelled to climb along trails that
made even the burros dizzy.

When they had been absent ten days, Robin said, "I begin to feel like
a grandmother; no, I don't mean that I feel so old, but that I begin
to long to see the chicken and cat-children, and the new calf,
and--everything."

Adam laughed, "I have been thinking we ought to hurry; that place of
ours is growing so entrancingly lovely in memory that last night I
dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls!"

They were not to reach home without at least one adventure, however. A
day or so later, as they toiled up a painfully steep ascent, Lassie
sounded the note of alarm, and catching up the rifle, Adam ran ahead.
As he rounded a point in the rocks, he came upon a Rocky Mountain goat
engaged in combat with a cinnamon bear. The bear was hardly more than
a cub, and was carrying off one of the kids. The goat, horns down, was
fighting viciously, though weak from loss of blood.

It would be interesting to know what one wild animal thinks when
another wild animal, from its point of view, comes to the rescue. Adam
carried a lariat over one arm. In an instant it flew through the air,
dropping over Bruin's shoulders. He released the kid, and tumbled
backward over the cliff, as much with surprise as by the force of the
jerk on the rope, taking that treasured article with him.

It took some time to capture the wounded animals, bind up their hurts,
and get them down the pathway leading to the beach. For there was a
beach, the best one they had found on the Eastern coast, and as they
put the goat and her kids down in the grass, Adam said tentatively,
"If you are not afraid, I can go home and get the horses and the
sleds. It isn't a great way, and I believe I can be back in three
hours,--I'm sure I can if the beach goes as close to our park as I
think."

Robin acquiesced, and as soon as he was gone began gathering
driftwood. When she had quite a little heap she made a fire with the
coals they carried in the pot. It is doubtless more romantic to build
a fire by striking flint rocks together, but a pot of coals has its
uses in a matchless universe. Then she found a long, stout club, and
put one end in the fire, where it smouldered sullenly.

"There now," she said conclusively, "if my bear acquaintance calls, I
will present him with 'the red flower.' I didn't learn the 'Jungle
Books' by heart for nothing."

Meanwhile Adam was striding over the beach at a rate that brought him
to the little cove and the high wall of rocks that shut them in on the
south in a little over an hour. Two of the pups had gone with him, and
they raced on ahead, as he came in sight of the house. Everything
seemed to have an air of welcome, and the horses whinnied joyfully
when he called them from the gateway.

The pathetic placard was still there, and he crumpled it in his hand,
and went in and opened the windows. He milked one of the cows, and
gathering some green stuff in the garden started back with the team
and the sleds. Once down the steep decline, and over the rocks at the
south, they went on rapidly.

Although he had wasted no time, it was past one o'clock when he saw
her familiar figure afar off. She hurried to meet him. They had not
been separated so long before that year, and realized the unconscious
strain in the sudden revulsion. They said nothing of this, however,
though they clasped hands for a moment. Then Robin spoke to the
horses, and stroked their necks, as they bent their heads and rubbed
against her affectionately.

She had spread their table on a broad, flat rock, but before they had
their own meal, she warmed some of the milk, and they gave the kids
their first lesson in drinking out of a bucket. Afterward it took but
a few moments to strike camp. The burros were already packed, and the
goat with her kids, all hobbled, were placed in the sled, and the
cavalcade started on its way.




X


    Cling to thy home! If there the meanest shed
    Yield thee a hearth and a shelter for thy head,
    And some poor plot, with vegetables stored,
    Be all that Heaven allots thee for thy board,
    Unsavory bread, and herbs that scatter'd grow
    Wild on the river-brink, or mountain-brow;
    Yet e'en this cheerless mansion shall provide
    More heart's repose than all the world beside.

    LEONIDAS.


"Do you know, Adam," said Robin, when they had walked a mile in
silence, "do you know that you are a fraud?"

"Well, yes," he responded, "but I didn't know you knew it. Is the
discovery recent?"

"Never mind about dates, but tell me why you didn't use the rifle
instead of the lariat? What did you take it for?"

"I took it for your peace of mind. I didn't use it for several good
and substantial and sentimental reasons. To reverse them, this last
year I have grown to understand your horror of killing things. We have
done very well without sacrificing any of our dependents; in fact, it
would seem like murder to slaughter the animals about us. And it's
such a little world it seems a pity to kill off any of its
inhabitants. To tell the truth, I hope the bear got away all right.
This is maudlin, I know, but I don't want my hand first to bring death
on all there is left of earth. Incidentally,--there are no
cartridges."

He stopped the horses, while Robin readjusted the kids to make them
more comfortable, and took the lame one in her arms, then they moved
on.

Presently she said, "I am so glad of these kids!"

There was so much enthusiasm in her voice that Adam laughed and asked
why, and she answered:--

"Like you, I have sound and sentimental reasons. The sound one is that
we shall need their fleece unless,--why, goodness gracious, Adam,
there is a baking-powder can of flax in the dresser, and I never
thought till this moment that we can plant it."

"True," answered Adam, "but given flax or fleece, what would you do
with it?"

"Spin it," she answered sententiously. "Of course you think I can't,
but it happens that I once lived, when I was a little girl, very near
to an old woman. I don't refer to her age, but her ideas. She carded
and spun and wove and dyed all the family clothing. She made her own
soap and wouldn't have a stove in the house. She had eight children,
too, and they all of them turned out badly. I used to go there off and
on; I think she looked on me as a kind of sinful amusement. Anyhow,
she told me the world was going to ruin, and the women were poor
'doless' creatures, who couldn't spin a hank of yarn, or gin a pound
of cotton, or heel a sock. She shook her head over me when she found I
couldn't knit, but she set a garter for me at once, and during the
seven or eight years that I went by her door on my way to school she
taught me all those marvelous accomplishments. I daresay I have
forgotten them."

"What are the sentimental reasons?" asked Adam.

She looked at the kid as it nestled against her shoulder.

"I have a fancy," she said, "that Nannette and her children are going
to minister to a mind diseased, and help pluck a rooted sorrow from
the brain. The world was getting too healthy. Has it ever struck you
that we have neither of us been sick for a day this year? I have had
to mother the chickens, but there has been no suffering. I'm not glad
to have pain come into the world, but it is good to be able to
alleviate it. We will put Nannette in a sling till her leg has a
chance to set, and by the time it is well she won't want to leave us.
As for the kids, I expect they will be like the plague of frogs, and
we shall find them in our beds and our ovens and our kneading troughs.
Oh, Adam, there is the house! Doesn't it look dear and homey?"

She put the kid back on the sled, and ran on, pointing out this and
that, the growth of the corn, the afternoon radiance, till they
reached their doorway. Then there were a thousand things to do. First
Nannette was made comfortable in the stable; then the chickens were
summoned to a meal of yellow corn, and when Lassie drove the cows into
the barnyard, each was congratulated in turn upon her calf, and those
interesting, if wobbly, bovine infants were carefully inspected. After
supper they sat down before the fire, very tired, but the nearest
happy they had been in a year. The dogs were lying about them, and the
thump, thump of first one tail and then another told the story of
canine content, while the kittens walked over them impartially.

"What a strange thing human nature is!" Adam said. "The only thing
needed to make our life perfect is that it shall not last. The moment,
if that moment ever comes, when it is real no more, it will become
ideal."

"I know," she said dreamily. "Things in the world used to be too good
to be true. This must cease to be, to be good at all."




XI


    Yet if Hope has flown away
    In a night, or in a day,
    In a vision, or in none.
    Is it therefore the less gone?
    All that we see or seem
    Is but a dream within a dream.

    POE.


"It is the first of May," said Adam. "It is a year ago to-day. Shall
we pass the gateway?"

"Not now," answered Robin. "Wait till afternoon. I am so busy this
morning."

She was sitting at the table teaching half a dozen little chickens to
appreciate hard-boiled egg. The wounded kid was lying in her lap, one
arm was about it, and an adventurous kitten looked over her shoulder.
As she tapped on the board with one slender forefinger, the chickens,
hearing their mother's bill, began picking up the fragments of egg.
She had rounded out wonderfully in a year, and Adam realized for the
first time that she was a very beautiful woman.

"Suppose," she went on, "you begin your book to-day. Write your
description of a year ago. It will never be so plain again. There is
plenty of time before we go. Besides, if it is a dream, we shall want
the written record to show what dreams may come."

Adam hesitated a moment, then went to his desk. She had said truly,
the events of that day would never again be so clear, and as he began
to record them they marshaled themselves before him, until he found
himself writing with a dramatic power that fascinated and amazed him.

It must have been some time afterward that Robin stole in and set a
glass of milk, some biscuit and strawberries, down on the desk beside
him and then went out, taking the dogs with her. He did not notice
another sound until she called him to supper.

While he did the evening work Robin dressed herself in the garments
she had worn the year before. As soon as she could make others she had
put them aside, awaiting the awakening or the rescue.

The heavy cloth skirt and the silk waist were put on with a strange
reluctance. Years ago the old doctor in "The Guardian Angel" said our
china became our tombstones, but surely our garments may become the
graveyards of our emotions, and hold sharp or sweet remembrances long
after they are past wearing. In spite of some tan Robin found the face
that looked back at her from her mirror infinitely more attractive
than it had been the year before.

Adam started a little when he saw her. Then he drew her hand through
his arm, and they went to the gateway. As he opened the gate she
turned and looked back. The sun was behind the mountains, and the
shadows were long and dark. They heard the sounds of the various
creatures settling into quiet for the night, and Adam sent back all
the dogs but Lassie. They went slowly and wistfully. Robin stooped and
kissed Prince on his white forehead. As Adam closed the gate, she said
half fearfully, "Shall we ever see them again?" But he did not answer.
He took her hand and led her to the boulder.

Far as the eye could reach they saw what they expected to see. Half a
mile away the sea rolled in on a tolerably level beach; here it
thundered and roared against a sheer cliff. Among the rocks they could
see the nests of many wild-fowl, and gulls flew by them. They sat down
on the rock and waited until midnight. Then they went home. The dogs
received them obstreperously, and the kid from its corner bleated
faintly. Robin bent over it anxiously, then warmed some milk and fed
it. When Adam came in with some fresh water she was swinging slowly to
and fro in the rocker, singing softly an absurd nursery song:--

    "Sleep, baby, sleep.
     The stars they are the sheep;
     The big moon is the shepherdess;
     The little stars are the lambs, I guess.
     Sleep, baby, sleep."

"It needed to be cuddled," she said in as matter-of-fact a voice as if
all lambs were sung to sleep regularly. "You know dear old Professor
Carter said there would have been no wild animals if we hadn't made
them so; but now, if you will, you can put her with Nannie."

When he came back she had gone into her room. There was nothing more
for either of them to say. There was nothing to do, except to hope for
a sail, since they no longer hoped for an awakening.




XII

    Speech is but broken light upon the depth Of the unspoken.

    GEORGE ELIOT.


The work on the book progressed rather slowly. Often Adam had to refer
to Robin when his memory was at fault. At first she had gone away, to
leave him alone with his work, but as he referred to her more
frequently, she sat with him, sewing while he wrote, a frame of
morning-glories back of her, or reading with the keen enjoyment of one
who renews a pleasure long foregone. When he seemed to be going on
smoothly, she sometimes stole away and gave herself up to long hours
with her violin.

One afternoon she tapped on his casement. His work was lagging, and he
rose gladly and went out with her. They walked up the path and through
the gateway to their boulder, and sat down.

"Talk to me," said Adam.

She shook her head. "About what, most worshipful seigneur? For I am
but a worm of the dust before thee, and all my tales are of the homely
tasks of baking and brewing. Naught is there worthy to be set down in
thy book." Then, with a sudden change of manner, "Oh, Adam, there are
eighteen new chickens to-day! The Plymouth Rock hen stole a nest, and
they came off this morning. And there is some news too. The flax is in
bloom. It is so pretty."

"When do you expect to weave your first linen?" asked Adam.

"Oh, I don't know, but it is good to know there will be some to weave.
Do you remember Andersen's story of the flax? I was thinking of it
this morning as I pulled out some weeds, and how when it was pulled up
and cut and hackled, it said: 'One cannot always have good times. One
must make one's experience, and so one comes to know something;' and
when it is woven and cut up and made into garments, it still says, 'If
I have suffered something, I have been made into something. I am
happiest of all. That is a real blessing. Now I shall be of some use
in the world, and that is right, that is a true pleasure.'"

"If one only knew he was to be of some use," Adam said wearily; "if we
could see the justification of our suffering."

"Then we should be as gods," answered Robin. "I like the song of the
flax, 'content, content;' and when the linen is worn out, it is again
tortured and beaten until it becomes paper whereon an eternal word is
written. I used to wonder why Andersen was given to children; not that
I wouldn't have them read him, but he is one of the profound thinkers
of the world. No one had Andersen clubs, or professed to find deep and
wonderful esoteric truths in his stories, but they are there. Do you
remember my girls' club down on--I don't think there were any streets,
but the inhabitants called the place 'Kerry Patch'?"

"Why, no," said Adam, "I didn't know you had one; why didn't you tell
me?"

"That was ever so long ago, ages and ages,--when you came to see--"
She paused a little, and then spoke the personal pronoun that tells
the whole story, for a woman can say "him" in such a way as to betray
unspeakable heights of adoration or abysses of loathing. She went on
slowly. "You were not one of my friends then; how could you be, if
there existed anything in common between you two? That sounds
dreadful, but you know all about it so well that subterfuges are
useless."

"To tell the truth, I never cared anything about him at all," Adam
answered quickly. "Like a good many others, I was enthusiastic over
your voice. He asked me to the house to hear you sing, and I went, and
was glad of the chance. And you have never sung for me once this
year."

"You never asked me," she answered. "'A dumb priest loses his
benefice.' But I was speaking of my club. We studied Andersen all
winter, and got enough more out of him than a lot of us who pored over
Ibsen, guided by a literary expert. Andersen has a more beautiful, a
more inspiring philosophy. Every nation has its story of Psyche, the
lost soul of things, but none is more beautiful than the tale of Gerda
and Kay. There were children in that club who were cruel, horribly
cruel, and one day when we gave an entertainment for them, one of the
older girls recited the story of 'The Daisy and the Lark.' They cried
as I had cried over it years before."

"I remember," he said. "It broke my heart when I was a little shaver.
I couldn't give so sad a story as that to a child."

"Oh, yes, you could," she said, "if the child needed it. The world was
cruel, cruel, Adam; I used to wonder sometimes why God did not blot it
all out, as He has blotted it out now. Once in another club, a big,
swell affair, there was a Humane Society programme. One woman, in a
Persian lamb jacket, spoke on the evils of the overcheck; you know how
they get that wool? And women nodded the aigrettes in their bonnets,
torn from the old birds while the little ones starved to death, to
show their approval, and patted their hands gloved in the skins of
kids, sewed in cloth soon after their birth so they couldn't grow a
fleece, and tortured all their short lives, and went home to eat
pate-de-foie gras, and broil live lobsters, thanking God they were not
as the rest of men, if only they let out their check-reins a hole or
so. It was horrible,--the cruelties men practised to gratify appetite,
and that women were guilty of for vanity. I suppose I am a monomaniac
on the subject, but we never seemed far removed from barbarians, when
we went clothed in the skins of wild animals, and decorated with their
heads and tails and feathers, like so many Sioux chiefs. The varnish
of civilization isn't dry on us yet. Why, if a ship should come here
now, do you know what they would do first, unless they happened to be
East Indians? They would say they wanted some fresh meat, and offer to
buy Lily; she is the fattest of the cows. If we wouldn't sell her,
they would probably take her anyway."

"Kill Lily," cried Adam, angrily. "They'd have me to kill first;
nothing on this place is going to be slaughtered while I can protect
it." He went on more slowly, a little ashamed of his heat, "I feel a
sense of kinship with all these creatures that would make it
impossible to kill them. It's like the woman whose Newfoundland died,
and a friend asked if she was going to have him stuffed. 'Stuffed!'
she said; 'I'd as soon think of stuffing my husband!'"

Robin laughed, and leaning over tweaked Lassie's ear. "If we are to be
stuffed, we prefer to have it an ante-mortem performance, don't we,
little dog?"

The sun dropped behind the tall peaks, but its dying light still
covered sea and shore. They rose as if for the benediction, and looked
out at the waters before them. Then they looked at each other and grew
white to the lips, and Robin knelt down and flinging her arms around
Lassie sobbed and laughed. Adam never took his eyes from the coming
ship.




XIII


    Every ship brings a word;
    Well for those who have no fear,
    Looking seaward well assured
    That the word the vessel brings
    Is the word they wish to hear.

    EMERSON.


The ship bore steadily toward them, but night was coming on so rapidly
that her lines were obscured. They could not even tell whether it was
a sailing vessel or propelled by steam.

"There's one thing certain," said Adam, excitedly: "it was coming this
way, but very slowly. I suppose that is to be expected of a ship
sailing unknown waters. They have nothing to go by, though they know,
of course, just what part of the round globe they are on."

She answered almost apathetically, as if she found it difficult to
talk, "It seems as if good sailors would lay by at night, when they do
not know their course, and there is land in sight,--land that has
never been explored."

"It does seem strange she should come right on," he assented. "For
surely no ship has ever sailed these seas before. Perhaps--"

"Perhaps what?"

"Perhaps she has been clear around; perhaps this is the only bit of
land left above a world ocean."

Robin shivered a little, and Adam turned toward the beacon, that had
glowed in vain for a year. It had been built on a high, altar-shaped
rock, across the gorge, where it could be kept up without leaving the
park. Robin went with him, and they gathered a pile of timber that
insured the brilliancy of their signal until morning. Adam piled on
the logs till the blaze leaped far up in the darkness; then they went
back to the boulder and sat down to think and wait.

"See how the wind is rising," said Robin, breaking a silence of an
hour, during which even Lassie had been motionless.

"But it is toward land," answered Adam.

"But the same wind that brings us the ship may dash it to pieces on
this awful coast."

"True, but she is far enough out to make herself secure. Oh, Robin,
suppose she sails around us and goes on!"

"That is impossible," answered Robin. "The people on that ship are as
anxious to find us as we can be to see them, if they are civilized at
all. Noah and Mt. Ararat are not to be named in the same day with us."

Adam crossed the gorge and added fuel to the fire. For a time the wind
increased in velocity until a stiff gale was blowing, then, as the
small hours came on, it waned, and the beacon flared straight up once
more.

"I wonder where's she from?" said Adam.

"I wonder where she is now," answered Robin.

"I feel sure," he said, "when morning comes we shall see her riding
the waves out there; and think of it, Robin, we can go!"

Robin made no reply, and her very silence made Adam repeat, but as a
self-addressed question, "Go where? Yes," he went on quickly, "go
where, Robin. Suppose the ship is all right, and that she stops, and
the crew are not pirates, and are willing to take us aboard, where are
we to go? Is there any place on earth that can mean as much to us as
this island? Suppose Asia, or Africa, or Europe are still in
existence, we should not regain our friends and relatives, and life
would be harder with strange people, under a strange government, far
more so than we have found it here, even without so many of its
luxuries."

Robin shook her head sadly. "At first, Adam. We should learn their
language and their customs. New friends are speedily acquired, and as
for relatives,--well, in the scheme of life relatives don't count for
much. There always comes a time when they step out of our lives,
anyway."

"But as to happiness?"

Her face paled a little. "Have you been happy here?" she asked,
without raising her eyes to his, and then went on, not waiting for a
reply, "If you have been, it has been in the care of our little family
of dependents, who do not need you half so much as the great family of
human dependents. Rest assured if there is a continent over there
across the darkness, it is peopled with beings who need the devoted
and unselfish labors of such a man as you. You would find your work
easily enough,--the work you have been saved for, the work you must
do."

"But if there is no continent left?" he queried.

"In that case there must be islands; there were many mountains higher
than these, and they are peopled, no doubt. Shall we not go to these
other orphans, deserted by Mother Earth, our brothers and sisters,
through our common calamity?"

Both were silent, engrossed in their own thoughts. A return to the
world meant going back to the uncivilized rush of civilization. It
meant the eternal question of what shall we eat, and what shall we
drink, and where-withal shall we be clothed? It meant the old
competition, the stern old law of the survival of the brawniest. Above
all, to Robin, it meant separation from Adam, for once more in Rome,
the customs of Rome must be followed. To do Adam justice, this was a
contingency which did not enter his mind. As he had said before,
whatever had put them in this dream together would keep them there, so
that when he thought of relinquishing all the comfort and ease and
quiet of his present life, all the loving animals, the cosy little
house, the tiny fields, the blooming garden, it never occurred to him
that he must relinquish more than all these things, more than the
peace and harmony, that which, unconsciously, had come to be the very
guiding star of his life.

"I wonder if whoever is left cares for grand opera?" said Robin,
rather grimly.

"Why?" asked Adam in so startled a voice that she laughed
hysterically.

"It's the only thing I know well enough to make a living at it," she
said laconically. "I think the fire needs some more wood, Adam."

As he replenished it, her words burned themselves upon his brain, and
he realized in an instant that a return to the old world meant giving
up this supreme friend, all that he had left in the world, all there
was for him in any world. The thing was impossible. He turned to go
back to her, some kind of an impetuous avowal on his lips, but she had
left the boulder and walked down almost to the edge of a precipitous
cliff which they had called "Lover's Leap," in a spirit of badinage.
She stood there quietly, watching the gray dawn, and his heart
impelled him to go to her and take her in his arms. As his love
revealed itself to him in all its power, it seemed impossible that he
should know it now for the first time. Why, why, had he been so blind?
If the ship took them away--

He walked unsteadily down to her, resolved to say nothing. If she
wanted to go, her wish should be sufficient.

The dawn came slowly, but it came at last. As the darkness lifted, a
slight fog settled over the face of the waters. Instinctively they
recalled that other night when they had watched through the mist and
his hand closed over hers. The sun was well up before the east wind
dissipated it, and left only the dancing waves, brilliantly blue,
stretching away into the dawn. On all that broad expanse there was not
so much as a cockle-shell afloat.

Robin turned and looked to right and left in bewilderment, and then at
Adam.

His chest was heaving, and as his eyes searched her face he cried,
"Thank God," and gathered her up in his arms. She nestled there
without a word.

They crossed the gorge and scattered the brands of their watch-fire,
and walked on down to the cove. Suddenly Lassie came bounding toward
them uttering short, excited barks. They quickened their pace, and as
they came in sight of the beach discovered the object of her alarm.
Against a small promontory, lying on one side, was the ship they had
sighted the evening before. It was a hopeless wreck, and had borne to
them no living thing. Yet it had served its purpose. It had revealed
their love for each other, and told them that they had hoped against a
second deluge in vain.




XIV


    The truth of truths is love.


    BAILEY.


As Adam went about his morning's work he was filled with a sense of
gladness, an exaltation of life he had never known before. He
stretched out his arms, as if to let all the glory of the earth meet
the profounder splendor of his soul. As he walked down the garden path
he looked with affection at the flowers they had planted together. But
for the absurdity of it, he could have woven a chaplet of them and
worn it. But the world had reached that height of civilization where
the symbol of the glad and living thing was too emotional; always and
everywhere we preferred the dead thing, the skin of the seal, the
shroud of the silkworm, the straw that was left after the flowers were
gone; and Adam was still civilized.

He accepted his happiness without a question. It was too real, too
keen, too great a revelation for him to stop to analyze it. He knew it
in every pulsation of his heart, in every imagination of his mind, and
with the quickened senses of the lover he perceived that Robin's
feelings differed from his own. For a year he had been lost in
introspection; now they seemed to have changed places, and she grew
silent and almost reserved.

"What is it, dear?" he said. "No, don't try to evade an answer. We
must not stop being frank with each other now."

She did not reply at once, and when she did her voice was so low that
he had to stoop to catch the words. "Do you think you do love me as
fully as you might have loved some one else, younger and happier than
I, better fitted to you? It doesn't seem as if you could; you never
did in the old days, you never even thought of it."

Adam laughed lightly. "I beg of you spare me, for this isn't 'so
sudden' at all." Then seeing that her mood forbade jest, he went on
seriously: "Really, I mean it. It's true I never made you pretty
speeches in the old days, nor stopped to consider whether I might have
done so had things been different; but then I never made pretty
speeches to any one. From the very beginning I have taken you as a
matter of course. It always seemed as if we had known each other from
the very first. You entered into my plans as if you had known them as
you might if we had gone to the same little red schoolhouse. I wish we
had! I'm jealous of the years when I didn't know you."

"But a whole year," she said doubtfully. "Are you sure it isn't just
loneliness and propinquity?"

Adam kissed her fingers one at a time. "You are going to beg my pardon
for that some day," he said. "You are not very vain, my sweetheart;
how could I help loving you?"

"That's just what I am finding fault with," she said with a sudden
twinkle of fun in her eyes. "You have managed to keep from it so long.
But seriously, I am not the kind of a woman I should have fancied you
would care for. I am, at least I was, very weary of life; I knew too
much about it. And I am older than you."

He looked at her critically. "You were, a year ago," he answered; "I
don't know how much, two or three years--"

"Five," she said.

"Well, five; but this last year you have been growing young. The very
fact that you were tired of the old life made it less of a strain for
you to give it up. The tired look is all gone, even from your eyes,
whereas lots of gray has come into my hair. You had learned to live in
yourself and your music. My whole scheme of life was wrapped up in the
social existence of our time. In a way I lost more than you did. I
have learned a good deal this past year. Five years ago, if I had
loved you, there would have been many inequalities between us that do
not exist to-day. Now it seems to me we are as absolutely mated, as
much parts of one whole as the two halves of the brain, or the right
and left ventricles of our hearts. It is no disparagement of you or of
myself to say that no boy could appreciate you. The measure of a man's
manhood is his ability to understand the highest type of womanhood. As
to your being worldly, that's all nonsense." He stroked her hair a few
minutes in silence, and then said, half quizzically, "You might
question me, if I said it, but this is what Balzac said of women like
you: 'A woman who has received a man's education possesses a faculty
which is the most fertile in happiness for herself and her husband;
but that woman is as rare as happiness itself.'"

She looked pleased, but she did not reply, and he went on.

"Do you still doubt me? Well, then, know that I have loved you from
the very beginning, for love, when it comes, is a retroactive law of
our being. If I had loved you less, if you had seemed less a part of
me, I might have realized it sooner."

She shook her head. "I have known that I loved you for a long time,
months," she said.

"Then you ought to have known I loved you," he answered quickly.
"Don't you think it is possible to love with our souls, our
subconsciousness, and realize with our slow brains, after months and
years, what our hearts knew at once? Even love has become more or less
of a mental process. We reason about things instead of feeling them,
and yet when we come to our last analyses we don't _know_ anything; we
simply feel. When the scientist says, 'The amoeba moves out of the
shade into the sunlight because it wants the sunlight,' he bases his
postulate upon what he feels, and believes that the atom feels. This
is all that he knows. We do not seek warmth because we have calculated
its effects upon us, but because we feel cold. Oh, we have starved our
feelings to feed our brains, until the mind believes it is the
immortal part of us, instead of realizing that what we know, we are
merely re-discovering, while what we feel is our apperception of the
infinite. If we had the courage to be true to our feelings, instead of
our thoughts, I believe it would be a better, as it would certainly be
a truer, world."

"Do you really think more people are guided by thought than by
feeling?" she asked with a good deal of surprise.

"Perhaps not in one sense," he answered. "A great many people are
carried along by their impulses, their transitory emotions, which are
not, properly speaking, feelings at all. They make what some one calls
the 'fatal error of mistaking the eddy for the current.' But among
educated people it seems to me that we think too much, especially of
our own thoughts, and feel too little. All this year I have not said
that I loved you; I don't know that I have thought it, but I have felt
and lived it. Sometimes I have not been thoughtful--"

"You have always been too thoughtful," she interrupted.

"No, but when I have been inconsiderate it was because you were
myself, the best self that we overlook sometimes, but return to with
unfailing loyalty. You were not bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh;
that is a very low and material view of what you have been and are to
me, heart of my heart and soul of my soul. I cannot think of a life
apart from you, for you are my life. Marriage is not a matter of a
license and a ceremony and Mendelssohn and gaping crowds and a tour.
We do not need any one to tell us that what God has joined cannot be
sundered by man. All this year has been a long wedding of every
thought and feeling and desire, until I have looked into your eyes to
see my own wish. We have thought and thought, but that way madness
lies. Now I feel that all the world we have lost, lives for us in
every glorious possibility in each other. For I know that you love
me."

"Yes," she said, "I think I have loved you all along, but it never
entered my dreams that you could love me. Even now, when you tell me,
it does not seem as if it could be so, either by the mental process,
or by that of feeling."

He caught her in his arms and kissed her, a kiss so long and tender
that it left her clinging to him, breathless and half awakened.

"Don't think," he said, "feel,--feel my heart and know that every beat
is for you, that every atom of me calls for you, and every drop of
blood obeys, as it would command you. I have tried to reach the ideal
of the love that says, not 'thou must be mine,' but 'I must be thine,'
but I have failed if you can doubt me."

She flung her arms around his neck with sudden passion.

"This is the greatest, the most perfect dream of all," she said; "I
think it must be heaven."

"A new heaven and a new earth," he answered gently.




XV


    Women alone know how much attraction there is in the respect which
    a master shows them.


    BALZAC.


The derelict did not afford them much amusement or information. The
waves soon beat her to pieces on the savage rocks. Apparently she had
been a ship plying between Western ports, probably San Francisco and
Honolulu. In the wreckage washed up there were a few pounds of rice,
and some brooms of what they believed to be sugar-cane. There was
nothing else.

"Not even a lemon!" Robin said disconsolately. "Think of living all
one's natural life not only ten, but ten thousand miles from a lemon."

Adam laughed sympathetically. "It's like a yachting party I remember;
we found that the boat we had engaged had been taken by somebody else,
and our set had to be divided. Later in the evening we discovered that
we had all the sugar and the other crowd all the lemons. ''Twas ever
thus from childhood's hour, I've seen my fondest hopes decay: I never
wanted something sour, but what molasses came my way.' Never mind,
dear. We will go and plant our sugar, and by the time it is ready to
sweeten anything, a whole cargo of lemons may have floated into harbor
right at our door."

They crossed the ranges to the western coast, where there was lower
ground, better fitted to the supposed requirements of rice and cane,
and had a good deal of amusement out of their ignorance, neither of
them having more than a misty idea about either rice or sugar before
they reach the stage to be served together.

It was quite late when they were through and camped for supper.
Remembering their trip of a few weeks previous, that now seemed so
long ago, Adam said, "Are you too tired to sing, dear? It is so long
since I have heard you."

She stood up and thought for a moment, and then putting back her
loosened hair began with Bourdillon's "The night has a thousand eyes,"
and sang on and on. At last, turning to Adam with a little fond
gesture, and altering the words slightly, she sang:

    "Like a laverlock in the lift, sing, O bonny bride!
    All the world was Adam once, with Eve by his side.
    What's the world, my lad, my love? What can it do?
    I am thine, and thou art mine; life is sweet and new.
    If the world have missed the mark, let it stand by,
    For we two have gotten leave, and once more we'll try."

"'Once more,'" Adam repeated. "Once more, my darling! Oh, life is
sweet and new for us; we can afford to lose the world! When will you
come to me, love, when?"

She shook her head with a little wilful laugh, and all the glistening
glory of her hair fell about her like a wedding veil.

"Wait," she said; "wait a little. The flax is not nearly ready for
spinning yet; can a bride forget her attire? Besides, how can we be--"
she paused, and let her silence fill the gap, "when I know we neither
of us know any ceremony more dignified than hopping over a
broomstick?"

They started homeward, walking slowly through the dimly lighted
mountain gorges, talking the ineffable nonsense that lovers never
weary of. As they came to a brook that rushed noisily down the ravine,
Adam stepped across, and held out his hand to her.

"Wait a moment," he said, "just where you are, dear, and say this with
me:--

"'Over running water: my love I give to you, my life I pledge to you,
my heart I take not back from you while this water runs.

"'Over running water: every seventh year, at this time of the year, at
this hour of the night, I will meet you here to renew my troth; death
alone to relieve me of this vow.'"

"Is that all?" she asked wonderingly. "Over running water, while this
water runs, while there is any snow in the mountains, or rivers upon
land, or waters in the seas, or clouds in the skies, when the world is
old, and the sun burned out, and time grows weary, I shall love you
still, always and forever. What is it all about, love?" He clasped her
close, and did not answer at once. "Don't you know that old Irish
troth," he said, "which would have been enough, even in that hard,
unromantic world of ours, to have made you legally my wife, if said
over any Scottish stream? I thought you knew; you are sure I would not
trick you? You know I could not?" He put her head back on his shoulder
and looked into her shining eyes. It seemed to him he could not bear
even a look of reproach. She raised her hands almost as if she were
placing an invisible crown upon his head, and let her arms fall about
his shoulders.

"Then I am your wife while living water runs?"

"Forever and forever," he replied.

"Oh, wait, wait just a little," she answered.




XVI

    All persons possessing any portion of power ought to be
    strongly and awfully impressed with an idea that they act in
    trust, and that they are to account for their conduct in
    that trust to the one great Master, Author, and Founder of
    society.

    BURKE.


Adam found a note beside his plate in the morning. "I will be back
before five o'clock," it said; "I must think." He did not sit down to
the table she had spread for him, but called the dogs; Prince was
missing, and this was a relief to him. Nothing could happen to her
when Prince was with her. His first impulse was to follow her, but he
repelled it, and he too sat down to think. Lassie whined uneasily, and
he stroked her head absent-mindedly, and finally went out and tried to
work. The hours dragged away, and by four o'clock he could stand it no
longer. He went to the gateway. As he unfastened it, he saw her coming
toward him, but she stopped and he joined her, and together they
turned back to the boulder. He noticed that she was very white, and
that her eyes looked as if she had not slept, but he only said, "Have
you thought?"

"Yes," she answered, "I have thought."

"And decided?"

"No," she said wearily; "we must decide together. We are not children,
Adam, nor are we in any way the prototypes of those first parents of
ours. I think sometimes that ever since their day their children have
been walking in a blind circle, eating not the fruit of knowledge, but
of the knowledge of good and evil. And what do we know, you and I,
after all these years? Are you sure what we ought to do? It is as if
God had taken us into a conspiracy to renew the old, or create a new,
scheme of existence. Possibly we are being tried, tested, to prove
whether or not we have learned our lesson. We must be brave enough to
think, not what is our will, but what is our duty. Think of the awful
responsibility, whichever way we choose."

"I can't," said Adam. "I can't think of anything but you."

"Nor I of aught but you," she said, moving away, "when you hold me so.
But we _must_ think."

"I have," answered Adam, gravely. "All my life I have thought. I have
wanted the perfect companionship of the one woman in all the world who
could give it; I have always known she would come. I have wanted a
home; I have wanted to see my sons and daughters grow up about me. I
wanted to be a power for good in this world of which we are a part,
and where we live for some good purpose, if there be any purpose in
life. I have so conducted myself that I can look a good woman in the
face, and offer her my life, for whatever it is worth, without damning
recollections to come between us. My children will have a clean
heritage of blood and name. The family tree was scoffed at in America,
but, thank God, mine was an oak that had weathered many a gale. Not
very great folk, but honest, upright, fearless men and women, true to
their king or their country and their faiths; true to their ideals,
too, when their fellows were content with realities only. Any man who
gives his children such a heritage as that can say with more truth
than Napoleon said to his soldiers, 'Fifty centuries look down upon
you.' I wanted to make the world a little better for my life, and I
wanted my children brought up to feel that their lives belonged first
to their country, to live or die for her."

"I know," said Robin, softly; "I used to think I would drape the flag
over my baby's cradle, and embroider it on his pinning blanket."

"We are probably a pair of sentimental fools," he went on, "but I
believe in sentiment. A man could not say this out loud because
sentiment was supposed to be essentially womanish. How those old
distinctions weary one, with their scientific data to prove that men
surpass women in the senses of feeling and taste, while women have
better sight and hearing, and so on through every conceivable
maundering of the human brain, forever harping on differences and
accentuating them, forever dwelling on sex distinctions and never on a
common humanity."

"It was a dreadfully scientific age," she assented, "a generation
fearfully and wonderfully given over to statistics; and yet how many
dreamers there were!"

"Yes, but in the twentieth century a young man dreamed dreams and saw
visions at his own risk. While he dreamed of the brotherhood of man,
his classmate with the corporation practice distanced him in the
pursuit of position. While he led himself through the valley of the
shadow of temptation, and feared no evil because of the Madonna vision
in his soul, even the Madonnas preferred Lancelot and Tristram to
Galahad. It wasn't an easy world for a man who wanted to keep faith
with himself. It was a pinchbeck world, of pretence and pull,--that
world that lies drowned out there. And yet I believe it was infinitely
better than the lost Atlantis, better than the deluged planet of Noah,
nobler and finer than the best civilization of which we have any
trace. I never despaired of it, and yet as I grew older I wondered if
I was not foolish and mistaken in daring to hope and to dream."

"I know," she said again. "I think I did despair, for it seemed to me
a dreadful, a terrible world. I used to wonder how conscientious men
and women could bring other human beings into it, to be and to suffer
and to faint in the frantic struggle for the unrealities that made us
miserable or happy. Consider how paltry they were. If we built a new
house, we were infinitely more concerned to see that the contractor
used pressed brick than we were to see that the construction of our
own characters was true. When we grew wealthy we moved into houses of
more stories; but how often did we say: 'Build thee more stately
mansions, O my soul'? I had as clean and strong a heritage as you, but
a different one. It is no use to comfort oneself with nice little
aphorisms about the needle's eye, and saws about filthy lucre, and
telling God's estimate of money from the kind of people He gives it
to; I tell you biting poverty is a terrible thing, an unspeakable
thing. It is a misfortune for a child to grow up under a sense of
injustice. I used to have times of revolt against it all, when I hated
with the blind, ferocious hate of a child, and I saw what David never
saw,--the righteous forsaken, and his seed begging, not bread, but a
chance to earn his bread, and begging for it without being able to
make just terms. I saw my home sold under the sheriff's hammer, and my
parents struggle all their lives because of the lack of money, when
they had everything else, nobility, character, truth, and education.
My girlhood was a long series of going-withouts. Finally I married a
man who promised me everything. Ah, well, when has the Apple of Sodom
failed to deceive the eye and undeceive the tongue? At least he did
care for my voice, and through that I learned that all those years I
had carried in my own throat the golden notes to have altered
everything, and I sang a little gladness into my parents' lives before
they ended, thank God."

"How did you come to sing in opera? Do not tell me if the recollection
is unpleasant. I wondered then."

"Because after--after things went wrong, I could not take his money. I
knew how to sing, and I loved it; but even there it was the same story
of suspicion and jealousy, till it seemed to me that hate and fear
ruled the world. I went to so many, many cities, but there was no city
beautiful, and in all the country I found no Arcady. I had money then,
it is true; but the jingle of the guinea doesn't help the artist who
sings, or paints, or writes, or plays, because God has put it into his
soul to do this thing; at least not after the very first, when it
stands as a tangible assurance of success. The cities were 'cities of
dreadful night,' and awful days; there were places that were not
hives, but styes of human beings, fighting for what they called life,
to die, never having lived. Sometimes I went into those jungles of
civilization and sang to them. It was the only thing I could give them
all. It was there I got my lesson. I had been singing 'All Tears,'
when an old woman said in her feeble, trembling voice, 'Ye mun loe us,
young leddy, to come to sic a place an' sing o' Him wha sa loed the
warld that He sent His only begotten Son ta it, for it's only great
loe that casts out fear, and this is a fearsome spot.' Since then I
haven't hated anything, except wanton cruelty, and I know love rules
when it is fearless, but that is very seldom. We were afraid to say, I
love you, to anything more sensitive than a stray kitten, though the
world has hungered and thirsted after the love we have feared to give
even to our own children. And yet just the love a man and woman may
bear each other, unconsciously, is enough to transform the earth. We
have not been cross to each other; I do not believe we have spoken
unkindly to anything this year."

He drew her into his arms. "Is it enough to regenerate the earth?"

"And keep it regenerated?" she echoed. "Do you know?"

"Do you remember telling me, long ago, of a story in which the woman
said she had never seen but one man whose mother she would be willing
to be? And you said you felt so about me? I was very proud of it then,
but I am prouder of it now, since, feeling so, you cannot be unwilling
to be the mother of my children. You are not, are you?"

She nestled a little closer to him, and put her hand about his neck.
He stooped and kissed it, and repeated his question.

"Unwilling? No; how could I be? I never dreaded maternity except
when--and that lasted such a little while. I do not dread it now. It
seems to me it would be a blessed thing for us. But, Adam, Adam, tell
me, for I have sat here all day asking myself, whether it is a blessed
thing to be born, or a penalty that others pay."

"I think it would be a blessing to be your son," he said steadily.

"And I think it would be a benediction to be yours," she answered;
"but he would not be yours nor mine, but ours, plus everything in the
past, verily heir of all the ages, and the ages were full of pain and
sorrow. Oh," she said passionately, "could you and I who love him so,
this son who is only our wish, could you and I who know the weight of
this weary world, bind it upon the shoulders of our baby boy, and send
him staggering down the centuries, the new Atlas of this old earth?"

They sat in silence for a long time. Then Adam said slowly, "I don't
know, dearest; but I do know that you are tired and hungry, and I am
going to take you home."

They rose and disappeared through the gateway together.




XVII

    Love gives us a sort of religion of our own; we respect
    another life in ourselves.

    BALZAC.


Robin was shelling peas. Adam was reading her the story of their
deluge. He paused, dissatisfied, and said impatiently,--

"I have not described it at all. I have said all I had to say in less
than a thousand words; one would think such a scene deserved a hundred
thousand."

Robin smiled her little inscrutable smile. "I think you have done it
very well. It isn't intended to be scientific. You haven't told all
the strata that were turned skyward for a moment when that crevasse
opened between us and the town. You will find, if you turn to the
first chapter of Genesis, that there is very little detail; but I am
sure that the one line, 'He made the stars also,' is as eloquent as a
treatise on the nebular theory. If you were learned in geology and
astronomy and so on, you would load it down with an avalanche of
scientific hypotheses, about which you would really know nothing,
except by deduction, and over which future scientists would wrangle,
part of them making you a god, and the rest proving you a fool. Be
content to 'climb where Moses stood,' and produce literature."

    "'Why should an author fret about The judgment of posterity?
    It is not, and it never was, And it, perhaps, may never
    be,'"

quoted Adam, cynically. "I wonder what they will call us, Robin, and
who will lecture on my mistakes in seven or eight thousand years, and
show how it never could have happened. Do you suppose there is any one
else on earth? Did the Atlantis people leave any literature behind
them?"

Robin shook her head. "Who really knows? God has not left Himself
without a witness, at any time. In some way the story of creation has
gone on and on. Every nation has its Eden and flood and Saviour.
Esther was the first, I think, to have her wish granted 'even to the
half of my kingdom,' and all the fairy stories since have borrowed the
phrase. Cinderella is almost as old as Job; and the Irish, the
Fenians, claim that Cadmus, the Phoenician, was one of their
forebears. Wide as race distinctions were, there were strange and
almost unaccountable similarities."

She went indoors to see to her baking, and coming back went on with
her work. Adam watched her silently for awhile, and then said
curiously, "I wonder what you have missed most this year?"

"Pins and needles, and until Christmas, books and shoes and stockings
and sugar and a cook-stove and a piano," answered Robin, promptly. "I
can live without the opera and a telephone, but if you only knew how I
cherish my stock of pins, and with what dread I look forward to the
day when, like a poor white trash family I used to know, I shall refer
to _the_ needle. I used to think you could do anything with a pair of
pliers and a bit of wire, but I tremble lest you may not be able to
compass a needle." She looked up, and seeing Adam's troubled face said
quickly, "Forgive me for being frivolous; I am so happy, I can't help
it. What were you thinking of, Adam?"

He got up and walked away a few yards, and cut one of the long thick
yucca leaves, and stripped it down to the central spine, while he went
on speaking to her. "I was thinking," he said, "of what Mill said
about inventions, and how they hadn't helped the laboring man; that
they had neither decreased his number of working hours, nor increased
his comforts, and wondering whether it would be better for a new race
to find an electric light plant alongside their other plants, or
whether they would better work out their own salvation, a little at a
time, by main strength and awkwardness. I was thinking how strange our
books would seem to men and women who knew nothing of the--the late
earth." He held out to her what looked something like a needle
threaded with coarse white linen thread. "Will your Majesty deign to
look at this?"

She took it, and looked at it wonderingly, and then ran in and brought
back a torn towel, and began mending it. "Why, it sews very well," she
said; "who taught you that?"

"The mother of inventions generally," he answered. "If you ever had
gone on the round-up, you might have had occasion for a needle and
thread when there wasn't any nearer than a hundred miles. But you
haven't answered my question."

"About inventions and so on? It seems to me you have to consider the
_raison d'etre_ of a people before you can tell the answer. What is
the use of labor-saving inventions, if the time saved isn't of some
great value? What is to be the chief end of man in a dispensation that
has no catechism as a guide-post?"

"A very different end from the old one," answered Adam, half sternly.
"Work should not come to him as a curse, nor as his greatest boon; at
least, not hard, manual labor. There should be work enough to insure
ease and comfort, and every one should work freely and gladly. I
should educate the individual; he should be strong of body and keen of
mind, and should feel that his talents were given him for use, not for
concealment; he should use his hands, both of them, and find delight
in their work. It is a beautiful world, it always was, but I don't
know that the steam-engine brought men's souls closer together, or
that the electric light let in any more radiance upon our minds, or
that the great telescopes made heaven any nearer. It should be a
happier and a healthier world, if it was no more."

"Adam," she said abruptly, "if we had children, in what religious
faith would you bring them up?"

"I don't know; I never thought about it very much," he answered
honestly. "I have an ideal in my mind, but I can't explain it. I
believe in one source of life, and therefore a common divinity."

Robin laughed quietly. "That is like the Hindoo proverb, 'That which
exists is one; sages call it variously.' That has been called
pantheism, and for that belief the Jews expelled Baruch Benedict
Spinoza from their synagogue. In our time there was a very learned
magazine published in its behalf, and I heard David Starr Jordan say
no man could tell whether it was a mere jargon of words, meaningless
and empty, or whether monism was the profoundest philosophy the world
has ever known."

"I don't care what you call it," said Adam, stoutly. "I am not afraid
of names, and I don't know anything about any of those religions,
pantheism, Spinozaism, or monism; but I do know I would rather a child
of mine saw God in everything than that he saw God in nothing save his
own narrow creed. I would rather he was a pantheist than a Calvinist.
Spinoza never burned any one, did he, nor preached that hell was paved
with infants' skulls?"

Robin clapped her hands and laughed again. "I beg your pardon for
laughing," she said, "but the idea of Spinoza, the 'God-intoxicated
man,' presiding over an auto-da-fe is too absurd. If you only
remembered anything about his gentle, retiring spirit and melancholy
life; I think he was better known in our time than in his own, but his
philosophy does not satisfy me. I am willing to grant the identity of
life, and its divine possibilities, but I cannot worship it as life
itself, a mere manifestation of nature. I know that there is such a
thing as living rock, and that it may be killed by a bolt of lightning
as readily as a tree; but this does not make it any more worthy of
worship than I am, and that is terribly unworthy. The rock and I are
types of life, stages in the development of life, but for my child
there must be something better. For the child I must lay hold on the
everlasting life; I must find the rock that is higher than I. I do not
know of any manifestation of that life so great, so godlike, and so
lovable as His who said, 'I am the way, the truth, and the life.'"

"But surely you do not believe in the Immaculate Conception?" asked
Adam, incredulously.

"I don't care anything about it, one way or the other. It's the
immaculate life that concerns me. As you said yourself a few minutes
ago, words cannot frighten me. Am I going to stand carping, 'Can any
good come out of Nazareth?' What do I care if it comes out of Sodom
and Gomorrah, if it is good?"

"But you surely don't believe in the miracles?" he asked.

"Surely I do, in some of them at least. I have seen a miracle or so
myself. Besides, if you remember the greatest proof He gave was that
the gospel was preached to the poor. Buddha was a prince; he whom the
Jews expected was to reign as a king. What a fall was there! the
gospel of hope and joy was brought to the children of Gibeon, the
hewers of wood and drawers of water. The love of Christ has wrought
greater miracles than He did. Look at the arena in Rome. Look at the
whole countless army of martyrs. When Mrs. Booth died, the eighty
thousand women that nightly walked the streets of London rebelled, and
for once the long aisles of brick and stone were swept clean of that
awful arraignment of civilization. That was more of a miracle than
satisfying three thousand souls with food. At least, it's enough of a
miracle for me."

The tears came into her eyes, and she gathered up her pans and went
into the house.




XVIII


    Are God and Nature then at strife,
      That Nature lends such evil dreams?
      So careful of the type she seems,
    So careless of the single life:

    So careful of the type? but no.
      From scarped cliff and quarried stone
      She cries, "A thousand types are gone:
    I care for nothing, all shall go."

    TENNYSON.


They were sitting in the doorway together. Robin rested her chin in
her hands and looked down the valley, the lines of perplexity
deepening in her forehead.

"If only we had an angel with a sword, or without one, to tell us what
to do," she said. "If only we were deeply religious with the
old-fashioned orthodox religion, that would enable us to believe we
were predestined not to be drowned--"

"Or if we believed in a personal God, without whom not a sparrow
falleth, though the waters cover the face of the earth and blot out
millions of His creatures," answered Adam. "After all, can we do
better than follow the dictates of Nature?"

"Do you mean to look through Nature up to Nature's God?" answered
Robin. "How can we worship any God as pitiless as Nature? Nature is
strong, but is it our place to help her in her care for the single
type? Perhaps we are the trilobites of a new Silurian period; well,
trilobites were painfully common, but we need not be. Nature's laws
are immutable, so we have been told with wearying insistence, but
suppose you and I have wills as strong as Nature herself? Suppose we
ask what she has done for the humanity of which we are a part, that
she should demand fresh victims from us? Oh, I know; you will tell
me,--

    "'What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason! how infinite
in faculty! in form and moving how express and admirable! in action
how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god!'

"And I should answer,--

    "'What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of
    man that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little
    lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and
    honor.'

"David or Hamlet, it comes to the same thing. Where are the crowns
now, and how can we say Solomon was not right when he said the end of
it all was vanity? What is Nature, and on what compulsion must we obey
her? The imperative mandates of our own hearts? But what if our hearts
are at war with our heads? Are we to follow no higher law than the
blind instinct that moves the house-fly? Or will we aspire to the
indomitable soul of the mocking-birds that feed their young in
captivity until they see they are prisoners for life, and then bring
them poisonous spiders that they may die rather than live under such
conditions? Shall we give hostages to Nature when she has given
nothing to us?"

She was standing now and speaking with more vehemence than was her
wont. Adam caught her hands, as she flung them out with a gesture full
of scorn.

"Do you really think we have nothing? How many million lovers have
envied Adam and Eve their paradise? This Nature against which you
bring so railing an accusation,--has she taken away more than she has
given us? We had ambitions, you and I, but the way of ambition is full
of weariness and disappointment and bitterness of spirit. We did not
expect peace and comfort and joy, but work and turmoil. Our slates
were set with a sum--"

"Yes, a sum in vulgar fractions," answered Robin.

"Perhaps; it was a sum in which the unknown and unknowable quantity
determined the result. We had seen a good deal of what is called
life,--it is a good name to distinguish it from the death it so much
resembles,--and I am half inclined to think Nature has been merciful."

"But if she was merciful to them," said Robin, quickly, "why were we
omitted?"

"She gave them oblivion, the hereafter, whatever comes hereafter. She
gave us each other. We were going to miss one another in the careers
we had mapped out. We might have lost each other forever, or for aeons
of years. Nothing but a general breaking up of everything would ever
have flung us into each other's arms. We were too much interested in
my career, my vast influence on the political situation, to consider
any existence apart from the setting we had chosen for the play. And,
after all, what was it, that career from which we hoped so much? I
stood waiting my cue, ready to act my part in the farce or tragedy,
whichever it turned out to be."

"I think it was more like a circus," said Robin.

"Very like a circus," he admitted with grim appreciation. "A circus in
which no one knew whether he was to be a ringmaster or a clown. There
were the financial tight-rope walkers, and the social lion-tamers, and
snake-charmers, and the political acrobats whose falls were unsoftened
by any kind of network. There were heat and dust and discomfort, and
weary, wretched animals looking out of cages at other weary, tortured
animals, that were sometimes scarcely less pachydermatous than
themselves. I know the program we had mapped out, the triumphal entry,
the daring leaps, the cheers,--but was it worth while? After all, does
one care to be the champion bareback rider in life's hippodrome?
Nature swept away my sawdust ring, but she gave me heaven for a
canopy, earth for an arena, you for a queen. At times I am disposed to
take a fatalist view of the case, and think that God, or Nature, knew
there was no more to be done with the earth, not so much because of
its wickedness, as on account of its stupidity and cruelty. All my
plans had centered in a political career, and yet how could a man
touch politics and remain undefiled? Yes, I know there were honorable
men in politics, but they were lonely, and they hated with an
unspeakable hatred all the means that were used to keep them there.
And there were any number of men who had been honorable once. When a
man becomes possessed by the desire of place, his backbone becomes
elastic, and he stoops to things of which he had believed himself
incapable. I don't know what it is, but it weakens a man's moral
fibre, and breaks down the tissues of his will, and gives him mental
astigmatism. How dare I say I should have been any better than the
rest?"

"Do you remember your address, a year ago Flag Day, and the old man
with the little bronze button of the Civil War veteran, who stood in
front, and shook hands with you afterwards, with tears running down
his face? And the applause? Can you honestly say that you find 'to
utter love more sweet than praise'? You have told me of your dream of
a home, but Emerson said, 'not even a home in the heart of one we love
can satisfy the awful soul that dwells in clay.' Can it satisfy you,
who hoped and expected so much?"

He hesitated and did not reply at once.

"Are you sure you are not making a virtue of necessity?" she asked a
little bitterly.

"I think as much as anything," he said slowly, "I was excusing myself
for not having known all along that the real life, and the most useful
one, is the one we could have made together. Principalities and powers
and empires and republics have fallen. When God wants to regenerate
the world, He begins with the family. Now _I_," with unspeakable
scorn,--"_I_ intended to begin with a different primary law. I could
have made a good home, but I was intent on making an indifferent,
honest congressman, or senator, or perhaps president. In a way your
home always meant a good deal of what I am trying to say. You always
had some one on hand you were trying to make capable of great things
by believing in them. You made us welcome, and were ready to listen to
our troubles, our literary curiosities, our musical gems and our
aspirations. Suppose I had had sense enough to refuse the husks and
choose--"

"Don't say it," she answered. "Don't say it, even if you mean it, for
I should have sent you away, and have felt like reviling you for
putting your hand to the plow and turning back. Your ambitions were
the most attractive thing about you then. I hadn't pinned my faith on
a primary law; I think it was government ownership that I regarded as
the great regenerator. I am glad if my home seemed homelike to any
one; it never reached my ideal; and when a woman's home isn't the hub
of her universe,--well, she takes to china painting, or gossip, or
philanthropy; a man takes to poker or politics. I took to politics,
second-hand. Personally and concretely I abhorred the whole miserable
farce, but abstractly, and as a means to an end which I greatly
desired, I found it interesting. I admired you infinitely more than I
liked you in those days, but I wouldn't have married you under any
circumstances."

"Why?"

"First, because I didn't want to marry any one; I didn't want to care
that much. And, secondly, because I wanted you to devote yourself to
your country, and had you possessed a family your devotion would have
been divided. I don't see," she went on reflectively, "how you, who
know so well how empty it all was, and how hopeless the endeavor to
lift it an inch,--I don't see how you can think anything would justify
us in making it go on."

"But, on the other hand," he said, "are we justified in snuffing it
all out? There was so much that was beautiful, and the possibilities
were so glorious! Sweetheart, I shall not believe you love me if you
think the world all cold and dark. I believe now the one law it needs,
or has ever needed, is love, the fulfilling of the law."

Robin shook her head, and there was a pathetic quiver about her
sensitive mouth. "Is it so? We have sung, ''Tis love, it makes the
world turn round,' but is it so? Would you give your world that one
great principle as the whole of its code of laws?"

"Yes, I would," he answered sturdily. "I should not revive a single
law, not even the Ten Commandments, nor any of their variations. You
have to read the statutes provided for unnamable crimes to understand
just how bad mankind could be. I should not bother my world with
Draco, or Solon, or Justinian, or Coke, or Blackstone. I should give
it the code of Christ, 'Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you, do ye even so unto them.' To love one's neighbor as
oneself,--isn't that code enough for any world? And I should make the
neighbor include every dumb creature."

She turned to him, her face radiant with love and trust.

"There is no difference between us in reality," she said: "you would
found your political economy on the teachings of Christ, and I my
religion. If we realize the unity of life, we must make our religion
our law, and our law our religion. Sometimes I think the hand of the
Lord is in it, for surely, surely, there never was a nobler man on
earth than you."




XIX

    For the race is run by one and one and never by two and two.

    KIPLING.


"Do you remember the name of that man we knew," said Adam one day,
"who wrote a book to prove the immortality of the body? He did prove
that various people had lived well on to two hundred years. If we were
sure of that, we might get the earth very fairly started."

Robin laughed. "We are not apparently growing any older," she said;
"but we can hardly count on more than a hundred years each."

"There is one thing you haven't taken into consideration," said Adam.
"Our children would be several thousand years ahead of the original
children of the Garden; they would be further along than you and I in
a good many ways."

"No," she said, "I haven't forgotten, but I do not know how much of a
load they would bring with them into the world. We called it heredity,
the Hindoos called it karma, and, though that is different, educators
called it the recapitulation theory."

Adam shook his head. "I understand heredity," he said, "but karma and
recapitulation are too much for me."

"Karma is our heritage from former existences," she answered, "that
may have been lived here or elsewhere. It is the sum of our past, good
and bad. It is based on a belief in reincarnation, and it is the law
that whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap. It is justice
untempered by mercy, and it is at variance with the doctrine of
vicarious atonement, though one may believe it and worship Christ as
the highest type of love the world has ever known. Naturally, it does
not appeal to the people who are willing to let some one bear the
cross for them, and yet I have wondered whether, if we were sure we
should not gather figs from thistles, we should sow the thistles so
freely. The recapitulation theory makes the child pass through the
evolutionary stages of the nation or nations he represents. It has a
kind of seven ages of man of its own, and brings him down through all
phases,--the savage, the hunter, the explorer, the conqueror, the
builder. I don't pretend fully to understand it. I heard one of its
ablest exponents say once, 'The soul of the German nation is in the
German boy.' Heredity curses or blesses, sometimes both. Before any of
these theories prospective parents might well hesitate."

"Which do you believe?" asked Adam, curiously.

She reflected a moment. "A little of all three; not all of any of
them; one would have to be a profound student to understand fully what
their adherents claim for them. Heredity plays strange freaks now and
then. It is easier to account for Abraham Lincoln by the second theory
than by either of the others. His shiftless, untidy mother and
commonplace father do not explain such a soul as his; nor was there
any reversion in his childhood to the original savage instincts that
make children dismember grasshoppers--rather the reverse. I like
better to think that, like that other Deliverer, who was a man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief, he came to do the will of his and
our Father which art in heaven,--came gladly, freely, knowing the end
from the beginning."

Adam sat up suddenly and looked at her with startled eyes. "Then you
think--you mean--you don't believe--surely you don't believe we have
anything to do with our coming here?"

She smiled. "Surely I do. Our coming is sad enough when we do it
voluntarily. It would be quite intolerable to have existence thrust
upon us. Besides, it seems blasphemous to me to believe that God has
given to every human being the power to bestow an eternal existence.
The responsibility is great enough when it is simply a matter of so
living that noble souls may seek to be born of us, and undertaking to
give them sound minds and bodies."

Adam looked unconvinced and troubled. "Where on earth did you get all
that?" he asked.

"Well, it is to my mind only an elaboration of Descartes' 'I think,
therefore I am.' I am, presupposes that I have been, and will be. If
you can't destroy one drop of water, you can't destroy me. If you drop
the water on red-hot iron, it instantly becomes an imperceptible mist,
the mere ghost of itself, but it will ultimately become fluid again.
It seems to me that the scientific fact gives a sound basis for the
psychologic probability."

"But think of all the miserable human beings born daily. Do you think
any one would choose such surroundings?"

"You and I never wanted to go anywhere badly enough to crowd ourselves
under the cow-catcher, or upon the trucks, but there were those who
did. We didn't want to see the parade badly enough to stand on the
street corner for hours; but you worked your way through college, and
we have both sat in the top gallery to hear 'Tannhaeuser.' We were
willing to put up with the whips and scorns, which is another way of
saying the garlic and tobacco, for the sake of the music. In any event
the experiment was of brief duration. No one gets more than a fragment
in an ordinary lifetime."

"If you think that," said Adam, "I can't see that there is any
responsibility about it. We should not thrust life on any one."

"True," she assented. "Your position is unassailable, but still it
seems to me the responsibility remains. In the first place, granting
that my hypothesis is true, how can we tell whether to live is gain?
How do we know that the next generation would be better and stronger
than we are? Moreover, I only give this to you as my idea. I do not
say it is true; I believe it to be so, but I do not know anything
whatsoever about it. I can't prove it, and it may be transcendental
rubbish. I rather imagine you think it is."

"Not exactly that," he said, coloring and laughing, "but certainly it
is rather amazing when one hears it for the first time. I daresay I
shall come to believe it too. So far as I can see, you are about as
unorthodox as I am."

"I have times of relapse," she said. "Then I think we are being
tempted like the first Adam and Eve. They were commanded to multiply
and reign. You and I wouldn't ask anything better, but as a rule one's
duty is not attractive. It seems to me just as likely that we are to
prove that the lesson is learned, and a man and woman may love each
other unselfishly and nobly, foregoing their own desires to save
others. Under the old dispensation it was said, 'Greater love hath no
man than this;' is it not possible now that the greatest love is that
which lays down its life untransmitted? If Christ could pray that the
cup of suffering and death might pass from Him, dare we press the
bitter draught of being to other lips?"

"Dare we dash the full goblet of joy and opportunity from them?" asked
Adam, gravely.

"I wish I knew," she said. "I wish I knew!"

"Have you ever thought what it will mean," he said, "if we adopt the
other alternative? Have you thought of the desolation and loneliness
of growing old and helpless and finally--" He stopped, and she threw
out her hands as if to ward off the thoughts he called before her.

"Oh, yes, yes, I have thought, and it is terrible. I keep remembering
a picture I saw in the French Exhibit. It was of a man and a woman;
the woman was dead, and he had dug her grave, his broken sword lay at
his side, and he had wrapped her in his coat, and begun to cover her
over. He could not go on, and knelt, looking at her with a despair on
his face that has haunted me ever since. The name, Manon Lescaut,
meant nothing to me then, but the story of the picture was enough by
itself. All last year I kept seeing that terrible picture. Sometimes
it was you, sometimes it was I, that dug the grave and went mad
looking into it."

"I should not bury you," said Adam, grimly. "I should carry you to the
cliff and take you in my arms and jump. The sea is deep and cruel
there."

"Sometimes," she hesitated a moment, then went on,--"sometimes I think
that would be the best way for us now, I mean if we decide we have no
right to be happy in the old way; for I should be afraid we could not
always be strong."

"Very well," he answered; "when we decide, it shall be literally life
or death."




XX

    The ant and the moth have cells for each of their young,
    but our little ones lie in festering heaps in homes that
    consume them like graves; and night by night, from the
    corners of our streets, rises up the cry of the
    homeless,--"I was a stranger and ye took me not in."

    RUSKIN.


For a time they busied themselves with different things about their
little home, worked in the garden, and held a round-up of their stock
that they might know the extent of their wealth; and because, in a
life quite apart from human beings, animals come to take their place
to a greater extent than might seem possible.

It was a very pleasant time. Everything seemed so gentle, so willing
to be friends, and so certain of their good-will.

"You used to be a Kipling fiend," said Adam, one morning, when they
had been salting the cattle, and were resting before going home.
"Didn't he write a Jungle tale about 'How Fear Came'? He ought to be
here now to write another to show how Fear might go."

"It seems to me he did," Robin answered, running her fingers through
the short, curly forelock of a colt that stood placidly licking her
hand. "I wonder that they don't remember longer, or perhaps they know
that we think they are folks. Really, I think we ought to hold a
reception, a kind of salon, once a week, so as to keep acquainted with
our neighbors."

"You are an absurd child," he said, laughing; "but does that mean that
you have really decided to go on living?"

"I don't know," she said. "What did we determine? By the way, which
side of this question are you on?"

"Both," he said decidedly.

"Oh! then we can't do like those men Cooper told about, in 'The
Pioneers,' wasn't it? who argued and argued every night until at last
they convinced each other, and then started in to argue it out again."

"No," he answered, "I rather think that we are answering ourselves
rather than each other, anyhow. Robin, where was 'the land of Nod'?"

"That is one of the questions that I was sent to bed for asking a
preacher who was visiting at our house, when I was about seven years
old. They hurried me hence before he had a chance to answer, so I
never found out. But I know what you are thinking of, and I have
thought of it too. Perhaps there isn't any land of Nod, or any land at
all. And I have thought, also, how it would be if one of us died and
left the other with little children. You might take my body and jump
off the rock, but you couldn't take them too, and still less could you
leave them."

"I have thought of the risk to you," he said, "and felt that not even
for the sake of a child would I let you come so near death."

She laughed a little. "That is really funny," she said. "You must have
been reading Michelet; I never thought of that at all. I am very well
and strong, and my habits and my clothes are not such as to hamper my
life nor endanger that of another. There is next to no risk, so far as
that is concerned, certainly none I would not gladly take. But I have
dreaded afterwards, when the child might fall ill and need help that
we could not give it."

"Because there are no doctors in the world?" said Adam, with a touch
of cynicism. "I don't know that we are not better off without them.
The greatest of them confessed that it was guess-work. The best
doctors I ever knew were always trying to make their patients live
more simply, take more exercise, and give nature a chance; they never
resorted to medicine until there was nothing else to do. If all the
germs and microbes have gone with them, the earth can stand the loss.
The main thing is to be well born, and when the body is healthy and
leads a natural life, while it may know pain, it need not be a prey to
disease. Very few children had a heritage worth having. It had been
bartered away. No wonder we were taught to say, 'There is no health in
us.'"

"Do you remember Gannett's 'Not All There'?" she asked soberly. "I am
not sure I can recall it, but it began this way:--

    "Something short in the making, Something lost on the way,
    As the little soul was taking Its path to the break of day.

    "Only his mood or passion,
      But it twitched an atom back,
    And she for her gods of fashion
      Filched from the pilgrim's pack.

    "The father did not mean it,
      The mother did not know,
    No human eye had seen it,
      But the little soul needed it so.

    "Thro' the street there passed a cripple
      Maimed from before its birth;
    On the strange face gleamed a ripple
      Like a half dawn on the earth.

    "It passed, and it awed the city
      As one not alive nor dead;
    Eyes looked and burned with pity.
      'He is not all there,' they said.

    "Not all! for part is behind it,
      Lying dropped on the way;
    That part--could two but find it,
      How welcome the end of day!"

For a long while neither spoke, then Robin went on. The colt had
wandered back to its mother, and she sat with her hands clasped, and
her eyes looking far out to sea.

"I don't blame people for dreading the responsibility, nor even for
shirking it, when I think of all the conditions we had to face. Men
who thought they had hedged their trades about with so much skill that
they had banished competition, found that they had only succeeded in
bringing into the field the machine that banished them. And everywhere
there was such ghastly poverty,--poverty of body and brain and soul.
We had gone back to patrons and patronesses. Men or women did not do
anything of themselves any more,--they did not sing or play, or give a
reading, or exhibit a painting. They starved, or they performed or
exhibited 'under the auspices of.' It has always been the same. Given
a pure democracy, and demos reigns sooner or later. The shiftless go
to the bottom, the thrifty to the top, and then like the upper and
nether millstones, they grind everything between them. That which is
below cries, 'Alms!' and that which is above responds, 'Largesse,' and
the voice that cries, 'Justice,' is stifled between. The stone that
crushed from above and the rock that ground from below were very near,
and men dreaded them, for when the grist is ground, and flint strikes
upon flint, the conflagration is at hand. Do you think I am talking
like a Populist campaign book? I only know what I saw, and what the
poets have said. I wouldn't dare to be as radical as Lowell, nor as
bitter as Tennyson, nor as savage as Carlyle, or Ruskin, or Hugo. We
had overcome the sharpness of death, but whence could we hope for
deliverance from the sharpness of living?"

"We have been delivered," said Adam, slowly, "but you don't seem
disposed to be the Miriam of this Israel--limited."

"Well, no," answered Robin. "I should like to believe that you and I
were rewarded for our superhuman excellence by being saved when
Pharaoh and his multitudes went under, but a somewhat wide
acquaintance with other people forbids. On the other hand, we can't
have been left on account of our superlative badness. Truly, Adam,
don't you feel sometimes as if you would rather have died with the
rest?"

He hesitated. The question was so unexpected, and so fraught with
possibilities. She watched the struggle in his face and honored him
for it. He put back a stray lock of hair and kissed her forehead
before he answered.

"The streak of cowardice that we all of us have in us," he said
finally, "the distrust of myself, and the doubt of all systems of life
of which I know anything, prompts me to answer yes; for I think even
if we had died, you and I would still be together. I think sometimes
we have been, in the past, but whether we have or not, I know we shall
be in the future. So while the mental part of me,--which it seems to
me is the weakest and most contemptible part of man, because it is
always reasoning him out of what his soul tells him is true,--while
the mental part of me might find it easier to be dead than to know
what we ought to do, everything else in me rejoices. I know that in
the great plan we have a part, it seems to me a very happy and
beautiful part. In all our world there is no cause for anger or hatred
or sin. There is friendliness and content and gentleness and love all
around us; look up, dear, and see how near heaven seems."

But though she looked up, she saw only the light in his eyes.




XXI

    "We're all for love," the violins said.

    SIDNEY LANIER.


Robin's music was a source of great delight to both of them. There was
such a sense of time, infinite and unlimited, that they ceased to be
the hurrying mortals of earth. The joy of life crept into their
hearts, and they grew young with the new world.

One evening they watched the full moon come up over the mountains. She
had been playing a few desultory airs, and looking up asked,--

"Who is it says 'music is love in search of a word'?"

"If you don't know, I'm sure I don't," answered Adam, laughing. "Do
you know that you quote entirely too much?"

"Oh, yes," she said lightly. "I always knew that if I ever should
break into print, the critics, supposing they ever deigned to notice
me, would say, as they said of Lubbock's 'Beauties of Life,' that it
wasn't a book, but a compendium of useful quotations. But do you
really dislike quoting? I think it takes as much or nearly as much
originality to quote well as to invent."

"Oh, no!" he interposed.

"No? Well, it seems so to me. I think the thing first myself, that is
original so far as I am concerned, though it may be old as the hills,
and then it comes to me afterward, in a dozen ways, perhaps, as other
people have said it. I realize that in the kaleidoscope of life the
pattern before my mind's eye approximates that which others have seen.
We don't say a man knows too many synonyms or antonyms, and I don't
see much difference."

"I have a misty memory that quotation is said to be a confession of
inferiority," answered Adam.

"That's Emerson," she said, laughing; "but he also says, 'genius
borrows nobly,' and I am willing to confess inferiority to a great
many people; all that implies is that one should only quote well. If
it wasn't that I'm not sure of the words, and that I can't verify
them, I should confound you with a citation from Disraeli."

"Go on," said Adam, lazily; "I don't mind being crushed."

"It is to the effect that people think that where there is no
quotation there must be great originality. Then he says, 'the greater
part of our writers, in consequence, have become so original that no
one cares to imitate them; and those who never quote are seldom
quoted.' That's about it. Now are you answered?" She laughed
gleefully. "It is delicious to disagree with you. I had almost
forgotten that it was possible."

He echoed her laugh with the carefree heartiness of a boy. "I am going
to make a riddle," he said. "Prepare yourself; this is the first
conundrum of the new world. Why is it better to disagree than to
differ?"

She made a little grimace. "It's a wonder the Sphinx does not rise
from the other side of the world and eat you," she said with derision.
"Anybody who loved anybody could answer such a poor little excuse for
a riddle as that; besides, it sounds like an extract from somebody's
'First Easy Lessons in Rhetoric.' Don't you see that I can disagree
_with_ you, while I must differ _from_ you? That is too disgracefully
easy. Indeed, Adam, that riddle of yours brings back every doubt, for
they say--scientists and ologists and learned people, you know--that
there is hope for delinquents and defectives, but none for
degenerates, and that is an awfully degenerate joke."

"Play for me," he said, "and don't call names."

She lifted the bow and drew it across the strings in a series of
cadences so wildly mournful that he shuddered. She put the bow down,
and laid her hand upon the strings to still them. In the old days she
had been given to sudden changes of mood, but of late she had been
almost serene.

"What is it?" he asked gently.

"Oh, nothing,--everything! I was thinking of another thing which those
wise ones said," she answered, with more bitterness than she had shown
for many months. "It was that word 'degenerate' brought it back. You
know birds are a very low order of being, a branch of the reptile
family, in truth, and I have heard people say that musicians are
generally lacking in something. They either have no moral or financial
sense, and cannot be bound by ordinary rules. And I am musical to the
very tips of my fingers. It is as if I could hear the song of the
silence,--I feel its vibrations like those of a great organ."

She walked up and down, her hands back of her head, and the moonlight
shining on her upturned, troubled face.

"There is another scientific fact you forget," he said.

She stopped to listen, and he went on.

"When a race has run its course, nature cries 'habet,' and nothing can
alter its fate. It was not alone the merciless onslaughts of the white
man that exterminated the buffalo. They died, and none came to take
their places. They vanished, less on account of man's cruelty than by
reason of their own sterility. Degenerates or regenerates, can't we
leave the decision with a power that forever builds or destroys, in
accordance with a law we do not understand, a higher law that comes
from the source of all law, whatever that source may be? Don't think
any more, but play for me. In spite of my lecture, I will quote too;
my mother used to sing a hymn that went like this,--

    'I'd soar and touch the heavenly strings,
    And vie with Gabriel while he sings,'--

Do you know it?"

She began the old tune, "Ariel," and then wandered on, playing many
airs that brought back forgotten days. Adam threw himself down on the
grass to listen, half jealously, for she seemed to forget everything.
She had seated herself on a great boulder, and, leaning back against
it, her eyes looking into the blue depths above her, she played on and
on. The old tunes were merged in new ones, and the high sustained
notes of the Cavalleria, the subtle minor of Wagner, the exquisite
sweetness of Beethoven and Schubert filled the moonlit canon, and
still she played on, melodies new to Adam, intoxicating, full of a
wild ecstasy, that filled his very soul, and thrilled through him till
he felt all power of resistance swept away. Every other desire in the
world was lost in the supreme and overwhelming longing to gather her
to his heart and hold her there forever. The very air was steeped in
melody. The full majestic chords rose and melted in unison with the
high, exquisitely sweet notes, and throbbed their life away. She held
the bow suspended a moment, then very softly, half unconsciously,
played a dreamy lullaby, and laid the violin down in her lap.

Adam took her and it into his arms.

"Be careful, put it down gently," she said faintly; "it is your soul
and mine. Do you not know the secret of Antonio Stradivari, of all the
great makers of violins? Ah, they solved our riddle, Love, ages ago.
Do you not remember the story of Jacob Steiner, and how he spent days
and days in the woods, selecting the trees for his violins, and how
the spirits of the trees revenged themselves by telling him of their
ruined lives till he went mad?"

"But there was no madness in this music," Adam answered, "except,
except--"

"The supreme, sublime madness of love? Do you not know, surely you do,
that every perfect violin is as much man and woman as you and I? The
back of the violin is made from the timber of the female tree, the
belly of the male tree. The harmony depends on their vibrations, as
they clasp each other in an embrace as real--"

"As this," he cried, drawing her closer, and bending his handsome head
until their lips met. "Sweet, must I envy that violin?"

He felt her heart beating wildly against his own, their arms closed
around each other convulsively. The sweetness of the music-laden,
flower-scented air filled his senses.

"God! how I love you!" he said.

A frightened look came into her eyes, and she struggled, for a moment,
futilely.

"Let me go!" she whispered; "let me go!"

"Do you want me to?" he answered, studying her face in the moonlight.

"No," she said. "No, never again, but, oh, Adam!"




XXII

    I'm weary of conjectures--this must end them.

    ADDISON.


Adam had to go to the cane-fields across the range, and one of the
calves needed Robin's ministrations, so she could not go with him. He
started before the stars were set, that he might be back before night,
and returned twice to kiss her before he finally got away.

Left with the long day ahead of her, restless and lonely, she gave the
small house a thorough sweeping and cleaning. She had finished her
dusting, and was rearranging the furniture, when she shoved back the
long chest and struck the framework of the window with some little
violence. It was enough to jar a rusty key from its place above the
casement, and it dropped upon the chest with a kind of ominous clink
as it struck the lock, and fell upon the floor. She took it up and
looked at it curiously, and then, kneeling, fitted it in the lock.

"I wonder," she mused, "what I shall set free if I open this box; is
it Pandora's? But there was nothing left in hers but hope, and that is
all we need. How happy we could be if we dared to hope!"

She turned the key with a wrench, and the hasp shot from its place.
The chest was nearly empty, there being but one parcel in it. This was
done up carefully in a square of linen, pinned here and there. On the
bottom of the chest were several folds of white paper. Very slowly she
lifted out the parcel and opened it. The treasure was a gown; it was
of a heavy, satiny weave of linen, very yellow and creased. The bodice
was made without sleeves or neck, and the skirt was a kind of kilt
plaited affair; the whole effect was Greek, and, simple as it was, it
seemed beautiful to Robin after her year of dark, utilitarian
clothing. There was white underwear, and even white stockings, and a
pair of slippers.

Robin drew a long breath of delight, and laying all her finery upon
the table placed the irons over the tripod that she might smooth the
wrinkles out, and set about making the necessary alterations at once.
She worked rapidly in spite of her excitement, but the hours slipped
away.

"I must try it on," she said, "before Adam comes; there will be plenty
of time, and then I will put it away until--"

Shroud or wedding-gown? She did not finish the sentence. She dressed
slowly; but when she had finished she was startled to see that the
image in the glass was so much fairer than she had ever thought
herself. Suddenly she discovered, with something like a pang, that
there was no belt, and hurried back to the chest to look again.

As she twitched out the remaining layer of paper in her eagerness, a
long white satin ribbon dropped from it, and a little heap of fine
muslin lay on the floor of the chest. She caught up the ribbon with an
exclamation of delight and adjusted it with trembling fingers. Her
flushed cheeks and radiant eyes, the long heavy braid of hair, her
round white arms and shoulders, made her a vision of delight indeed.
When she had quite completed her toilet, she sat down by the chest to
inspect its last secret. As she took up the pile of lace and muslin,
her heart seemed to stop beating for a moment. She had forgotten. Only
the hands of the prospective mother could have fashioned such dainty
garments as these. Everywhere the eternal question. All her
perplexities had fallen from her in the joy of dressing herself as
Adam's bride should be decked, howbeit Adam saw her not, but the great
problem of life confronted her still.

She put the tiny garments down on the chest, closed now, having given
up its mystery, its hope of the world, and knelt by it, touching them
with loving, reverent fingers till the tears blinded her, and she
gathered up the clothes and kissed them as she had never kissed Adam,
as she had never kissed anything in her life. After awhile the tears
ceased to flow, and there stole over her a gracious calmness and then
the slumber of a child.

She did not hear Adam, nor see him, until he passed the window and
stood in the doorway, all the sunset glow back of him. Then she
started to her feet, her arms closing instinctively over the tiny
garments she had gathered to her breast, as she stepped back, her face
flushing and paling all in a moment.

He stood as if he dared not move lest the vision vanish, but heart and
soul looked out of his eyes.

"Eve," he said, "Eve!"

She turned, and he sprang toward her with an eager cry of joy.

"Eve," he repeated, "Eve, my love, my soul! You have decided; you are
going to be my wife. Oh, do not torture yourself or me any longer with
doubts that did not enter the mind of God Almighty when He made us
what we are. You are my world, dearer than life, more necessary than
the air we breathe. We are only one being, separated God knows how
long, but united now forever. Nothing can part us again."

He stopped and held out his arms to her. He had taken her into their
shelter very often, but now he wanted her to come to him and nestle
against his heart of her own will. She took a single step, stretching
out her arms to him with a gesture of infinite trust and abandon. The
long sheer dress fluttered down to the floor, and lay between them.

They stood as still as if frozen.

"Dare you cross it?" she said, and hid her face in her hands.

He stooped and picked it up, and looked at it as a man might look at
the soul of something of which he had never seen the body. He had a
sense of his own strength, the glory of his manhood, and a vision of
his weakness. She watched him breathlessly. He put the garment down on
the table and smoothed it out gently. There was in his face the
combined look of a man who sees the cradle and the coffin of his
firstborn.

She went and stood beside him, touching the dress timidly. He covered
her hand with his own.

"My wife," he said, "we know all there is to say, all there is to
risk. We must do what is right. I am going now to set everything at
liberty. It is nearly sundown; you will meet me at the rock in half an
hour. If we give each other our right hands, we will fear no evil, not
though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, for the love
in our hearts is deathless, and though the sun sets, it is to rise
upon another shore. Death is only an incident, but life is eternal."

"We could not choose differently?" And though she spoke with the
upward inflection it was not a question.

"No, it would be quite impossible for either of us to desire what the
other did not. And much as we love each other, we will know we have
loved our race and honored God first in our decision. To live, if we
live, not for ourselves alone, but for the good of our kind; to
renounce love, the unspeakable gift, if need be, for the sake of what
seems to us right."

"And if I give you my left hand--?"

The sudden flash of light in his eyes half blinded her. He took both
her hands in his and looked deep in her beautiful unfathomable eyes.

"Then the morning stars will sing together, and all the sons of God
shall shout for joy."

The sun dropped lower and lower over the high sharp peaks at the west,
covering their white summits with a flood of golden glory. The sullen
roar of the ocean seemed hushed, and across its wide expanse the last
beams of the setting sun made radiant pathways of crimson and gold. A
lark far up in the heavens sang its few clear notes as it hastened
homeward. Far away on the mountain-side the cattle lay placidly, and a
mare whinnied to her colt. The air was soft and warm and drowsy with
the scent of many flowers, the sounds of nestling birds, the drone of
an insect here and there, the cheerful call of the crickets.

Adam stood by the rock and waited for her. She came toward him, all
the light of the world seeming to fall upon her and circle her in a
halo that transformed her white draperies, and glistened like a
million gems in the sparse grass about her feet.

They made each other no greeting, but stood and looked into each
other's eyes, grave and sweet with the exaltation of their purpose.
And, standing so, they clasped hands, and the word they spoke was the
same, for they by searching had found out God.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MASTER-KNOT OF HUMAN FATE***


******* This file should be named 20615.txt or 20615.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/6/1/20615



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

