The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Home, by Fredrika Bremer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Home

Author: Fredrika Bremer

Translator: Mary Howitt

Release Date: March 5, 2007 [EBook #20746]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOME ***




Produced by Stacy Brown, Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











FREDRIKA BREMER'S WORKS.

THE HOME

OR, LIFE IN SWEDEN.


  TRANSLATED
  BY MARY HOWITT.

  LONDON:
  HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
  1853.




C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE.




THE HOME:

OR, LIFE IN SWEDEN.

PART I.

CHAPTER I.

MORNING DISPUTE AND EVENING CONTENTION.


"My sweet friend," said Judge Frank, in a tone of vexation, "it is not
worth while reading aloud to you if you keep yawning incessantly, and
looking about, first to the right and then to the left;" and with these
words he laid down a treatise of Jeremy Bentham, which he had been
reading, and rose from his seat.

"Ah, forgive me, dear friend!" returned his wife, "but really these good
things are all somewhat indigestible, and I was thinking about----Come
here, dear Brigitta!" said Mrs. Elise Frank, beckoning an old servant to
her, to whom she then spoke in an under tone.

Whilst this was going on, the Judge, a handsome strong-built man of
probably forty, walked up and down the room, and then suddenly pausing
as if in consideration, before one of the walls, he exclaimed to his
wife, who by this time had finished her conversation with the old
servant, "See, love, now if we were to have a door opened here--and it
could very easily be done, for it is only a lath-and-plaster wall--we
could then get so conveniently into our bedroom, without first going
through the sitting-room and the nursery--it would indeed be capital!"

"But then, where could the sofa stand?" answered Elise, with some
anxiety.

"The sofa?" returned her husband; "oh, the sofa could be wheeled a
little aside; there is more than room enough for it."

"But, my best friend," replied she, "there would come a very dangerous
draft from the door to every one who sat in the corner."

"Ah! always difficulties and impediments!" said the husband. "But cannot
you see, yourself, what a great advantage it would be if there were a
door here?"

"No, candidly speaking," said she, "I think it is better as it is."

"Yes, that is always the way with ladies," returned he; "they will have
nothing touched, nothing done, nothing changed, even to obtain
improvement and convenience; everything is good and excellent as it is,
till somebody makes the alteration for them, and then they can see at
once how much better it is; and then they exclaim, 'Ah, see now that is
charming!' Ladies, without doubt, belong to the stand-still party!"

"And the gentlemen," added she, "belong to the movement party; at least
wherever building and molestation-making comes across them!"

The conversation, which had hitherto appeared perfectly
good-humoured, seemed to assume a tone of bitterness from that word
"molestation-making;" and in return the voice of the Judge was somewhat
austere, as he replied to her taunt against the gentlemen. "Yes," said
he, "they are not afraid of a little trouble whenever a great advantage
is to be obtained. But----are we to have no breakfast to-day? It is
twenty-two minutes after nine! It really is shocking, dear Elise, that
you cannot teach your maids punctuality! There is nothing more
intolerable than to lose one's time in waiting; nothing more useless;
nothing more insupportable; nothing which more easily might be
prevented, if people would only resolutely set about it! Life is really
too short for one to be able to waste half of it in waiting!
Five-and-twenty minutes after nine! and the children--are they not ready
too? Dear Elise----"

"I'll go and see after them," said she; and went out quickly.

It was Sunday. The June sun shone into a large cheerful room, and upon a
snow-white damask tablecloth, which in soft silken folds was spread over
a long table, on which a handsome coffee-service was set out with
considerable elegance. The disturbed countenance with which the Judge
had approached the breakfast-table, cleared itself instantly as a
person, whom young ladies would unquestionably have called "horribly
ugly," but whom no reflective physiognomist could have observed without
interest, entered the room. This person was tall, extremely thin, and
somewhat inclining to the left side; the complexion was dark, and the
somewhat noble features wore a melancholy expression, which but seldom
gave place to a smile of unusual beauty. The forehead elevated itself,
with its deep lines, above the large brown extraordinary eyes, and above
this a wood of black-brown hair erected itself, under whose thick stiff
curls people said a multitude of ill-humours and paradoxes housed
themselves; so also, indeed, might they in all those deep furrows with
which his countenance was lined, not one of which certainly was without
its own signification. Still, there was not a sharp angle of that face;
there was nothing, either in word or voice, of the Assessor, Jeremias
Munter, however severe they might seem to be, which at the same time did
not conceal an expression of the deepest goodness of heart, and which
stamped itself upon his whole being, in the same way as the sap clothes
with green foliage the stiff resisting branches of the knotted oak.

"Good day, brother!" exclaimed the Judge, cordially offering him his
hand, "how are you?"

"Bad!" answered the melancholy man; "how can it be otherwise? What
weather we have! As cold as January! And what people we have in the
world too: it is both a sin and shame! I am so angry to-day that----Have
you read that malicious article against you in the----paper?"

"No, I don't take in that paper; but I have heard speak of the article,"
said Judge Frank. "It is directed against my writing on the condition of
the poor in the province, is it not?"

"Yes; or more properly no," replied the Assessor, "for the extraordinary
fact is, that it contains nothing about that affair. It is against
yourself that it is aimed--the lowest insinuations, the coarsest abuse!"

"So I have heard," said the Judge; "and on that very account I do not
trouble myself to read it."

"Have you heard who has written it?" asked the visitor.

"No," returned the other; "nor do I wish to know."

"But you should do so," argued the Assessor; "people ought to know who
are their enemies. It is Mr. N. I should like to give the fellow three
emetics, that he might know the taste of his own gall!"

"What!" exclaimed Judge Frank, at once interested in the Assessor's
news--"N., who lives nearly opposite to us, and who has so lately
received from the Cape his child, the poor little motherless girl?"

"The very same!" returned he; "but you must read this piece, if it be
only to give a relish to your coffee. See here; I have brought it with
me. I have learned that it would be sent to your wife to-day. Yes,
indeed, what pretty fellows there are in the world! But where is your
wife to-day? Ah! here she comes! Good morning, my lady Elise. So
charming in the early morning; but so pale! Eh, eh, eh; this is not as
it should be! What is it that I say and preach continually? Exercise,
fresh air--else nothing in the world avails anything. But who listens to
one's preaching? No--adieu my friends! Ah! where is my snuff-box? Under
the newspapers? The abominable newspapers; they must lay their hands on
everything; one can't keep even one's snuff-box in peace for them!
Adieu, Mrs. Elise! Adieu, Frank. Nay, see how he sits there and reads
coarse abuse of himself, just as if it mattered nothing to him. Now he
laughs into the bargain. Enjoy your breakfasts, my friends!"

"Will you not enjoy it with us?" asked the friendly voice of Mrs. Frank;
"we can offer you to-day quite fresh home-baked bread."

"No, I thank you," said the Assessor; "I am no friend to such home-made
things; good for nothing, however much they may be bragged of.
Home-baked, home-brewed, home-made. Heaven help us! It all sounds very
fine, but it's good for nothing."

"Try if to-day it really be good for nothing," urged she. "There, we
have now Madame Folette on the table; you must, at least, have a cup of
coffee from her."

"What do you mean?" asked the surprised Assessor; "what is it? What
horrid Madame is it that is to give me a cup of coffee? I never could
bear old women; and if they are now to come upon the coffee-table----"

"The round coffee-pot there," said Mrs. Frank, good-humouredly, "is
Madame Folette. Could you not bear that?"

"But why call it so?" asked he. "What foolery is that?"

"It is a fancy of the children," returned she. "An honest old woman of
this name, whom I once treated to a cup of coffee, exclaimed, at the
first sight of her favourite beverage, 'When I see a coffee-pot, it is
all the same to me as if I saw an angel from heaven!' The children heard
this, and insisted upon it that there was a great resemblance in figure
between Madame Folette and this coffee-pot; and so ever since it has
borne her name. The children are very fond of her, because she gives
them every Sunday morning their coffee."

"What business have children with coffee?" asked the Assessor. "Cannot
they be thin enough without it; and are they to be burnt up before their
time? There's Petrea, is she not lanky enough? I never was very fond of
her; and now, if she is to grow up into a coffee wife, why--"

"But, dear Munter," said Mrs. Frank, "you are not in a good humour
to-day."

"Good humour!" replied he: "no, Mrs. Elise, I am not in a good humour; I
don't know what there is in the world to make people good-humoured.
There now, your chair has torn a hole in my coat-lap! Is that pleasant?
That's home-made too! But now I'll go; that is, if your doors--are they
home-made too?--will let me pass."

"But will you not come back, and dine with us?" asked she.

"No, I thank you," replied he; "I am invited elsewhere; and that in this
house, too."

"To Mrs. Chamberlain W----?" asked Mrs. Frank.

"No, indeed!" answered the Assessor: "I cannot bear that woman. She
lectures me incessantly. Lectures me! I have a great wish to lecture
her, I have! And then, her blessed dog--Pyrrhus or Pirre; I had a great
mind to kill it. And then, she is so thin. I cannot bear thin people;
least of all, thin old women."

"No?" said Mrs. Frank. "Don't you know, then, what rumour says of you
and poor old Miss Rask?"

"That common person!" exclaimed Jeremias. "Well, and what says malice of
me and poor old Miss Rask?"

"That, not many days since," said Mrs. Frank, "you met this old lady on
your stairs as she was going up to her own room; and that she was
sighing, because of the long flight of stairs and her weak chest. Now
malice says, that, with the utmost politeness, you offered her your arm,
and conducted her up the stairs with the greatest possible care; nor
left her, till she had reached her own door; and further, after all,
that you sent her a pound of cough lozenges; and----"

"And do you believe," interrupted the Assessor, "that I did that for her
own sake? No, I thank you! I did it that the poor old skeleton might not
fall down dead upon my steps, and I be obliged to climb over her ugly
corpse. From no other cause in this world did I drag her up the stairs.
Yes, yes, that was it! I dine to-day with Miss Berndes. She is always a
very sensible person; and her little Miss Laura is very pretty. See,
here have we now all the herd of children! Your most devoted servant,
Sister Louise! So, indeed, little Miss Eva! she is not afraid of the
ugly old fellow, she--God bless her! there's some sugar-candy for her!
And the little one! it looks just like a little angel. Do I make her
cry? Then I must away; for I cannot endure children's crying. Oh, for
heaven's sake! It may make a part of the charm of home: that I can
believe;--perhaps it is home-music! Home-baked, home-made,
home-music----hu!"

The Assessor sprang through the door; the Judge laughed; and the little
one became silent at the sight of a kringla,[1] through which the
beautiful eye of her brother Henrik spied at her as through an
eye-glass; whilst the other children came bounding to the
breakfast-table.

"Nay, nay, nay, my little angels, keep yourselves a little quiet," said
the mother. "Wait a moment, dear Petrea; patience is a virtue. Eva dear,
don't behave in that way; you don't see me do so."

Thus gently moralised the mother; whilst, with the help of her eldest
daughter, the little prudent Louise, she cared for the other children.
The father went from one to another full of delight, patted their little
heads, and pulled them gently by the hair.

"I ought, yesterday, to have cut all your hair," said he. "Eva has quite
a wig; one can hardly see her face for it. Give your papa a kiss, my
little girl! I'll take your wig from you early to-morrow morning."

"And mine too, and mine too, papa!" exclaimed the others.

"Yes, yes," answered the father, "I'll shear every one of you."

All laughed but the little one; which, half frightened, hid its
sunny-haired little head on the mother's bosom: the father raised it
gently, and kissed, first it, and then the mother.

"Now put sugar in papa's cup," said she to the little one; "look! he
holds it to you."

The little one smiled, put sugar in the cup, and Madame Folette began
her joyful circuit.

But we will now leave Madame Folette, home-baked bread, the family
breakfast, and the morning sun, and seat ourselves at the evening lamp,
by the light of which Elise is writing.


TO CECILIA.

I must give you portraits of all my little flock of children; who now,
having enjoyed their evening meal, are laid to rest upon their soft
pillows. Ah! if I had only a really good portrait--I mean a painted
one--of my Henrik, my first-born, my summer child, as I call
him--because he was born on a Midsummer-day, in the summer hours both of
my life and my fortune; but only the pencil of a Correggio could
represent those beautiful, kind, blue eyes, those golden locks, that
loving mouth, and that countenance all so perfectly pure and beautiful!
Goodness and joyfulness beam out from his whole being; even although his
buoyant animal life, which seldom allows his arms or legs to be quiet,
often expresses itself in not the most graceful manner. My
eleven-years-old boy is, alas! very--his father says--very unmanageable.
Still, notwithstanding all this wildness, he is possessed of a deep and
restless fund of sentiment, which makes me often tremble for his future
happiness. God defend my darling, my summer child, my only son! Oh, how
dear he is to me! Ernst warns me often of too partial an affection for
this child; and on that very account will I now pass on from portrait
No. 1 to

No. 2.--Behold then the little Queen-bee, our eldest daughter, just
turned ten years; and you will see a grave, fair girl, not handsome, but
with a round, sensible face; from which I hope, by degrees, to remove a
certain ill-tempered expression. She is uncommonly industrious, silent
and orderly, and kind towards her younger sisters, although very much
disposed to lecture them; nor will she allow any opportunity to pass in
which her importance as "eldest sister" is not observed; on which
account the little ones give her the titles of "Your Majesty" and "Mrs.
Judge." The little Louise appears to me one of those who will always be
still and sure; and who, on this account, will go fortunately though the
world.

No. 3.--People say that my little nine-years-old Eva will be very like
her mother. I hope it will prove a really splendid fac-simile. See,
then, a little, soft, round-about figure, which, amid laughter and
merriment, rolls hither and thither lightly and nimbly, with an
ever-varying physiognomy, which is rather plain than handsome, although
lit up by a pair of beautiful, kind, dark-blue eyes. Quickly moved to
sorrow, quickly excited to joy; good-hearted, flattering,
confection-loving, pleased with new and handsome clothes, and with dolls
and play; greatly beloved too by brothers and sisters, as well as by all
the servants; the best friend and playfellow, too, of her brother. Such
is little Eva.

No. 4.--Nos. 3 and 4 ought not properly to come together. Poor Leonore
had a sickly childhood, and this rather, I believe, than nature, has
given to her an unsteady and violent temper, and has unhappily sown the
seeds of envy towards her more fortunate sisters. She is not deficient
in deep feeling, but the understanding is sluggish, and it is extremely
difficult for her to learn anything. All this promises no pleasure;
rather the very opposite. The expression of her mouth, even in the
uncomfortable time of teething, seemed to speak, "Let me be quiet!" It
is hardly possible that she can be other than plain, but, with God's
help, I hope to make her good and happy.

"My beloved, plain child!" say I sometimes to her as I clasp her
tenderly in my arms, for I would willingly reconcile her early to her
fate.

No. 5.--But whatever will fate do with the nose of my Petrea? This nose
is at present the most remarkable thing about her little person; and if
it were not so large, she really would be a pretty child. We hope,
however, that it will moderate itself in her growth.

Petrea is a little lively girl, with a turn for almost everything,
whether good or bad; curious and restless is she, and beyond measure
full of failings; she has a dangerous desire to make herself observed,
and to excite an interest. Her activity shows itself in destructiveness;
yet she is good-hearted and most generous. In every kind of foolery she
is a most willing ally with Henrik and Eva, whenever they will grant her
so much favour; and if these three be heard whispering together, one may
be quite sure that some roguery or other is on foot. There exists
already, however, so much unquiet in her, that I fear her whole life
will be such; but I will early teach her to turn herself to that which
can change unrest into rest.

No. 6.--And now to the pet child of the house--to the youngest, the
loveliest, the so-called "little one"--to her who with her white hands
puts the sugar into her father's and mother's cup--the coffee without
that would not taste good--to her whose little bed is not yet removed
from the chamber of the parents, and who, every morning, creeping out of
her own bed, lays her bright curly little head on her father's shoulder
and sleeps again.

Could you only see the little two-years-old Gabriele, with her large,
serious brown eyes; her refined, somewhat pale, but indescribably lovely
countenance; her bewitching little gestures; you would be just as much
taken with her as the rest are,--you would find it difficult, as we all
do, not to spoil her. She is a quiet little child, but very unlike her
eldest sister. A predominating characteristic of Gabriele is love of the
beautiful; she shows a decided aversion to what is ugly and
inconvenient, and as decided a love for what is attractive. A most
winning little gentility in appearance and manners, has occasioned the
brother and sisters to call her in sport "the little young lady," or
"the little princess." Henrik is really in love with his little sister,
kisses her small white hands with devotion, and in return she loves him
with her whole heart. Towards the others she is very often somewhat
ungracious; and our good friend the Assessor calls her frequently "the
little gracious one," and frequently also "the little ungracious one,"
but then he has for her especially so many names; my wish is that in the
end she may deserve the surname of "the amiable."

Peace be with my young ones! There is not one of them which is not
possessed of the material of peculiar virtue and excellence, and yet not
also at the same time of the seed of some dangerous vice, which may ruin
the good growth of God in them. May the endeavours both of their father
and me be blessed in training these plants of heaven aright! But ah! the
education of children is no easy thing, and all the many works on that
subject which I have studied appear to me, whether the fault be in me
or in them I cannot tell, but small helps. Ah! I often find no other
means than to clasp the child tenderly in my arms, and to weep bitterly
over it, or else to kiss it in the fulness of my joy; and it often has
appeared to me that such moments are not without their influence.

I endeavour as much as possible not to scold. I know how perpetually
scolding crushes the free spirit and the innocent joyousness of
childhood; and I sincerely believe that if one will only sedulously
cultivate what is good in character, and make in all instances what is
good visible and attractive, the bad will by degrees fall away of
itself.

I sing a great deal to my children. They are brought up with songs; for
I wished early, as it were, to bathe their souls in harmony. Several of
them, especially my first-born and Eva, are regular little enthusiasts
in music; and every evening, as soon as twilight comes on, the children
throng about me, and then I sit down to the piano, and either accompany
myself, or play to little songs which they themselves sing. It is my
Henrik's reward, when he has been very good for the whole day, that I
should sit by his bed, and sing to him till he sleeps. He says that he
then has such beautiful dreams. We often sit and talk for an hour
instead, and I delight myself sincerely in his active and pure soul.
When he lays out his great plans for his future life, he ends
thus:--"And when I am grown up a man, and have my own house, then,
mother, thou shalt come and live with me, and I will keep so many maids
to wait on thee, and thou shalt have so many flowers, and everything
that thou art fond of, and shalt live just like a queen; only of an
evening, when I go to bed, thou shalt sit beside me and sing me to
sleep; wilt thou not?" Often too, when in the midst of his plans for the
future and my songs, he has dropped asleep, I remain sitting still by
the bed with my heart full to overflowing with joy and pride in this
angel. Ernst declares that I spoil him. Ah, perhaps I do, but
nevertheless it is a fact that I earnestly endeavour not to do so. After
all, I can say of every one of my children what a friend of mine said of
hers, that they are tolerably good; that is to say, they are not good
enough for heaven.

This evening I am alone. Ernst is away at the District-Governor's. It
is my birthday to-day; but I have told no one, because I wished rather
to celebrate it in a quiet communion with my own thoughts.

How at this moment the long past years come in review before me! I see
myself once more in the house of my parents: in that good, joyful,
beloved home! I see myself once more by thy side, my beloved and only
sister, in that large, magnificent house, surrounded by meadows and
villages. How we looked down upon them from high windows, and yet
rejoiced that the sun streamed into the most lowly huts just as
pleasantly as into our large saloons--everything seemed to us so well
arranged.

Life then, Cecilia, was joyful and free from care. How we sate and wept
over "Des Voeux Temeraires," and over "Feodor and Maria,"--such were
our cares then. Our life was made up of song, and dance, and merriment,
with our so many cheerful neighbours; with the most accomplished of whom
we got up enthusiasms for music and literature. We considered ourselves
to be virtuous, because we loved those who loved us, and because we gave
of our superfluity to those who needed it. Friendship was our passion.
We were ready to die for friendship, but towards love we had hearts of
stone. How we jested over our lovers, and thought what fun it would be
to act the parts of austere romance-heroines! How unmerciful we were,
and--how easily our lovers consoled themselves! Then Ernst Frank came on
a visit to us. The rumour of a learned and strong-minded man preceded
him, and fixed our regards upon him, because women, whether
well-informed or not themselves, are attracted by such men. Do you not
remember how much he occupied our minds? how his noble person, his calm,
self-assured demeanour, his frank, decided, yet always polite behaviour
charmed us at first, and the awed us?

One could say of him, that morally as well as physically he stood
firmly. His deep mourning dress, together with an expression of quiet
manly grief, which at times shaded his countenance, combined to make him
interesting to us; nevertheless, you thought that he looked too stern,
and I very soon lost in his presence my accustomed gaiety. Whenever his
dark grave eyes were fixed upon me, I was conscious that they possessed
a half-bewitching, half-oppressive power over me; I felt myself happy
because of it, yet at the same time filled with anxiety; my very action
was constrained, my hands became cold and did everything blunderingly,
nor ever did I speak so stupidly as when I observed that he listened.
Aunt Lisette gave me one day this maxim: "My dear, remember what I now
tell thee: if a man thinks that thou art a fool, it does not injure thee
the least in his opinion; but if he once thinks that thou considerest
him a fool, then art thou lost for ever with him!" With the last it may
be just as it will--I have heard a clever young man declare that it
would operate upon him like salt on fire--however, this is certain, that
the first part of Aunt Lisette's maxim is correct, since my stupidity in
Ernst's presence did not injure me at all in his opinion, and when he
was kind and gentle, how inexpressibly agreeable he was!

His influence over me became greater each succeeding day: I seemed to
live continually under his eyes; when they beamed on me in kindness, it
was as if a spring breeze passed through my soul; and if his glance was
graver than common, I became still, and out of spirits. It seemed to me
at times--and it is so even to this very day--that if this clear and
wonderfully penetrating glance were only once, and with its full power,
riveted upon me, my very heart would cease to beat. Yet after all, I am
not sure whether I loved him. I hardly think I did; for when he was
absent I then seemed to breathe so freely, yet at the same time, I would
have saved his life by the sacrifice of my own.

In several respects we had no sympathies in common. He had no taste for
music, which I loved passionately; and in reading too our feelings were
so different. He yawned over my favourite romances, nay he even
sometimes would laugh when I was at the point of bursting into tears; I,
on the contrary, yawned over his useful and learned books, and found
them more tedious than I could express. The world of imagination in
which my thoughts delighted to exercise themselves, he valued not in the
least, whilst the burdensome actuality which he always was seeking for
in life, had no charm for me. Nevertheless there were many points in
which we accorded--these especially were questions of morals--and
whenever this was the case, it afforded both of us great pleasure.

And now came the time, Cecilia, in which you left me; when our fates
separated themselves, although our hearts did not.

One day there were many strangers with us; and in the afternoon I played
at shuttlecock with young cousin Emil, to whom we were so kind, and who
deserved our kindness so well. How it happened I cannot tell, but before
long Ernst took his place, and was my partner in the game. He looked
unusually animated, and I felt myself more at ease with him than common.
He threw the shuttlecock excellently, and with a firm hand, but always
let it fly a little way beyond me, so that I was obliged to step back a
few paces each time to catch it, and thus unconsciously to myself was I
driven, in the merry sport, through a long suite of rooms, till we came
at last to one where we were quite alone, and a long way from the
company. All at once then Ernst left off his play, and a change was
visible in his whole countenance. I augured something amiss, and would
gladly have sprung far, far away, but I felt powerless; and then Ernst
spoke so from his heart, so fervently, and with such deep tenderness,
that he took my heart at once to himself. I laid my hand, although
tremblingly, in his, and, almost without knowing what I did, consented
to go through life by his side.

I had just then passed my nineteenth year; and my beloved parents
sanctioned the union of their daughter with a man so respectable and so
universally esteemed, and one, moreover, whom everybody prophesied would
one day rise to the highest eminences of the state--and Ernst, whose
nature it was to accomplish everything rapidly which he undertook,
managed it so that in a very short time our marriage was celebrated.

At the same time some members of my family thought that by this union I
had descended a step. I thought not; on the contrary, the very reverse.
I was of high birth, had several not undistinguished family connexions,
and was brought up in a brilliant circle, in all the superficial
accomplishments of the day, amid superfluity and thoughtlessness. He was
a man who had shaped out his own course in life, who, by his own honest
endeavours, and through many self-denials, had raised his father's house
from its depressed condition, and had made the future prospects of his
mother and sister comfortable and secure: he was a man self-dependent,
upright, and good--yes, GOOD, and that I discover more and more the
deeper knowledge I obtain of his true character, even though the outward
manner may be somewhat severe--in truth, I feel myself very inferior
beside him.

The first year of our marriage we passed, at their desire, in the house
of my parents; and if I could only have been less conscious of his
superiority, and could only have been more certain that he was satisfied
with me, nothing would have been wanting to my happiness. Everybody
waited upon me; and perhaps it was on this account that Ernst, in
comparison, seemed somewhat cold; I was the petted child of my too kind
parents; I was thankless and peevish, and ah, some little of this still
remains! Nevertheless, it was during this very time that, under the
influence of my husband, the true beauty and reality of life became more
and more perceptible to my soul. Married life and family ties, one's
country and the world, revealed their true relationships, and their holy
signification to my mind. Ernst was my teacher; I looked up to him with
love, but not without fear.

Many were the projects which we formed in these summer days, and which
floated brightly before my romantic fancy. Among these was a journey on
foot through the beautiful country west of Sweden, and this was one of
the favourite schemes of my Ernst. His mother--from whom our little
Petrea has derived her somewhat singular name--was of Norway, and many a
beloved thought of her seemed to have interwoven itself with the valleys
and mountains, which, as in a wonderfully-beautiful fairy tale, she had
described to him in the stories she told. All these recollections are a
sort of romantic region in Ernst's soul, and thither he betakes himself
whenever he would refresh his spirit, or lay out something delightful
for the future. "Next year," he would then exclaim, "will we take a
journey!" And then we laid out together our route on the map, and I
determined on the dress which I would wear as his travelling-companion
when we would go and visit "that sea-engarlanded Norway." Ah! there soon
came for me other journeys.

It was during these days also that my first-born saw the light; my
beautiful boy! who so fettered both my love and my thoughts that Ernst
grew almost jealous. How often did I steal out of bed at night in order
to watch him while he slept! He was a lively, restless child, and it
therefore was a peculiar pleasure for me to see him at rest; besides
which, he was so angelically lovely in sleep! I could have spent whole
nights bending over his cradle.

So far, Cecilia, all went with us as in the romances with which we in
our youth nourished heart and soul. But far other times came. In the
first place, the sad change in the circumstances of my parents, which
operated so severely on our position in life; and then for me so many
children--cares without end, grief and sickness! My body and mind must
both have given way under their burden, had Ernst not been the man he
is.

It suited his character to struggle against the stream; it was a sort of
pleasure to him to combat with it, to meet difficulties, and to overcome
them. With each succeeding year he imposed more business upon himself,
and by degrees, through the most resolute industry, he was enabled to
bring back prosperity to his house. And then how unwearingly kind he was
to me! How tenderly sustaining in those very moments, when without him I
must have found myself so utterly miserable! How many a sleepless night
has he passed on my account! How often has he soothed to sleep a sickly
child in his arms! And then, too, every child which came, as it were
only to multiply his cares, and increase the necessity for his labour,
was to him a delight--was received as a gift of God's mercy--and its
birth made a festival in the house. How my heart has thanked him, and
how has his strength and assurance nerved me!

When little Gabriele was born I was very near death; and it is my firm
belief that, without Ernst's care for me, I must then have parted from
my little ones. During the time of great weakness which succeeded this,
my foot scarcely ever touched the ground. I was carried by Ernst himself
wherever I would. He was unwearied in goodness and patience towards the
sick mother. Should she not now, that she is again in health, dedicate
her life to him? Ah, yes, that should she, and that will she! Alas, were
but my ability as strong as my will!

Do you know one thing, Cecilia, which often occasions me great trouble?
It is that I am not a clever housewife; that I can neither take pleasure
in all the little cares and details which the well-being of a house
really requires, nor that I have memory for these things; more
especially is the daily caring for dinner irksome to me. I myself have
but little appetite; and it is so unpleasing to me to go to sleep at
night, and to get up in the morning with my head full of schemes for
cooking. By this means, it happens that sometimes my husband's domestic
comforts are not such as he has a right to demand. Hitherto my weak
health, the necessary care of the children, and our rather narrow
circumstances, have furnished me with sufficient excuses; but these now
will avail me no longer; my health is again established, and our greater
prosperity furnishes the means for better household management.

On this account, I now exert myself to perform all my duties well; but,
ah! how pleasant it will be when the little Louise is sufficiently grown
up, that I may lay part of the housekeeping burdens on her shoulders. I
fancy to myself that she will have peculiar pleasure in all these
things.

I am to-day two-and-thirty years old. It seems to me that I have entered
a new period of my life: my youth lies behind me, I am advanced into
middle age, and I well know what both this and my husband have a right
to demand from me. May a new and stronger being awake in me! May God
support me, and Ernst be gentle towards his erring wife!

Ernst should have married a more energetic woman. My nervous weakness
makes my temper irritable, and I am so easily annoyed. His activity of
mind often disturbs me more than it is reasonable or right that it
should; for instance, I get regularly into a state of excitement, if he
only steadfastly fixes his eyes on a wall, or on any other object. I
immediately begin to fancy that we are going instantly to have a new
door opened, or some other change brought about. And oh! I have such a
great necessity for rest and quiet!

One change which is about to take place in our house I cannot anticipate
without uneasiness. It is the arrival of a candidate of Philosophy,
Jacob Jacobi, as tutor for my children. He will this summer take my wild
boy under his charge, and instruct the sisters in writing, drawing, and
arithmetic; and in the autumn conduct my first-born from the maternal
home to a great educational institution. I dread this new member in our
domestic circle; he may, if he be not amiable, so easily prove so
annoying; yet, if he be amiable and good, he will be so heartily welcome
to me, especially as assistant in the wearisome writing lessons, with
their eternal "Henrik, sit still!"--"Hold the pen properly,
Louise!"--"Look at the copy, Leonore!"--"Don't forget the points and
strokes, Eva!"--"Little Petrea, don't wipe out the letters with your
nose!" Besides this, my first-born begins to have less and less esteem
for my Latin knowledge; and Ernst is sadly discontented with his wild
pranks. Jacobi will give him instruction, together with Nils Gabriel,
the son of the District-Governor, Stjernhoek, a most industrious and
remarkably sensible boy, from whose influence on my Henrik I hope for
much good.

The Candidate is warmly recommended to us by a friend of my husband, the
excellent Bishop B.; yet, notwithstanding this, his actions at the
University did not particularly redound to his honour. Through credulity
and folly he has run through a nice little property which had been left
him by three old aunts, who had brought him up and spoiled him into the
bargain. Indeed, his career has hitherto not been quite a correct one.
Bishop B. conceals nothing of all this, but says that he is much
attached to the young man; praises his heart, and his excellent gifts as
a preceptor, and prays us to receive him cordially, with all parental
tenderness, into our family. We shall soon see whether he be deserving
of such hearty sympathy. For my part, I must confess that my motherly
tenderness for him is as yet fast asleep.

Yet, after all, this inmate does not terrify me half as much as a visit
with which I am shortly threatened. Of course you have heard of the lady
of the late Colonel S., the beautiful Emilie, my husband's "old flame,"
as I call her, out of a little malice for all the vexation her
perfections, which are so very opposite to mine, have occasioned me. She
has been now for several years a widow, has lived long abroad, and now
will pay us a visit on her return to her native land. Ernst and she have
always kept up the most friendly understanding with each other, although
she refused his hand; and it is a noble characteristic of my Ernst, and
one which, in his sex, is not often found, that this rejection did not
make him indifferent to the person who gave it. On the contrary, he
professes the most warm admiration of this Emilie, and has not ceased to
correspond with her; and I, for I read all their letters, cannot but
confess her extraordinary knowledge and acuteness. But to know all this
near is what I would indeed be very gladly excused, since I cannot help
thinking that my husband's "old flame" has something of cold-heartedness
in her, and my heart has no great inclination to become warm towards
her.

It strikes ten o'clock. Ernst will not come home before twelve. I shall
leave you now, Cecilia, that----shall I confess my secret to you? You
know that one of my greatest pleasures is the reading of a good novel,
but this pleasure I have almost entirely renounced, because whenever I
have a really interesting one in my hand, I find the most cruel
difficulty in laying it down before I reach the last page. That,
however, does not answer in my case; and since the time when through the
reading of Madame De Stael's Corinne, two dinners, one great wash, and
seventeen lesser domestic affairs all came to a stand-still, and my
domestic peace nearly suffered shipwreck, I have made a resolution to
give up all novel-reading, at least for the present. But still it is so
necessary for me to have some literary relaxation of the kind, that
since I read no more novels, I have myself--begun to write one. Yes,
Cecilia, my youthful habits will not leave me, even in the midst of the
employments and prosaic cares of every-day life; and the flowers which
in the morning-tide cast their fragrance so sweetly around me, will yet
once more bloom for me in remembrance, and encircle my drooping head
with a refreshing garland. The joyful days which I passed by your side;
the impressions and the agreeable scenes--now they seem doubly so--which
made our youth so beautiful, so lively, and so fresh,--all these I will
work out into one significant picture, before the regular flight of
years has made them perish from my soul. This employment enlivens and
strengthens me; and if, in an evening, my nervous toothache, which is
the certain result of over-exertion or of vexation, comes on, there is
nothing which will dissipate it like the going on with my little
romance. For this very reason, therefore, because this evening my old
enemy has plagued me more than common, I have recourse to my innocent
opiate.

But Ernst shall not find me awake when he returns: this I have promised
him. Good night, sweet Cecilia!

We will now, in this place, give a little description of the
letter-writer--of the mother of Henrik, Louise, Eva, Leonore, Petrea,
and Gabriele.

Beautiful she certainly was not, but nature had given to her a noble
growth, which was still as fine and delicate as that of a young girl.
The features were not regular, but the mouth was fresh and bewitching,
the lips of a lovely bright red, the complexion fair, and the clear blue
eyes soft and kind. All her actions were graceful: she had beautiful
hands--which is something particularly lovely in a lady--yet she was not
solicitous to keep them always in view, and this beautified them still
more. She dressed with much taste, almost always in light colours; this
and the soft rose scent which she loved, and which always accompanied
her, lent to her whole being a something especially mild and agreeable.
One might compare her to moonlight; she moved softly, and her voice was
low and sweet, which, as Shakspeare says, is "an excellent thing in
woman." Seeing her, as one often might do, reclining on a soft couch,
playing with a flower or caressing a child, one could scarcely fancy her
the superintendent of a large household, with all its appertaining
work-people and servants; and beyond this, as the instructor of many
children: yet love and sense of duty had led her to the performance of
all this, had reconciled her to that which her natural inclinations were
so averse to; nay, by degrees indeed, had made these very cares dear to
her--whatever concerned the children lay near to her heart, whilst
order, pleasantness, and peace, regulated the house. The contents of the
linen-press were dear to her; a snow-white tablecloth was her delight;
grey linen, dust, and flies, were hated by her, as far as she could hate
anything.

But let us now proceed with our historical sketches.

We left Elise at her manuscript, by which she became soon so deeply
occupied that the clock struck twelve unperceived by her; nor was she
aware of the flight of time till a sudden terror thrilled her as she
heard her husband return. To throw her manuscript into her drawer, and
quickly undress, had been an easy thing for her, and she was about to do
so, when the thought occurred, "I have never hitherto kept my
proceedings secret from Ernst, and to-day I will not begin to do so;"
and she remained at her writing-table till he entered the room.

"What! yet up, and writing?" said he, with a displeased glance. "Is it
thus you keep your promise, Elise?"

"Pardon me, Ernst," said she; "I had forgotten myself."

"And for what?" asked he. "What are you writing? No, let me see! What! a
novel, as I live! Now, what use is this?"

"What use is it?" returned Elise. "Ah, to give me pleasure."

"But people should have sense and reason in their pleasures," said the
Judge. "Now it gives me no pleasure at all that you should sit up at
night ruining your eyes on account of a miserable novel;--if there were
a fire here I would burn the rubbish!"

"It would be a great deal better," returned Elise, mildly, "if you went
to bed and said your prayers piously, rather than thought about such an
_auto-da-fe_. How have you amused yourself at the Governor's?"

"You want now to be mixing the cards," said he. "Look at me, Elise; you
are pale; your pulse is excited! Say my prayers, indeed! I have a great
mind to give you a lecture, that I have! Is it reasonable--is it
prudent--to sit up at night and become pale and sleepless, in order to
write what is good for nothing? It really makes me quite angry that you
can be so foolish, so childish! It certainly is worth while your going
to baths, sending to the east and to the west to consult physicians, and
giving oneself all kind of trouble to regain your health, when you go
and do every possible thing you can in the world to destroy it!"

"Do not be angry, Ernst," besought Elise; "do not look so stern on me
to-night, Ernst; no, not to-night."

"Yes, indeed!" replied he, but in a tone which had become at once
milder, "because it is two-and-thirty years to-day since you came into
the world, do you think that you have a right to be absolutely
childish?"

"Put that down to my account," said Elise, smiling, yet with a tear in
her eye.

"Put it down! put it down!" repeated the Judge. "Yes, I suppose so.
People go on putting down neck or nothing till it's a pretty fool's
business. I should like to pack all novels and novel-writers out of the
world together! The world never will be wise till that is done; nor will
you either. In the mean time, however, it is as well that I have found
you awake, else I must have woke you to prove that you cannot conceal
from me, not even for once, how old you are. Here then is the punishment
for your bad intention."

"Ah! Walter Scott's romances!" exclaimed Elise, receiving a set of
volumes from her husband; "and such a magnificent edition! Thanks!
thanks! you good, best Ernst! But you are a beautiful lawgiver; you
promote the very things which you condemn!"

"Promise me, only," returned he, "not to spend the night in reading or
writing novels. Think only how precious your health is to so many of us!
Do you think I should be so provoked, if you were less dear to me? Do
you comprehend that? In a few years, Elise," added he, "when the
children are older, and you are stronger, we will turn a summer to
really good account, and take our Norwegian journey. You shall breathe
the fresh mountain air, and see the beautiful valleys and the sea, and
that will do you much more good than all the mineral waters in the
world. But come now, let us go and see the children; we will not wake
them, however, although I have brought with me some confectionery from
the lady hostess, which I can lay on their pillows. There is a rennet
for you."

The married pair went into the children's room, where the faithful old
Fin-woman, Brigitta, lay and guarded, like the dragon, her treasures.
The children slept as children sleep. The father stroked the beautiful
curling hair of the boy, but impressed a kiss on the rosy cheek of each
girl. After this the parents returned to their own chamber. Elise lay
down to rest; her husband sate down to his desk, but so as to shade the
light from his wife. The low sounds of a pen moving on paper came to her
ear as if in sleep. As the clock struck two she awoke, and he was still
writing.

Few men required and allowed themselves so little rest as Ernst Frank.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] A kind of fine curled cake.




CHAPTER II.

THE CANDIDATE.


It was in the twilight. The children were playing at "lana eld"[2] in
the great hall, swarming about in holes and corners, when the sudden
stopping of a travelling carriage before the door operated upon the wild
little flock much as a stream of cold water on a swarm of Lees. The
Queen-bee of the children-swarm, the wise little Louise, sate herself
down at the window, and four other little heads clustered themselves
about her, fervent and inquisitive, and almost pushing her away in their
impatient zeal to get a peep at the arrival.

It was a gentleman who stepped lightly out of that travelling carriage,
but whether young or old, the children could not see; this, however,
they saw, that their father came quickly to the door, shook the
traveller by the hand, and conducted him into the house; whilst a very
small portmanteau was carried after him. Seeing this, the little swarm
hastened to their mother; to whom they gave, in all possible degrees of
tone, from a low whisper to a loud annunciation, the information that
for certain "the tutor was come."

Elise, who had company with her, calmed with a "yes, yes!" and "so,
indeed!" the excited state of the children. The Queen-bee composed
herself quickly; and with mildly silencing looks seemed to observe that
she had somewhat forgotten her own dignity, and seated herself quietly
and becomingly among the "grown people," as one of them, whilst the
other children gathered themselves in a little group in one corner of
the room, whispering and wondering; and whoever had looked at them might
have seen many a time Petrea's nose peering forth from the little group.

Judge Frank sent to announce to his wife the arrival of the expected
guest, who would be introduced to her as soon as he had completed his
toilet. Presently afterwards another messenger came, desiring
curling-irons for the Candidate.

"It is a blessed long toilet!" thought Elise, many a time during a full
hour which elapsed in waiting; and it must be confessed that her nose
more than once during the hour took the same direction as Petrea's.

At last the steps of two gentlemen were heard on the hall floor, and
there advanced through the parlour door a well-shod foot and a handsome
leg, belonging to a well-formed though somewhat compressed figure, which
carried gracefully a twenty-year-old head, of a jovial, comely
appearance, with the hair dressed after the newest mode. It was the
Candidate. He cast a glance first at his foot, and then at the lady of
the house, whom he approached with the most unconstrained
self-possession, exhibiting the while a row of dazzlingly white teeth.
Odour of _eau de Portugal_ diffused itself though the room.

The Judge, who followed, and whose bearing and simple demeanour
contrasted with those of the new guest, introduced the Candidate Jacobi.
Various unimportant polite speeches were made by everybody, and then
they all took their seats. The children then came forward, and made
their bows and curtseys. Henrik eyed his future preceptor with a joyous,
confiding glance; the Queen-bee curtseyed very becomingly, and then made
several steps backward as the young man seemed inclined to take the
great liberty of kissing her; whilst Petrea turned up her nose with an
inquisitive saucy air. The Candidate took the kindest notice of them
all; shook all of them by the hand; inquired all their names; looked at
himself in the glass, and arranged his curls.

"Whom have we here?" thought Elise, with secret anxiety. "He is a fop--a
perfect fop! How in all the world could Bishop B. select him as teacher
for my poor little children? He will think much more of looking at
himself in the glass than of looking after them. The fine breast-pin
that he is wearing is of false stones. He laughs to show his white
teeth. An actual fop--a fool, perhaps! There, now, he looks at himself
again in the glass!"

Elise sought to catch her husband's eye, but he evidently avoided
meeting hers; yet something of discontent, and something of trouble too,
showed itself in his manner. The Candidate, on the contrary, appeared
not in the slightest degree troubled, but reclined perfectly at his ease
in an armchair, and cast searching glances on three ladies, who
evidently were strangers in the company. The eldest of these, who kept
on sewing incessantly, appeared to be upwards of forty, and was
distinguished by a remarkably quiet, bright, and friendly aspect. Judge
Frank and she talked much together. The other two appeared neither of
them to have attained her twentieth year: the one was pale and fair; the
other a pretty brunette; both of them were agreeable, and looked good
and happy. These ladies were introduced to Jacobi as Miss Evelina
Berndes and her adopted daughters, Laura and Karin. Laura had always one
of the children on her knee, and it was upon her that his eyes were most
particularly fixed. It was indeed a very pretty picture, which was
formed by Laura, with the lovely little Gabriele on her knee, decorated
with the flowers, bracelets, necklace, in short, with all the pretty
things that just before had ornamented herself.

The conversation soon became general, and was remarkably easy, and the
Candidate had an opportunity of taking his part well and interestingly
in it whilst speaking of certain distinguished men in the University
from which he was just come. Elise mentioned one celebrated man whom she
had a great desire to see, upon which Jacobi said he had lately made a
little sketch of him, which, on her expressing a wish to see, he
hastened to fetch.

He returned with a portfolio containing many drawings and pictures;
partly portraits, and partly landscapes, from his own pencil; they were
not deficient in talent, and afforded pleasure. First one portrait was
recognised and then another, and at last the Candidate himself. The
children were quite enchanted, and thronged with enthusiasm round the
table. The Candidate placed some of them on his knee, and seemed
particularly observant of their pleasure, and it was not long,
therefore, before they appeared entirely to forget that he was only a
new acquaintance--all at least excepting Louise, who held herself rather
_fiere_, and "the baby," which was quite ungracious towards him.

Above all the pictures which the portfolio contained, were the children
most affected and enchanted by one in sepia, which represented a girl
kneeling before a rose-bush, from which she was gathering roses, whilst
a lyre lay against a gravestone near her.

"Oh, how sweet! how divinely beautiful!" exclaimed they. Petrea seemed
as if she actually could not remove her eyes from the charming picture,
which the Candidate himself also seemed to regard with a fatherly
affection, and which was the crown of his little collection.

It was the custom at the Franks, that every evening, as soon as the
clock had struck eight, the little herd of children, conducted by the
Queen-bee, withdrew to their bed-chamber, which had once occasioned the
wakeful Petrea to say that night was the worst thing God had ever made:
for which remark she received a reproving glance from the Queen-bee,
accompanied by the maxim, "that people should not talk in that way."

In order, however, to celebrate the present day, which was a remarkable
one, the children were permitted to take supper with their parents, and
even to sit up as late as they did. The prospect of this indulgence, the
Candidate, the pictures, all combined to elevate the spirits of the
children in no ordinary degree; so much so indeed that Petrea had the
boldness, whilst they were regaling on roast chicken, to propose to the
Candidate that the picture of the girl and the rose-bush should be put
up for a prize on the breaking of a merrythought between them;
promising, that if she had the good fortune to win it, she would give as
a recompense a picture of her own composition, which should represent
some scene in a temple. The Queen-bee appeared scandalised at her
sister's proposal, and shook her little wise head at her.

The mother also violently opposed Petrea's proposition; and she, poor
girl, became scarlet, and deeply abashed, before the reproving glances
which were cast upon her; yet the Candidate was good-natured enough,
after the first astonishment was over, to yield in the most cheerful
manner to Petrea's proposal, and zealously to declare that the affair
should be managed just as she would. He accordingly set himself, with an
appearance of great accuracy and solemnity, to measure the length of
both limbs of the merrythought, and then counted three; the mother all
this time hoping within herself that he would so manage it that he
himself should retain the head--but no! the head remained in Petrea's
hand, and she uttered a loud cry of joy. After supper, the parents again
opposed what had taken place; but the Candidate was so cheerful and so
determined that it should remain as it was settled already, that Petrea,
the happiest of mortals, ventured to carry out the girl and rose-bush;
yet, she did not miss a motherly warning by the way, which mingled some
tears with her joy. The Candidate had, in the mean time, on account of
his kindness towards the children, and his good-nature towards Petrea,
made a favourable impression on the parents.

"Who knows," said Elise to her husband, "but that he may turn out very
well. He has, probably, his faults, but he has his good qualities too;
there is something really very agreeable in his voice and countenance;
but he must leave off that habit of looking at himself so continually in
the glass."

"I feel assured that he must have worth," said the Judge, "from the
recommendation of my friend B. This vanity, and these foppish habits of
his, we shall soon know how to get rid of; the man himself is
unquestionably good; and, dear Elise, be kind to him, and manage so that
he shall feel at home with us."

The children also, in their place of rest, made their observations on
the Candidate.

"I think he is much handsomer than my father," said little Petrea.

"I think," said the Queen-bee, in a tone of correction, "that nobody can
be more perfect than my father."

"That is true, excepting mamma," exclaimed Eva, out of her little bed.

"Ah," said Petrea, "I like him so much; he has given me that lovely
picture. Do you know what I shall call that girl? I shall call her Rosa;
and I'll tell you a long story about her. There was once upon a
time----"

All the sisters listened eagerly, for Petrea could relate better and
prettier stories than any of them. It was therefore said among
themselves that Petrea was very clever; but as the Queen-bee was
desirous that Petrea should not build much on this opinion, she now
listened to her history without bestowing upon it one token of applause,
although it was found to be sufficiently interesting to keep the whole
little auditorium awake till midnight.

"What will become of my preserves?" thought Elise, one day as she
remarked the quantity which vanished from the plate of the Candidate;
but when that same evening she saw the little Gabriele merrily, and
without reproof, pulling about his curls; when she saw him join the
children at their play, and make every game which they played
instructive to them; when she saw him armed with a great paper weapon,
which he called his sword, and deal about blows to those who counted
false, thereby exciting greater activity of mind as well as more mirth,
she thought to herself, "he may eat just as much preserves as he likes;
I will take care that he never goes short of them."

If, however, the Candidate rose higher in the regards of one party,
there still was another with which his actions did not place him in the
best point of view. Brigitta, to whom the care of some few things in the
house was confided, began to look troubled, and out of sorts. For
several days, whatever her cause of annoyance might be, she preserved
silence, till one evening, when expanding the nostrils of her little
snubby nose, she thus addressed her mistress:

"The gracious lady must be so good as to give out to the cook just twice
as much coffee as usual; because if things are to go on in this way, we
cannot do with less. He, the master there, empties the little coffee-pot
himself every morning! Never, in all my life, have I seen such a
coffee-bibber!"

The following evening came a new announcement of trouble.

"Now it is not alone a coffee-bibber," said poor Brigitta, with a gloomy
countenance and wide-staring eyes, "but a calf it is, and a devourer of
rusks! What do you think, gracious lady, but the rusk-basket, which I
filled only yesterday, is to-day as good as empty--only two rusks and
two or three crumbs remaining! Then for cream! Why every morning he
empties the jug!"

"Ah, it is very good," said Elise, mildly, yet evasively, "that he
enjoys things so much."

"And only look, in heaven's name!" lamented poor Brigitta another day,
"he is also quite a sugar-rat! Why, dear, gracious lady, he must put in
at least twenty pieces of sugar into one cup of coffee, or he never
could empty a sugar-basin as he does! I must beg you to give mo the key
of the chest, that I may fill it again. God grant that all this may have
a good ending!"

Brigitta could venture to say much, for she had grown old in the house;
had carried Elise as a child in her arms; and from affection to her, had
followed her when she left her father's house: besides this, she was a
most excellent guardian for the children; but as now these complaints of
hers were too frequently repeated, Elise said to her seriously: "Dear
Brigitta, let him eat and drink as much as he likes, without any
observation: I would willingly allow him a pound of sugar and coffee a
day, if he only became, as I hope he may, a good friend and preceptor
for the children."

Brigitta walked away quite provoked, and grumbling to herself: "Well,
well!" said she, "old Brita can be silent, yes, that she can;--well,
well! we shall see what will be the end of it. Sugar and rusks he eats,
and salt-fish he can't eat!--well, well!"

All this time Jacobi was passing his days in peace, little dreaming of
the clouds which were gathering over his head, or of his appellations of
coffee-bibber, calf, rusk-devourer, and sugar-rat; and with each
succeeding day it became more evident that Elise's hopes of him were
well grounded. He developed more and more a good and amiable
disposition, and the most remarkable talents as teacher. The children
became attached to him with the most intense affection; nor did their
obedience and reverence for him as preceptor prevent them, in their
freer hours, from playing him all kind of little pranks. Petrea was
especially rich in such inventions; and he was too kind, too much
delighted with their pleasure, not willingly to assist, or even at times
allow himself to be the butt of their jokes.

Breakfast, which for the elder members of the family was commonly served
at eleven o'clock, furnished the children with an excellent opportunity
for their amusement. The Candidate was particularly fond of eggs, and
therefore, when under a bulky-looking napkin he expected to find some,
and laid hasty hands on it, he not unfrequently discovered, instead of
eggs, balls of worsted, playing-balls, and other such indigestible
articles; on which discovery of his, a stifled laughter would commonly
be heard at the door, and a cluster of children's heads be visible,
which he in pretended anger assailed with the false eggs, and which
quickly withdrew amid peals of laughter. Often too, when, according to
old Swedish usage, he would take a glass of spirits, he found pure water
instead of Cognac in his mouth; and the little advocates of temperance
were always near enough to enjoy his astonishment, although sufficiently
distant, also, that not one drop of the shower which was then sent at
them should reach them, though it made them leap high enough for
delight. And really it was wonderful how often these little surprises
could be repeated, and how the Candidate let himself so constantly be
surprised. But he was too much occupied by his own thoughts (the
thoughts of course of a student of philosophy!) in order to be on his
guard against the tricks of these young merry-andrews. One day----

But before we proceed further we must observe, that although the
toilette of the Candidate seemed externally to be always so well
supplied, yet still it was, in fact, in but a very indifferent
condition. No wonder, therefore, was it, that though his hat outwardly
was always well brushed, and was apparently in good order, yet that it
had within a sadly tattered lining.

One day, therefore, as the Candidate had laid his hat in a corner of the
room, and was sitting near the sofa in a very earnest conversation,
Henrik, Petrea, and Eva gathered themselves about that symbol of freedom
with the most suspicious airs and gestures of conspiracy. Nobody paid
any attention to them, when after awhile the Candidate rose to leave the
room, and going through the door would have put on his hat--but, behold,
a very singular revolution had taken place within it, and a mass of tin
soldiers, stones, matches, and heaven knows what besides, came rattling
down upon his head; and even one little chimney-sweeper fell astride on
his nose. Nothing could compare with the immeasurable delight of the
children at the astonishment of the Candidate, and the comic grimaces
and head-shakings with which he received this their not very polite
jest.

No wonder was it, therefore, that the children loved the Candidate so
well.

The little Queen-bee, however, who more and more began to reckon herself
as one of the grown people, and only very rarely took part in the
conspiracies against the Candidate, shook her head at this prank of her
brother and sisters, and looked out a new piece of dark silk from her
drawer (Louise was a hoarder by nature), possessed herself secretly of
the Candidate's hat, and with some little help from her mother, had then
her secret pleasure also, and could laugh in her own sleeve at his
amazement when he discovered a bran new lining in his hat.

"Our little Queen-bee is a sensible little girl," said the Judge,
well-pleased, to his wife, who had made him a third in this plot; and
after that day she was called both by father and mother "our sensible
little Queen-bee."

Scarcely had Jacobi been three weeks in the family of the Franks,
before Elise felt herself disposed to give him a new title, that of
Disputer-General, so great was the ability he discovered to dispute on
every subject, from human free-will to rules for cookery; nay, even for
the eating of eggs.

On this subject Elise wrote thus to her sister Cecilia:--"But however
polite and agreeable the Candidate may be generally, still he is just as
wearisome and obstinate in disputation; and as there is nobody in the
house that makes any pretension to rival him in certain subtleties of
argument, he is in great danger of considering himself a miracle of
metaphysical light, which he is not, I am persuaded, by any means, since
he has much more skill in rending down than in building up, in
perplexing than in making clear. Ernst is no friend of metaphysical
hair-splitting, and when Jacobi begins to doubt the most perceptible and
most certain things--'what is perceptible, what is certain?' the
Candidate will inquire--he grows impatient, shrugs his shoulders, goes
to his writing-table, and leaves me to combat it out, although, for my
part, I would gladly have nothing to do with it. Should I, however, for
awhile carry on the contest boldly, the scholar then will overwhelm me
with learned words and arguments, and then I too flee, and leave him
_maitre du champ de bataille_. He believes then that I am convinced, at
least of his power, which yet, however, is not the case; and if fortune
do not bestow upon me a powerful ally against him, he may imagine so.
Nevertheless, I am not without some curiosity to hear a system which he
has promised to explain to me this evening, and according to which
everything in the world ought to be so good and consistent. These
subjects have always an interest for me, and remind me of the time when
you and I, Cecilia, like two butterflies, went fluttering over the
earth, pausing about its flowers, and building up for ourselves pretty
theories on the origin of life and all things. Since then I had almost
forgotten them. Think only if the mythology of our youth should present
itself again in the system of the Candidate!"

Here Elise was interrupted by the entrance of the troop of children.

"Might we borrow Gabriele?" "Mother, lend us Gabriele!" besought several
coaxing little voices.

"Gabriele, wilt thou not come and play with us? Oh, yes, certainly thou
wilt!" and with these words Petrea held up a gingerbread heart, winch
so operated on the heart of the little one, that she yielded to the
wishes of brother and sisters.

"Ah, but you must take great care of her, my little angel!" said the
mother; "Louise, dear, take her under your charge; look after her, and
see that no harm befal her!"

"Yes, of course," said Louise, with a consequential countenance; and the
jubilant children carried off the borrowed treasure, and quickly was
their sport in full operation in the hall.

Elise took her work, and the Candidate, with a look of great importance,
seated himself before her, in order to initiate her into the mysteries
of his system. Just, however, at the moment when he had opened his mouth
to begin, after having hemmed a few times, a shrill little barking, and
the words "your most devoted servant," were heard at the door, and a
person entered curtseying with an air of conscious worth, said with a
little poodle in her arms--a person with whom we will have the honour to
commence a new chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] Borrowing fire; a Swedish child's play.




CHAPTER III.

THE CHAMBERLAIN'S LADY.


Where is there not _haute volee_? Above the heavenly hosts are outspread
the wings of cherubim and seraphim; and in the poultry-yards of earth
the geese exalt their wings high over the other lesser feathered
creatures. It belongs to the ordination of the world.

The Chamberlain's lady, Gunilla W., belonged incontestibly to the
highest _haute volee_ in the excellent city of X., where we have had the
honour of making the acquaintance of the family of the Franks. She was
the sister of Governor Stjernhoek, and inhabited the third story of the
house of which the Franks inhabited the second, and Evelina Berndes the
first.

This lady had spent her youth at court, and passed many a day of
wearisome constraint, and many a night in making those clothes which
were to conceal from the world how poor Miss Gunilla was; yet neither
night nor day did she complain either of constraint or of poverty, for
she possessed under a plain exterior a strong and quiet spirit.

An old aunt used to preach to her thus: "Eat, that thou mayst grow fat;
if thou art fat, thou wilt grow handsome; and if thou art handsome, thou
wilt get married."

Miss Gunilla, who never ate much, and who did not eat one mouthful more
for this warning, grew neither fat nor handsome; yet on account of her
excellent disposition she was beloved by every one, and especially by a
young rich Chamberlain of the court, who, through his own good qualities
and excellent heart, won her affections, and thus Miss Gunilla became
Mistress. After this, in the circle of her friends she was accustomed to
be called Mrs. Gunilla; which freedom we also shall sometimes take with
her here.

Shortly after her marriage, and in consequence of cold, her husband
became a sad invalid. For thirty years she lived separated from the
world, a faithful and lonely attendant of the sick man; and what she
bore and what she endured the world knew not, for she endured all in
silence. For several years her husband could not bear the light; she
learned, therefore, to work in darkness, and thus made a large
embroidered carpet. "Into this carpet," said she, as she once spoke
accidentally of herself, "have I worked many tears."

One of the many hypochondriacal fancies of her husband was, that he was
about to fall into a yawning abyss, and only could believe himself safe
so long as he held the hand of his wife. Thus for one month after
another she sate by his couch.

At length the grave opened for him; and thanking his wife for the
happiness he had enjoyed in the house of sickness on earth, he sank to
rest, in full belief of a land of restoration beyond. When he was gone,
it seemed to her as if she were as useless in the world as an old
almanack; but here also again her soul raised itself under its burden,
and she regulated her life with peace and decision. In course of years
she grew more cheerful, and the originality of her talents and
disposition which nature had given to her, and which, in her solitude,
had undisturbedly followed their own bent, brought a freshness with them
into social life, into which she entered at first rather from resolution
than from feeling at ease in it.

"The Lord ordains all things for the best;" that had always been, and
still remained, the firm anchorage of her soul. But it was not this
alone which gave to her the peace and gentleness which announced
themselves in her voice, and diffused a true grace over her aged and
not handsome countenance; they had yet another foundation: for even as
the sunken sun throws the loveliest light upon the earth which it has
left, so does the holy memory of a beloved but departed human being on
the remaining solitary friend. Mrs. Gunilla herself lived in such a
remembrance: she knew it not, but after the death of her husband the
dark pictures of his suffering vanished more and more, and his own form,
purified by patience and suffering, rose continually higher in its noble
glorification; it beamed into her soul, and her soul became brightened
thereby. Seldom mentioned she the name of her husband; but when she did
so, it was like a breath of summer air in voice and countenance.

She collected good people about her, and loved to promote their
happiness; and whenever there was a young couple whose narrow
circumstances, or whose fears for the future, filled them with anxiety,
or a young but indigent man who was about to fall into debt and
difficulty, Mrs. Gunilla was ever at hand, although in most cases behind
others. She had nevertheless her faults; and these, as we proceed, we
shall become acquainted with.

We now hastily sketch her portrait the size of life. Age between fifty
and sixty; figure tall, stiff, well-made, not too thin--beside Jeremias
Muntor she might be called stout--complexion, pale yellow; the nose and
chin coming together, the mouth fallen in; the eyes grey and small,
forehead smooth, and agreeably shaded by silver hair; the hands still
handsome, and between the thumb and delicate tip of the forefinger a
pinch of snuff, which was commonly held in certain perspective towards
the nose, whilst with an elbow resting on the arm of sofa or easy-chair
she gave little lectures, or read aloud, for it was one of her
weaknesses to suppose that she knew everything.

During her long hermit-life she had been accustomed wholly to neglect
her toilet, and this neglect she found it difficult afterwards to
overcome; and her old silk gown, from which the wadding peeped out from
many a hole, especially at the elbows; her often-mended collar, and her
drooping cap, the ribbons of which were flecked with many a stain of
snuff, were always a trouble to Elise's love of order and purity.
Notwithstanding all this, there was a certain air about Mrs. Gunilla
which carried off all; and with her character, rank, property, and
consideration, she was _haute volee_, spite of torn gown and
snuff-beflecked ribbons, and had great influence among the best society
of the city.

She considered herself somewhat related to Elise, was very fond of her,
and used very often to impart to her opinions on education (N. B.--Mrs.
Gunilla never had children), on which account many people in the city
accused Elise of weakness towards the _haute volee_, and the
postmistress Bask and the general-shopkeeper Suur considered it quite as
much a crime as a failing.

There was in Mrs. Gunilla's voice, manners, and bearing, a something
very imposing; her curtsey was usually very stately and low, and this
brings us again to her entrance into Elise's room. Elise, the moment she
entered, quickly rose and welcomed her, introducing Jacobi at the same
time.

At the first glance Jacobi uttered an exclamation of joyful surprise,
approached her with an appearance of the greatest cordiality, seized her
hand, which he kissed reverentially, and felicitated himself on the
happiness of seeing her again.

The little eyes of the Chamberlain's lady twinkled, and she exclaimed,
"Oh, heavens! my heart's dearest! Nay, that is very pleasant! He, he,
he, he!"

"How!" exclaimed Elise, in astonishment, "Mr. Jacobi, do you
know----Aunt W., do you know Mr. Jacobi?"

The Candidate appeared about to give an explanation of the acquaintance,
but this Mrs. Gunilla, with a faint crimson overspreading the pale
yellow cheek, and a twitch of the eyebrow, prevented, and with a quick
voice she said, "We once lived in the same house."

She then desired that the conversation which her entrance had
interrupted, and which appeared to have been very important, might
proceed. "At least," added she, with a penetrating glance on Elise and
the Candidate, "if I should not disturb you."

"Certainly not!"

The Candidate needed only the sixteenth of a hint to rush armed with
full fervour into the mysteries of his system. Mrs. Gunilla took up a
packet of old gold thread, which she set herself to unravel, whilst the
Candidate coughed and prepared himself.




CHAPTER IV.

MONADS AND NOMADS.


"All beings," commenced the Candidate, "have, as their most intrinsic
foundation and substance, a simple unity, a soul, a--in one word, a
monad."

"A--a what?" asked the Chamberlain's lady, fixing her eyes upon him.

"A monad, or a simple unity," continued he. "The monads have a common
resemblance in substance one with another; but in respect of qualities,
of power, and size, they are substantially unlike. There are the monads
of people; there are human monads, animal monads, vegetable monads; in
short, the world is full of monads--they compose the world----"

"Heart's dearest!" interrupted the old lady, in a tone of displeasure,
"I don't understand one word of all this! What stuff it is! What are
monads?--fill the world, do they?--I see no monads!"

"But you see me, dear lady," said Jacobi, "and yourself. You are
yourself a monad."

"I a monad!" exclaimed she, in disgust.

"Yes, certainly," replied he, "your Honour, just the same as any other
living creature----"

"But," interrupted she, "I must tell you, dear friend, that I am neither
a monad nor a creature, but a human being--a sinful human being it is
true--but one that God, in any case, created in his own image."

"Yes, certainly, certainly," acceded the Candidate. "I acknowledge a
principal monad, from which all other monads emanate----"

"What!" exclaimed she, "is our Lord God to be a monad also?"

"He may be so designated," said the Candidate, "on account of oneness,
and also to preserve uniformity as to name. For the rest, I believe that
the monads, from the beginning, are gifted with a self-sustaining
strength, through which they are generated into the corporeal world;
that is to say, take a bodily shape, live, act, nay even strive--that is
to say, would remove themselves from one body into another without the
immediate influence of the Principal Monad. The monads are in perpetual
motion--perpetual change, and always place and arrange themselves
according to their power and will. If, now, we regard the world from
this point of view, it presents itself to us in the clearest and most
excellent manner. In all spheres of life we see how the principal monad
assembles all the subject monads around itself as organs and members.
Thus are nations and states, arts and sciences, fashioned; thus every
man creates his own world, and governs it according to his ability; for
there is no such thing as free-will, as people commonly imagine, but the
monad in man directs what he shall become, and what in regard to----"

"That I don't believe," interrupted Mrs. Gunilla; "since, if my soul, or
monad, as you would call it, had guided me according to its pleasure, it
would have led me to do many wicked things; and if our Lord God had not
chastised me, and in his mercy directed me to something that was
good--be so good as to let alone my cotton-balls--it would have gone mad
enough with my nomadic soul--that I can tell you."

"But, your Honour," said Jacobi, "I don't deny at all the influence of a
principal monad; on the contrary, I acknowledge that; and it is
precisely this influence upon your monad which----"

"And I assert," exclaimed she, warming, and again interrupting him,
"that we should do nothing that was right if you could establish your
nomadic government, instead of the government of our Lord God. What good
could I get from your nomads?"

"Monads," said the Candidate, correcting her.

"And supposing your monads," continued Mrs. Gunilla, "do keep in such
perpetual movement, and do arrange themselves so properly, what good
will that do me in moments of temptation and need? It is far wiser and
better that I say and believe that our Lord God will guide us according
to his wisdom and good, than if I should believe that a heap of your
nomads----"

"Monads, monads!" exclaimed the Candidate.

"Monads or nomads," answered angrily Mrs. Gunilla, "it is all one--be so
good as to let my cotton alone, I want it myself--your nomads may be as
magnificent and as mighty as they please, and they may govern
themselves, and may live and strive according to their own wisdom; yet I
cannot see how the world, for all that, can be in the least the more
regular, or even one little grain the more pleasant, to look at. And why
are things so bad here? Why, precisely for this very reason, because you
good people fancy yourselves such powerful monads, and think so much of
your own strength, without being willing to know that you are altogether
poor sinners, who ought to beseech our Lord God to govern their poor
nomadic souls, in order that they might become a little better. It is
precisely such nomadic notions as these that we have to thank for all
kind of rapscallion pranks, for all uproars and broken windows. If you
had only less of nomads, and more of sensible men in you, one should
live in better peace on the earth."

The Candidate was quite confounded; he had never been used to argument
like this, and stared at Mrs. Gunilla with open mouth; whilst little
Pyrrhus, excited by the warmth of his mistress, leapt upon the table,
and barking shrilly seemed disposed to spring at the Candidate's nose.
All this appeared so comic, that Elise could no longer keep back the
merriment which she had felt during the former part of the dispute, and
Jacobi himself accompanied her hearty laugh. Mrs. Gunilla, however,
looked very bitter; and the Candidate, nothing daunted, began again.

"But, in the name of all the world," said he, "your Honour will not
understand me: we speak only of a mode of observing the world--a mode by
which its phenomena can be clearly expounded. Monadology, rightly
understood, does not oppose the ideas of the Christian religion, as I
will demonstrate immediately. Objective revelation proves to us exactly
that the subject-objective and object-subjective, which----"

"Ah!" said Mrs. Gunilla, throwing herself back, "talk what nonsense you
will for me, I know what I know. Nomads may be just what they please for
me: but I call a man, a man; I call a cat, a cat, and a flower, a
flower; and our Lord God remains to me our Lord God, and no nomad!"

"Monad, monad!" cried the Candidate, in a sort of half-comic despair;
"and as for that word, philosophy has as good a right as any other
science to make use of certain words to express certain ideas."

During the last several minutes suspicious movements had been heard at
the parlour door, the cause of which now became evident; the children
had stolen in behind the Candidate, and now cast beseeching glances
towards their mother that she should let all go on unobserved. Petrea
and Eva stole in first, carrying between them a heavy pincushion,
weighted with lead, five pounds in weight at least. The Candidate was
standing; and at the very moment when he was doing his best to defend
the rights of philosophy, the leaden cushion was dropped down into his
coat-pocket. A motion backwards was perceptible through his whole body,
and his coat was tightly pulled down behind. A powerful twitching showed
itself at the corners of his mouth, and a certain stammering might be
noticed in his speech, although he stood perfectly still, and appeared
to observe nothing; while the little rascals, who had expected a
terrible explosion from their well-laid train, stole off to a distance;
but oh, wonder! the Candidate stood stock-still, and seemed not at all
aware that anything was going on in his coat-laps.

All this while, however, there was in him such a powerful inclination to
laugh that he hastened to relate an anecdote which should give him the
opportunity of doing so. And whether it was the nomads of Mrs. Gunilla
which diverted him from his system, or the visit of the little herd of
nomads to his pockets, true it is there was an end of his philosophy for
that evening. Beyond this, he appeared now to wish by cheerful discourse
to entertain Mrs. Gunilla, in which he perfectly succeeded; and so mild
and indulgent was he towards her, that Elise began to question with
herself whether Mrs. Gunilla's mode of argument were not the best and
the most successful.

The children stood not far off, and observed all the actions of Jacobi.
"If he goes out, he will feel the cushion," said they. "He will fetch a
book! Now he comes--ah!"

The Candidate really went out for a book from his room, but he stepped
with the most stoical repose, though with a miserably backward-pulled
coat, through the astonished troop of children, and left the room.

When he returned, the coat sate quite correctly; the cushion evidently
was not there. The astonishment of the children rose to the highest
pitch, and there was no end to their conjectures. The Queen-bee imagined
that there must be a hole in his pocket, through which the pincushion
had fallen on the stairs. Petrea, in whose suggestion the joke
originated, was quite dismayed about the fate of the cushion.

Never once did it enter into the innocent heads of the children that the
Candidate had done all this in order to turn their intended surprise on
him into a surprise on themselves.

"How came you to be acquainted with Mrs. Gunilla W.?" asked Elise from
Jacobi when the lady was gone.

"When I was studying in----," replied he, "I routed a small room on the
ground-floor of the same house where she lived. As I at that time was in
very narrow circumstances, I had my dinner from an eating-house near,
where all was supplied at the lowest price; but it often was so
intolerably bad, that I was obliged to send it back untasted, and
endeavour, by a walk in the fresh air instead, to appease my hunger. I
had lived thus for some time, and was, as may be imagined, become meagre
enough, when Mrs. W., with whom I was not personally acquainted,
proposed to me, through her housekeeper, that she should provide me with
a dinner at the same low charge as the eating-house. I was astonished,
but extremely delighted, and thankfully accepted the proposal. I soon
discovered, however, that she wished in this way to become my benefactor
without its appearing so, and without my thanks being necessary. From
this day I lived in actual plenty. But her goodness did not end here.
During a severely cold winter, in which I went out in a very thin
great-coat, I received quite unexpectedly one trimmed with fur. From
whom it came I could not for some time discover, till chance gave me a
clue which led me to the Chamberlain's lady. But could I thank her for
it? No; she became regularly angry and scolded me if I spoke of the
gratitude which I felt and always shall feel for her kindness."

Tears filled the eyes of Jacobi as he told this, and both Elise's eyes
and those of her husband beamed with delight at this relation.

"It is," said Judge Prank, "a proof how much goodness there is in the
world, although at a superficial glance one is so disposed to doubt it.
That which is bad usually noises itself abroad, is echoed back from
side to side, and newspapers and social circles find so much to say
about it; whilst that which is good likes best to go--like
sunshine--quietly through the world."




CHAPTER V.

DISAGREEABLE NEWS.


The "skirmish"--as Mrs. Gunilla called the little strift she had with
the Candidate, about monads and nomads--appeared to have displeased
neither of them, but rather, on the contrary, to have excited in them a
desire for others of the same kind; and as Elise, who had no great
inclination to spend her evenings alone with him, used frequently to
invite Mrs. Gunilla to drink tea with them, it was not long before she
and the Candidate were again in full disputation together. If the
Assessor happened also to come in, there was a terrible noise. The
Candidate screamed, and leapt about almost beside himself, but was
fairly out-talked, because his voice was weak, and because Mrs. Gunilla
and the Assessor, who between them two selves never were agreed, leagued
themselves nevertheless against him. Jacobi, notwithstanding this, had
often the right side of an argument, and bore his overthrow with the
best temper in the world. Perhaps he might have lost his courage,
however, as well as his voice in this unequal contest--he himself
declared he should--had he not suddenly abandoned the field. He vanished
almost entirely from the little evening circle.

"What has become of our Candidate?" sometimes asked Mrs. Gunilla. "I
shall be much surprised if his monad or nomad has not carried him off to
the land of the nomads! He, he, he, he!"

Judge Frank and wife also began to question with some anxiety, "What has
become of our Candidate?"

Our Candidate belonged to that class of persons who easily win many
friends. His cheerful easy temper, his talents, and good social
qualifications, made him much beloved and sought after, especially in
smaller circles. It was here, therefore, as it had been in the
University--he was drawn into a jovial little company of good fellows,
where, in a variety of ways, they could amuse themselves, and where the
cheerful spirit and talents of Jacobi were highly prized. He allowed
himself, partly out of good-nature and partly out of his own folly, to
be led on by them, and to take part in a variety of pranks, which,
through the influence of some members of the Club, went on from little
to more, and our Candidate found himself, before he was aware of what he
was about, drawn into a regular carouse--all which operated most
disadvantageously upon his affairs--kept him out late at night, and only
permitted him to rise late in the morning, and then with headache and
disinclination to business.

There was, of course, no lack of good friends to bring these tidings to
Judge Frank. He was angry, and Elise was seriously distressed, for she
had begun to like Jacobi, and had hoped for so much from his connexion
with the children.

"It won't do, it won't do," grumbled Judge Frank. "There shall very soon
be an end to this! A pretty story indeed! I shall tell him--I, if
he----But, my sweet friend, you yourself are to blame in this affair;
you should concern yourself a little about him; you are so _fiere_ and
distant to him; and what amusement do you provide for him here of an
evening? The little quarrels between Mrs. Gunilla and Munter cannot be
particularly amusing to him, especially when he is always out-talked by
them. It would be a thousand times better for the young man if you would
allow him to read aloud to you; yes, if it were romances, or whatever in
the world you would. You should stimulate his talent for music; it would
give yourself pleasure, and between whiles you could talk a little sound
reason with him, instead of disputing about things which neither he nor
you understand! If you had only begun in that way at first, he would
perhaps never have been such a swashbuckler as he is, and now to get
order and good manners back into the house one must have scenes. I'll
not allow such goings on!--he shall hear about it to-morrow morning!
I'll give that pretty youth something which he shall remember!"

"Ah!" said Elise, "don't be too severe, Ernst! Jacobi is good; and if
you talk seriously yet kindly to him, I am persuaded it will have the
best effect."

Judge Frank made no reply, but walked up and down the room in very ill
humour.

"Would you like to hear some news of your neighbour the
pasquinade-writer?" asked Assessor Munter, who just then entered with a
dark countenance. "He is sick, sick to death of a galloping
consumption--he will not write any more pasquinades."

"Who looks after his little girl?" asked Elise; "I see her sometimes
running about the street like a wild cat."

"Yes, there's a pretty prospect for her," snorted out the Assessor.
"There is a person in the house--a person they call her, she ought to be
called reptile, or rather devil--who is said to look after the
housekeeping, but robs him, and ruins that child. Would you believe it?
she and two tall churls of sons that she has about her amuse themselves
with terrifying that little girl by dressing themselves up whimsically,
and acting the goblins in the twilight. It is more than a miracle if
they do not drive her mad!"

"Poor wretch!" exclaimed Judge Frank, in rage and abhorrence. "Good
heavens! how much destruction of character there is, how much crime,
which the arm of the law cannot reach! And that child's father, can he
bear that it is so treated?"

"He is wholly governed by that creature--that woman," said Munter;
"besides, sick in bed as he now is, he knows but little of what goes on
in the house."

"And if he die," asked the Judge, "is there nobody who will look after
that girl? Has he a relation or friend?"

"Nobody in this world," returned Jeremias. "I have inquired
particularly. The bird in the wood is not more defenceless than that
child. Poverty there will be in the house; and what little there is,
that monster of a housekeeper will soon run through."

"What can one do?" asked the Judge, in real anxiety. "Do you know
anything, Munter, that one could do?"

"Nothing as yet," returned he; "at present things must take their own
course. I counsel nobody to interfere; for he is possessed of the woman,
and she is possessed of the devil: and as for the girl, he will have her
constantly with him, and lets her give way to all her petulances. But
this cannot long endure. In a month, perhaps, he will be dead; and he
who sees the falling sparrow will, without doubt, take care of the poor
child. At present nobody can save her from the hands of these harpies.
Now, good night! But I could not help coming to tell you this little
history, because it lay burning at my heart; and people have the very
polite custom of throwing their burdens upon others, in order to lighten
themselves. Adieu!"

The Judge was very much disturbed this evening. "What he had just heard
weighed heavily on his heart.

"It is singular," said he, "how often Mr. N.'s course and mine have
clashed. He has really talent, but bad moral character; on that account
I have opposed his endeavours to get into office, and thus operated
against his success. It was natural that he should become my enemy, and
I never troubled myself about it! but now I wish--the unhappy man, how
miserably he lies there! and that poor, poor child! Stroem," said he,
calling to his servant, "is the Candidate at home? No? and it is nearly
eleven! The thousand! To-morrow he shall find out where he is at home!"




CHAPTER VI.

HERO-DEEDS.


On the following morning, as Judge Frank drew aside his window-curtains,
the sun--the sun, so powerful in its beams and its silence--shone into
his chamber, lighting it with its glorious splendour. Those sunbeams
went directly to his heart.

"Dear Elise," said he, when his wife was awake, "I have a great deal to
do to-day. Perhaps it would be better if you would speak with Jacobi,
and give him his lecture. Ladies, in such circumstances, have more
influence on men than we men can have. Besides this, what can be bent
must not be broken. I--in short, I fancy you will manage the affair
best. It is so beautiful to-day! Could you not take the children a long
walk? It would do both them and you good, and upon the way you would
have an excellent opportunity for an explanation. Should this be of no
avail, then I will--but I would gladly avoid being angry with him; one
has things enough to vex one without that."

The Judge was not the only person in the house whom the sun inspired
with thoughts of rambling. The Candidate had promised the children on
some "very fine day" to take them to a wood, where there were plenty of
hazel-bushes, and where they would gather a rich harvest of nuts.
Children have an incomparable memory for all such promises; and the
little Franks thought that no day could by any possibility be more
beautiful or more suitable for a great expedition than the present, and
therefore, as soon as they discovered that the Candidate and their
parents thought the same, their joy rose actually as high as the roof.
Brigitta had not hands enough for Petrea and Eva, so did they skip about
when she wished to dress them.

Immediately after noon the procession set forth; Henrik and the
Queen-bee marched first, next came Eva and Leonore, between whom was
Petrea, each one carrying a little basket containing a piece of cake, as
provision for their journey. Behind the column of children came the
mother, and near her the Candidate, drawing a little wicker-carriage, in
which sate little Gabriele, looking gravely about with her large brown
eyes.

"Little Africa"--so the children called their little dark-eyed neighbour
from the Cape--stood at her door as the little Franks tripped forth from
theirs. Petrea, with an irresistible desire to make her acquaintance,
rushed across the street and offered her the piece of cake which she had
in her basket. The little wild creature snatched the piece of cake with
violence, showed her row of white teeth, and vanished in the doorway,
whilst Elise seized Petrea's hand, in order to keep her restless spirit
in check.

As soon as they had passed the gate of the city the children were
permitted full freedom, and they were not much more composed in their
demeanour than a set of young calves turned out for the first time into
a green meadow. We must even acknowledge that the little Queen-bee fell
into a few excesses, such as jumping over ditches where they were the
broadest, and clapping her hands and shouting to frighten away
phlegmatical crows. It was not long, however, before she gave up these
outbreaks, and turned her mind to a much sedater course; and then,
whenever a stiff-necked millifolium or gaudy hip came in her way, she
carefully broke it off, and preserved it in her apron, for the use of
the family. Henrik ran back every now and then to the wicker-carriage,
in order to kiss "the baby," and give her the very least flowers he
could find. Petrea often stumbled and fell, but always sprang up
quickly, and then unaffrightedly continued her leaping and springing.

The Candidate also, full of joyous animal spirits, began to sing aloud,
in a fine tenor voice, the song, "Seats of the Vikings! Groves old and
hoary," in which the children soon joined their descant, whilst they
marched in time to the song. Elise, who gave herself up to the full
enjoyment of the beautiful day and the universal delight, had neither
inclination nor wish to interrupt this by any disagreeable explanation;
she thought to herself that she would defer it a while.

"Nay, only look, only look, sisters! Henrik, come here!" exclaimed
little Petrea, beckoning with the hand, leaping, and almost out of
herself for delight, whilst she looked through the trellis-work of a
tall handsome gate into pleasure-grounds which were laid out in the
old-fashioned manner, and ornamented with clipped trees. Many little
heads soon looked with great curiosity through the trellis-gate; they
seemed to see Paradise within it; and then up came the Candidate, not
like a threatening cherub with a flaming sword, but a good angel, who
opened the door of this paradise to the enraptured children. This
surprise had been prepared for them by Elise and the Candidate, who had
obtained permission from the Dowager Countess S * * * to take the
children on their way to the nut-wood through her park.

Here the children found endless subject for admiration and inquiry, nor
could either the Candidate or their mother answer all their questions.
Before long the hearts of the children were moved at sight of a little
leaden Cupid, who stood weeping near a dry fountain.

"Why does he cry?" asked they.

"Probably because the water is all gone," answered the Candidate,
smiling.

Presently again they were enchanted by sight of a Chinese temple, which
to their fancy contained all the magnificence in the world--instead of,
as was the case, a quantity of fowls; then they were filled with
astonishment at trees in the form of pyramids--they never had seen
anything so wonderful, so beautiful! But the most wonderful thing was
yet to come.

They reached a gloomy part of the grounds. Melancholy sounds,
incoherent, yet pleasurable, became audible, accompanied by an
uninterrupted splashing of water. The children walked slower and closer
together, in a state of excited expectation, and a kind of shuddering
curiosity. The melancholy tones and the falling water became more and
more distinct, as they found themselves inclosed in a thick fir-wood;
presently, however, an opening to the right showed itself, and then
thickly wreathed with a wild growth of plants and heavily-leaved trees,
the vault of a grotto revealed itself, within which, and in the
distance, stood a large white figure, with aged head, long beard,
crooked back, and goat's legs. To his lips he held a pandean pipe, from
which the extraordinary sounds appeared to proceed. Little waterfalls
leapt here and there from the rocks around, and then collected
themselves at the foot of the statue in a large basin, in which the
figure seemed, with a dreamy countenance, to contemplate himself and the
leaf-garlanded entrance of the grotto.

The Candidate informed them that this was the Wood-god Pan; but what
further information he gave respecting the faith of the ancients in this
deity of nature was listened to by nobody but the Queen-bee, who,
however, shook her wise head over the want of wisdom in the Grecians who
could believe on such a god; and by Elise, who loved to discover in the
belief of antiquity a God of nature, which makes itself felt also in our
days, but in a truer and, as we think, a diviner sense.

The exhibition in the grotto had produced its effect upon all the
spectators, great as well as small; but the brain of the little Petrea
seemed quite intoxicated, not to say crazed by it. The Wood-god, with
his music, his half-animal, half-human figure, although only of gypsum,
and, as the Candidate declared, the offspring only of a dim fancy, as
well as that it was without life or actuality, still remained to her
imagination a living existence, as real as wonderful. She could see
nothing, think of nothing, but the Wood-god; and the foreboding of a new
and wonderful world filled her soul with a delicious terror.

In the mean time the Candidate conducted Elise, by a path which wound
among alders and birches, up the mountain in which the grotto was. When
they reached the top, all was sunny and cheerful; and behold upon a
mound was set out, so pleasantly in the sunshine, a little collation of
berries and fruit. It was the Candidate, who had great pleasure in being
the kind-hearted host on such occasions, who had provided this little
surprise for Elise and the children; and never, indeed, was a surprise
more welcome or more joyous. It is the most thankful thing in the world
to give pleasure to children; and, moreover, the goodwill of the mother
is always obtained thereby.

The Candidate spread his cloak upon a green slope under a hedge of
roses, on which Elise's favourite flowers were still blooming, as a seat
for herself and "the baby," which now, lifted out of the
wicker-carriage, had its green silk bonnet taken off, and its golden
locks bathed in sunshine. He chose out the best fruit for her and her
mother; and then seating himself on the grass near her, played with her,
and drove away the flies from her and her mother with a spray of roses,
whilst the other children ran about at a distance, enjoying with all the
zest of childhood, gooseberries and freedom. The trees soughed in the
soft south wind, whilst the melodious sighs of the Wood-god, and the
splash of the water, mingled gently with the whispering leaves. It was a
delicious time, and its soft influence stole into the soul of Elise. The
sun, the scent of the roses, the song of the wood and of the water, and
the Syrinx, the beautiful scene before her, the happy children--all
these called up suddenly into her breast that summer of the heart, in
which all sentiments, all thoughts, are like beautiful flowers, and
which makes life seem so light and so lovely: she conceived a friendship
for that young man who had occasioned it, and whose good heart beamed
forth from his eyes, which at one moment were fixed on the blue heavens,
and then on her own soft blue eyes, with an expression of devotion and a
certain pure earnestness, which she had never observed in him before.
Elise felt that she could now undertake the explanation with him; she
felt that she could talk with him openly and warmly as a sister, and
that the truth would flow from her lips, without wounding him or giving
him pain.

Scarcely, however, had she with cordial, though with tremulous voice,
began to speak, when an uneasy movement among the children interrupted
her. Some looked in the hedges, some ran about under the trees, and the
name "Petrea! Petrea!" was repeated in every variety of tone. The mother
looked uneasily around, and the Candidate sprang up to see what was
amiss. It was nothing uncommon for Petrea to separate herself from the
rest of the children, and occupied by her own little thoughts, to lag
behind; on that account, therefore, nobody had at first troubled
themselves because she was not with them at the collation, for they
said, "she will soon come." Afterwards, Elise and the Candidate were too
much occupied by their own thoughts; and the children said as usual,
"she'll soon come." But when she did not come, they began to seek for
her, and Elise and the Candidate came to their assistance. They ran back
to the grotto; they sought and called, but all in vain--Petrea was
nowhere to be found! and uneasiness very soon changed itself into actual
anxiety.

We will now ourselves go in quest of Petrea. So enchanted was she with
the Wood-god and his music, that no sooner had she, with the others,
begun to climb the hill, than she turned back to the grotto, and there,
transported by its wonderful world, she was suddenly possessed by a
desire to acquaint her father and Brigitta, with her having seen the
Wood-god. Resolve and action are much more one with children than with
women. To be the first who should carry to the father the important
tidings, "Father, I have seen the Wood-god!" was a temptation too strong
for Petrea's ambition and craving for sympathy.

She had heard them say that they should rest on the hill; and as her
organ of locality was as feeble as her imagination was powerful, she
never doubted for a moment of being able to run home and back before
they were aware even of her absence. As for the rest, to confess the
truth, she thought nothing at all about it; but with a loudly-beating
heart, and the words, "Oh, father! we have seen the Wood-god!" on her
lips, she made a spring, and rushed forward on the wings of fancy as
fast as her little legs would carry her in a direction exactly the
opposite of that which led homeward, and which at the same time removed
her from the grotto; never thinking, the poor Petrea! that in this world
there are many ways. Before long, however, she found it necessary to
stand still, in order to rest herself: it was all so beautiful around
her; delicious odours breathed from the wild flowers; the birds sang;
the heaven was cloudless; and here, where no Cupids nor Chinese temples
dazzled her thoughts, the very remembrance of the god Pan vanished from
her soul, and instead of it a thought, or more properly speaking a
sentiment, took possession of it--a holy and beautiful sentiment, which
the mother had early instilled into the hearts of her children. Petrea
saw herself solitary, yet at the same time she felt that she was not so;
in the deliciousness of the air, in the beauty of nature, she perceived
the presence of a good spirit, which she had been taught to call Father;
and filled, as her heart seemed to be, by a sense of his goodness and
affection, which appeared never to have been so sensibly impressed upon
her mind as then, her heart felt as if it must dissolve itself in love
and happiness. She sank down on the grass, and seemed to be on the way
to heaven. But, ah! the way thither is not so easy; and these heavenly
foretastes remain only a short time in the souls of children, as well as
of grown people.

That which brought Petrea from her heavenly journey back to the earth
again was a squirrel, which sprang directly across her path, and sent
her forth immediately in chase of it. To catch such game, and to carry
it home, would be indeed in the highest degree a memorable action. "What
would Henrik and my sisters say? What would all the city say? Perhaps it
will get into the newspapers!--perhaps the king may get to hear of
it!"--thought Petrea, whilst, out of herself with ambition and
earnestness, she pursued the little squirrel over stock and stone.

Her frock was torn; her hands and feet were bruised; but that was a mere
nothing! She felt it not, more particularly--oh, height of felicity!--as
she fell down, and at that same moment grasped in her trembling hands
her little prey. Petrea cried for delight, and shouted to her mother and
sisters, who--could not hear her.

"Oh, thou little most loveable creature!" said Petrea, endeavouring at
the same time to kiss her little captive, in return for which that most
loveable little creature bit her by the chin. Surprised, and sorely
smarting from the pain, Petrea began to cry; yet for all that would not
let go the squirrel, although the blood flowed from the wound. Petrea
ran forward, wondering that she never came to the great trellis-gate,
through which she knew she must pass in order to reach home. Whilst she
thus wondered with herself, and ran, and struggled with her little
untractable prisoner, she saw a gentleman coming towards her. It never
once occurred to her that this could be any other than her father, and
almost transported for joy, she exclaimed, "Father, I have seen the
Wood-god!"

Greatly astonished to hear himself thus parentally addressed, the young
man looked up from the book in which he read, gazed at Petrea, smiled,
and replied, "Nay, my child, he is gone in that direction," pointing
with his finger towards that quarter whence Petrea had come. Imagining
at once that he meant the Candidate, Petrea replied with anxiety and a
quick foreboding that she was on a wrong track, "Oh, no, it is not he!"
and then turned suddenly back again.

She abandoned now all thoughts of running home, and was only desirous of
finding those whom she had so thoughtlessly left. She ran back,
therefore, with all her speed, the way she had come, till she reached
where two roads branched off, and there unfortunately taking the wrong
one, came into a wild region, where she soon perceived how entirely
confused she had become. She no longer knew which way to go, and in
despair threw herself into the grass and wept. All her ambition was
gone; she let the squirrel run away, and gave herself up to her own
comfortless feelings. She thought now of the uneasiness and anxiety of
her mother, and wept all the more at the thought of her own folly. But,
however, consoling thoughts, before long, chased away these desponding
ones. She dried her eyes with her dress--she had lost her
pocket-handkerchief--and looking around her she saw a quantity of fine
raspberries growing in a cleft of the hill. "Raspberries!" exclaimed
she, "my mother's favourite berries!" And now we may see our little
Petrea scrambling up the cliff with all her might, in order to gather
the lovely fruit. She thought that with a bouquet of raspberries in her
hand, she could throw herself at the feet of her mother, and pray for
forgiveness. So thought she, and tore up the raspberry bushes, and new
courage and new hope revived the while in her breast. If, thought she,
she clambered only a little way higher, could she not discover where
her home was? should she not see her mother, father, sisters, nay, the
whole world? Certainly. What a bright idea it was!

With one hand full of raspberries, the other assisted her to climb; but,
ah! first one foot slipped on the dry smooth grass, and then the other.
The left hand could no longer sustain the whole weight of her body; the
right hand would not let go the raspberries. A moment of anguish, a
violent effort, and then Petrea rolled down the cliff into a thicket of
bushes and nettles, where for the present we will leave her, in order to
look after the others.

The anxiety of the mother is not to be described, as after a whole hour
spent with Jacobi and Henrik (the little Queen-bee watched over the
other children near Pan's grotto), in seeking and calling for Petrea,
all was in vain. There were many ponds in the park, and they could not
conceal from themselves that it was possible she might have fallen into
one. It was a most horrible idea for Elise, and sent an anguish like
death into her heart, as she thought of returning in the evening to her
husband with one child missing, and that one of his favourites--missing
through her own negligence. Death itself seemed to her preferable.

Breathless, and pale as a corpse, she wandered about, and more than once
was near sinking to the earth. In vain the Candidate besought her to
spare herself; to keep herself quiet, and leave all to him. In vain! She
heard him not; and restless and unhappy, she sought the child herself.
Jacobi was afraid to leave her long alone, and kept wandering near her;
whilst Henrik ran into other parts of the park, seeking about and
calling.

It was full two hours of fruitless search after the lost one, when the
Candidate had again joined the despairing mother, that at the very same
moment their glances both fell suddenly on the same object--it was
Petrea! She lay in a thicket at the foot of the hill; drops of blood
were visible on her face and dress, and a horrible necklace--a yellow
spangled snake!--glittered in the sun around her neck. She lay
motionless, and appeared as if sleeping. The mother uttered a faint cry
of terror, and would have thrown herself upon her, had not the Candidate
withheld her.

"For heaven's sake," said he, fervently, and pale as death, "be still;
nothing perhaps is amiss; but it is the poisonous snake of our
woods--the aspic! An incautious movement, and both you and Petrea may be
lost! No, you must not; your life is too precious--but I--promise me to
be still, and----"

Elise was scarcely conscious of what she did. "Away! away!" she said,
and strove to put Jacobi aside with her weak hands; she herself would
have gone, but her knees supported her no longer--she staggered, and
fell to the ground.

In that same moment the Candidate was beside Petrea, and seizing the
snake by the neck with as much boldness as dexterity, he slung it to a
distance. By this motion awakened, Petrea shuddered, opened her
sleep-drunken eyes, and looking around her, exclaimed, "Ah, ah, father!
I have seen the Wood-god!"

"God bless thee and thy Wood-god!" cried the delighted Candidate,
rejoicing over this indisputable token of life and health; and then
clasping her to his breast he bore her to her mother. But the mother
neither heard nor saw anything; she lay in a deep swoon, and was first
recalled to consciousness by Henrik's kisses and tears. For a while she
looked about her with anguishful and bewildered looks.

"Is she dead?" whispered she.

"No, no! she lives--she is unhurt!" returned Jacobi, who had thrown
himself on his knees beside her; whilst the little Petrea, kneeling
likewise, and holding forth the bunch of raspberries, sobbed aloud, and
besought her, "Forgive! oh, mamma, forgive me!"

Light returned to the eyes of the mother; she started up, and, with a
cry of inexpressible joy, clasped the recovered child to her breast.

"God be praised and blessed!" cried she, raising her folded hands to
heaven; and then silently giving her hand to Jacobi, she looked at him
with tears, which expressed what was beyond the power of words.

"Thank God! thank God!" said Jacobi, with deep emotion, pressing Elise's
hand to his lips and to his breast. He felt himself happy beyond words.

They now hastened to remove from the dangerous neighbourhood of the
snake, after Jacobi and Henrik had given up, at the desire of the
mother, the probably ineffectual design of seeking out the poisonous but
blameless animal, and killing it on the spot.

All this time the little Queen-bee had sate alone by the grotto,
endeavouring to comfort her sisters, whilst she herself wept bitter
tears over Petrea, whom she never expected to see again: on that very
account her joy was all the greater and louder, when she saw her carried
in the arms of the Candidate; and no sooner did she learn from her
mother how he had rescued her from the fangs of death, than she threw
her arms round his neck in inexpressible gratitude. All this Petrea
heard and saw with the astonishment and curiosity of one who meets with
something unheard of; and then, thus seeing the distress which her
inconsiderateness had occasioned, she herself melted into such
despairing tears, that her mother was obliged to console and cheer her.
Of her fall into the thicket Petrea knew no more than that her head had
felt confused, that she could not get up again, had slept, and then
dreamed of the Wood-god.

In the mean time it had become so late, that the harvest of nuts was not
to be thought of, and as much on the mother's as on Petrea's account, it
was necessary to hasten home. The other children probably would have
grieved more over the unfortunate pleasure journey, had they not felt an
extraordinary desire to relate at home the remarkable occurrences of the
day. New difficulties arose on the return. Petrea--who, besides that she
was weary, was bruised and sadly dirtied by her fall--could not walk,
and therefore it was determined that she must ride in the little
carriage, while the Candidate carried Gabriele. When, however, the
little one saw that Jacobi was without gloves, she would neither allow
him to carry her nor to take hold of her, and set up the most pitiable
cry. Spite of her crying, however, he took up the "little mother," as he
called her; and what neither his nor the mother's persuasion could
effect, was brought about by Henrik's leaps and springs, and
caresses--she was diverted: the tears remained standing half-way down
her cheeks, in the dimples which were suddenly made by her hearty
laughter.

Petrea, after the paroxysm of sorrow and penitence was in measure
abated, began to think herself and her adventures particularly
interesting, and sate in her little carriage a very important personage,
surrounded by her sisters, who could not sufficiently listen to her
relation, and who emulated each other in drawing the little equipage.
As for Jacobi, he drew the carriage; he carried the baby, which soon
fell asleep on his shoulder; he sang songs; told stories, in order to
entertain Elise, who remained a long time pale and depressed, from the
danger which had threatened her, and the anxiety which she had endured.

At length they reached home. They poured forth their adventures:
Brigitta shed tears over her "Little angel-sweet Mamselle Petrea;" and
the father, from the impulse of his feelings, pressed Jacobi to his
heart.

After Petrea's scratches and bruises had been washed with Riga-balsam,
the mother permitted the children to have a supper of pancakes and
raspberry-cream, in order to console them for the unfortunate
expedition. Hereupon the children danced for joy about the table; and
Petrea, who, on account of her misfortunes, received a Benjamin's
portion, regarded it as certain that they always eat such cream in
heaven, wherefore she proposed that it should be called "Angels' food."
This proposition met with the highest approbation, and from this day
"Angels' food" became a well-known dish in the Frank family.

Yet Petrea wept some bitter tears on the breast of her father over the
gentle admonition she received from him; but spite of tears, she soon
slept sweetly in his arms.

And the lecture of the Candidate?

"Stay at home with us this evening," said Elise to him, with a kind,
beseeching glance.

The Candidate stayed with them.




CHAPTER VII.

BREAKERS.


"Stay at home with us this evening," prayed Elise the next day, and for
several other days, and the Candidate stayed.

Never before had he seen Elise so kind, so cordial towards him; never
before had she shown him so much attention as now; and this attention,
this cordiality from a lady who, in her intercourse with men, was
generally only polite and indifferent, flattered his vanity, at the same
time that it penetrated his good heart. All occasion for explanation
and lectures vanished, for the Candidate had entirely renounced his
dissipated friends and companions, and now nobody could talk more
edifying than he on the subject. He agreed so cordially with Elise, that
the fleeting champagne of the orgies foamed only for the moment, leaving
nothing but emptiness and flatness behind. "For once, nay, for a few
times," he was of opinion, "such excesses might be harmless, perhaps
even refreshing; but often repeated--ah! that would be prejudicial, and
demoralising in the highest degree!"

All this seemed to the little Queen-bee, who had heard it, remarkably
well expressed.

Nobody seemed now better pleased at home than Jacobi; he felt himself so
well in the regular course of life which he led, and there seemed so
much that was genuine and fresh in the occupations and pleasures of
those quiet days at home.

In the mean time, the fresh life of the Candidate began to develop its
weak side. Gratitude had, in the first instance, warmed Elise's heart
towards him, and then his own real amiability made it so easy to gratify
the wish of her husband respecting her behaviour towards him, and thus
it soon happened that her intercourse with Jacobi enlivened her own
existence. In many respects their tastes were similar, especially in
their love of music and polite literature, whilst his youthful
enthusiasm gave to their common occupations a higher life and interest.
Discussion lost all character of dispute, and became merely an agreeable
interchange of thought: it was no longer now of any importance to him to
be always right; there was a peculiar kind of pleasure in giving up his
opinion to hers. He knew more out of books than she did, but she knew
more of life--the mother of books, than he; and on this account she, on
her part, proceeded as the older and guiding friend. He felt himself
happy from the influence and gentle guidance of an agreeable woman, and
became more and more devoted to her from his soul.

Still there was a quietness and a charm about this connexion that made
him never forbode danger in it. He loved to be treated as a child by
Elise, and he gave, therefore, free play to his naturally
unsophisticated feelings. Her gentle reproofs were a sort of luxury to
him; he had a delight in sinning, in order to deserve them; and then,
whilst listening to them, how gladly would he have pressed her dress,
or her white and beautiful hand to his lips; there was even a sort of
painfully agreeable sensation to him in his not daring to do so.
Whenever she approached, and he heard her light footsteps, or when he
perceived the soft rose-odour which always accompanied her, it seemed to
become infinitely warm around his heart. But that which, above all the
rest, was the strongest bond between Jacobi and Elise, was her
sufferings. Whenever nervous pain, or domestic unpleasantness, depressed
her spirits; when she bore the not unfrequent ill-humour of her husband
with patience, the heart of Jacobi melted in tenderness towards her, and
he did all that lay in his power to amuse and divert her thoughts, and
even to anticipate her slightest wishes. She could not be insensible to
all this--perhaps also it flattered her vanity to observe the power she
had over this young man--perhaps even she might willingly deceive
herself as to the nature of his sentiments, because she would not
disturb the connexion which lent a sweet charm to her life.

"He loves the children and their mother," said she; "he is their friend
and mine! May he only continue such!"

And certain it is that the children had never been better conducted,
never had learned better, never been happier, than they were now, whilst
Jacobi himself developed a more and more happy ability to teach and
guide.

Adverse fate barricades the shore which the vessel is on the point of
approaching, by dangerous breakers, and interrupts the bond between the
dearest friends, which is just about to be cemented eternally. It was
this fate which, at the very time when Jacobi was exhibiting his
character in the fairest point of view, occasioned the Judge to exhibit
the darker side of his.

Judge Frank belonged to that class of persons who are always in the best
humour the more they have to do, and the more active is the life they
lead. And just now there had occurred a pause in an undertaking for the
country's good, which lay much at the Judge's heart; and delay,
occasioned by a number of little circumstances which he willingly would,
but could not, dissipate, put him into an ill humour. At home he was
often exacting and quarrelsome, particularly towards his wife; thus
placing himself, beside the kind and cheerful Jacobi, in a very
disadvantageous light. He felt this, and was displeased with himself,
and displeased with his wife too, because she seemed to pay but little
regard to his grumbling; occupying herself instead by her
singing-practice with Jacobi. This very singing-practice, too, of which
he himself had been the occasion, began to appear to him too much of a
thing. He seemed to think scolding more agreeable for the ear; in fact,
he was in that edifying state of mind which excites and angers itself
about that which a few good words alone would easily put an end to.

The reading, likewise, which at first he had so zealously recommended,
became now to him another cause of vexation. Precisely at this very time
he wished to have more of the society of his wife of an evening, and
wished her to take more interest in his undertakings and his annoyances;
but whenever he came into the parlour he found them reading, or occupied
by music; and if these ceased at his entrance, there was still an
evident damp on the spirits of all--the entertainment could not proceed;
and if, on the contrary, he said, "Go on with your music (or reading),
go on," and they did so, he was still dissatisfied; and if he did not
very soon return to his own room, he walked up and down like a
snowstorm.

It was precisely this fate, of which we have just now spoken, which
managed it so, that one evening as Judge Frank, the prey of ill humour,
was walking up and down the room, a letter was put into his hand, at
sight of which he burst into an exclamation of joyful surprise. "Nay,
that is indeed delightful," said he, in a very cheerful voice, as soon
as he had read the letter. "Elise! Mrs. S----, Emelie, is here. She is
only just this evening arrived; I must hasten to her directly. Sweet
Elise, will you not come with me? It would be polite."

"Oh, it is so late!" said Elise, much less pleased than her husband;
"and I fancy it rains. Cannot you go alone to-night? to-morrow morning I
will----"

"Well, well, then," said the Judge, suddenly breaking off; and somewhat
offended at her refusal, hastening away.

It was rather late when he returned from his visit, but he was in high
spirits. "She is a most interesting lady," said he; "my best Elise, it
certainly would give you great pleasure to know her intimately."

"Ah! I question that," thought Elise.

"She talks," continued he, "of locating herself here in the city. I hope
we shall decide her to do so."

"I hope not," thought Elise.

"We will do all that we possibly can," said he, "to make her residence
here agreeable. I have invited her to dinner to-morrow."

"To-morrow!" exclaimed Elise, half terrified.

"Yes, to-morrow," answered her husband, peremptorily. "I told her that
to-morrow morning you would pay her a visit, but she insists on first
coming to you. You need not trouble yourself much about the dinner
to-morrow. Emelie will not expect much from an improvised dinner. At all
events, it may be just as good as there is any need for, if people will
only give themselves a little trouble. I hope Emelie will often come and
take up with our simple way of living."

Elise went to rest that night with a depressed heart, and with an
indefinite but most unpleasant feeling, thought of the next day's
dinner, and then dreamed that her husband's "old flame" had set the
house on fire, and robbed the whole family of its shelter.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE IMPROVISED DINNER.


You housewives who know the important meaning of a roast, who know the
difficulties which sometimes overwhelm you, especially when you must
improvise a dinner; you who know that notwithstanding all inspiration,
both of understanding and inclination--yet inspiration is necessary to
all improvisation--one cannot inspire either chickens or heath-cocks to
come flying into the important dish, when the crust is ready to put on
it;--you housewives who have spent many a long morning in thoughts of
cookery and in anguish, without daring to pray the Lord for help,
although continually tempted to do so; you can sympathise in Elise's
troubles, as she, on the morning of this important dinner, saw the
finger of the clock approach twelve without having been able to
improvise a roast.

It is true that an improvised dinner might do without a roast: this we
grant as a general law; but in the case of this particular dinner, we
deny it altogether, in proof of which we might easily give the
arrangement of the whole dinner, did we not flatter ourselves that we
are believed on our bare word. Beyond this, the Judge was a declared
lover of a roast, and of all kinds of animal food, which circumstance
increased still more Elise's difficulty; and as if to make difficulty
still greater, Elise, on this very day, was remarkably in want of
assistants, for her husband had sent out, on his own business, those
servants who, on extraordinary occasions, Elise found very good help.
The cook, too, was confused to-day in a remarkable manner; the children
were in a fermentation; Eva and Leonore quarrelled; Petrea tore a hole
in her new frock; Henrik broke a water-bottle and six glasses; the baby
cried and screamed for nothing; the clock was on the stroke of twelve,
and no roast would come!

Elise was just on the point of falling into despair over roasts, cooks,
the dinner, the child, nay, over the whole world, when the door opened,
and the words, "your most devoted servant," were spoken out shrilly and
joyously, and the widow of the Court Chamberlain--to Elise she seemed an
angel of light from heaven--stood in the room, with her beaming friendly
countenance, took out of her monstrous reticule one chicken after
another, and laid them upon the table, fixing her eye on Elise, and
making with each one a little curtsey to her, upon which she laughed
heartily. Enraptured by the sight, Elise embraced first the lady
Chamberlain, then the chickens, with which she hastily sprang into the
kitchen, and returning, poured forth her thanks and all her cares to
this friend in need.

"Well, well, patience!" exhorted Mrs. Gunilla, kindly and full of
cordial sympathy, and somewhat touched by Elise's communication.
"Best-beloved, one should not take it so much to heart--such troubles as
these soon pass away--yes, indeed, they soon pass. Now listen, and I'll
tell you something, 'when need is greatest, help is nearest.' Yes, yes,
remember that! As for the chickens, I saw them in a peasant's cart, as I
crossed the market, and as I knew what was going on here, I lost no time
in buying them and bringing them, under my cloak, and I have nearly run
myself out of breath, in my haste. He, he, he! And so now I must go,
for the dear lady must dress herself nicely, and so must I too. Adieu,
dear Elise; I wish you the happiness of getting both the dinner and the
young folks in order. He, he, he!"

Gunilla went, dinner-time came, and with it the guests and the Judge,
who had spent the whole morning in the business of his own office, out
of the house.

Emelie, the Colonel's widow, was elegant in the highest degree; looked
handsome, and distinguished, and almost outdid herself in politeness;
but still Elise, spite even of herself, felt stiff and stupid by the
side of her husband's "old flame." Beyond this, she had now a great
distraction.

"Oh, that the chickens may be nicely done!" was the incessant
master-thought of Elise's soul; and it prevailed over the Pope, the
Church of St. Peter's, Thorwaldsen and Pasta, and over every subject on
which they talked.

The hour of dinner was come, and yet the dinner kept the company
waiting. The Judge, who expected from everybody else the punctuality
which he himself practised, began to suffer from what Elise called his
"dinner-fever," and threw uneasy glances first at the dining-room door,
and then at his wife, whose situation, it must be confessed, was not a
very enviable one. She endeavoured to look quite calm, but often
whispered something to the little Louise, which sent her very
importantly in and out of the room. Elise's entertainment, both that
part which was audible, and that which was inaudible, was probably at
the moment carried on something after the following fashion:

"It must be inexpressibly pleasant to know," (ah, how unbearably long it
is!) "it must be very interesting." (I wish Ernst would fire again on
his "old flame," and forget dinner.) "Yes, indeed, that was very
remarkable." (Now are those chickens not roasted!) "Poor Spain!" (Now,
thank goodness, dinner is ready at last--if the chickens are only well
done!)

And now to dinner! A word which brightens all countenances, and enlivens
all tempers. Elise began to esteem the Colonel's widow very highly,
because she kept up such a lively conversation, and she hoped this would
divert attention from any of the dishes which were not particularly
successful. The Judge was a polite and agreeable host, and he was
particularly fond of dinner-time, when he would willingly have made all
men partakers of his good appetite, good humour, and even of his good
eating--N. B. if this really was good--but if the contrary happened to
be the case, his temper could not well sustain it.

During the dinner Elise saw now and then little clouds come over her
husband's brow, but he himself appeared anxious to disperse them, and
all went on tolerably till the chickens came. As the Judge, who adhered
to all old customs, was cutting them up, he evidently found them tough,
whereupon a glance was sent across the table to his wife which went to
her heart like the stab of a knife; but no sooner was the first pang
over than this reproachful glance aroused a degree of indignation in her
which determined her to steel herself against a misfortune which in no
case was her fault; she, therefore, grew quite lively and talkative, and
never once turned her eyes to her husband, who, angry and silent, sate
there with a very hot brow, and the knife sticking still in the fowls.

But, after all, she felt as if she could again breathe freely when the
dinner was over, and on that very account longed just to speak one word
of reconciliation with her husband; but he now seemed to have only eyes
and ears for Emelie; nor was it long before the two fell into a lively
and most interesting conversation, which certainly would have given
Elise pleasure, and in which she might have taken part, had not a
feeling of depression stolen over her, as she fancied she perceived a
something cold and depreciating in the manners of her husband towards
her. She grew stiller and paler; all gathered themselves round the
brilliant Emelie; even the children seemed enchanted by her. Henrik
presented her with a beautiful flower, which he had obtained from Louise
by flattery. Petrea seemed to have got up a passion for her father's
"old flame," took a footstool and sat near her, and kissed her hand as
soon as she could possess herself of it.

The lady devoted herself exclusively to her old worshipper, cast the
beams of her beautiful eyes upon him, and smiled bewitchingly.

"This is a great delight!" thought Elise, as she wiped away a traitorous
tear; "but I will keep a good face on it!"

The Candidate, who perceived all this, quickly withdrew from the lady's
enchanted circle, in which he also had been involved, and taking "the
baby" on his knee, began to relate a story which was calculated as much
to interest the mother as the child. The children were soon around him:
Petrea herself forsook her new flame to listen, and even Elise for the
moment was so amused by it that she forgot everything else. That was
precisely what Jacobi wanted, but it was not that which pleased the
Judge. He rose for a moment, in order to hear what it was which had so
riveted the attention of his wife.

"I cannot conceive," said he to her in a half-whisper, "how you can take
delight in such absurdity; nor do I think it good for the children that
they should be crammed with such nonsense!"

At length Emelie rose to take her leave, overwhelming Elise with a flood
of polite speeches, which she was obliged to answer as well as she
could, and the Judge, who had promised to show her the lions of the
place, accompanied her; on which the rest of the guests dispersed
themselves. The elder children accompanied the Candidate to the
school-room to spend an hour in drawing; the younger went to play;
Petrea wished to borrow Gabriele, who at the sight of a gingerbread
heart could not resist, and as a reward received a bit of it; Elise
retired to her own chamber.

Poor Elise! she dared not at this moment descend into her own heart; she
felt a necessity to abstain from thought--a necessity entirely to forget
herself and the troubling impressions with which to-day had overwhelmed
her soul. A full hour was before her, an hour of undisturbed repose, and
she hastened to her manuscript, in order to busy herself with those rich
moments of life which her pen could call up at pleasure, and to forget
the poor and weary present--in one word, to lose the lesser in the
higher reality. The sense of suffering, of which the little annoyances
of life gave her experience, made her alive to the sweet impressions of
that beauty and that harmonious state of existence which was so dear to
her soul.

She wrote and wrote and wrote, her heart was warm, her eyes filled with
tears, the words glowed upon her page, life became bright, the moments
flew. An hour and a half passed. Her husband's tea-time came; he had
such delight in coming home at this hour to find his wife and his
children all assembled round the tea-table in the family room. It very
rarely happened that Elise had not all in readiness for him; but now the
striking of seven o'clock roused her suddenly from her writing; she laid
down her pen, and was in the act of rising when her husband entered.

A strong expression of displeasure diffused itself over his countenance
as he saw her occupation.

"You gave us to-day a very bad dinner, Elise," said he, going up to her
and speaking with severity; "but when this novel-writing occupies so
much of your time, it is no wonder that you neglect your domestic
duties; you get to care really just as little about these, as you
trouble yourself about my wishes."

It would have been easy for Elise to excuse herself, and make all right
and straight; but the severe tone in which her husband spoke, and his
scornful glance, wounded her deeply. "You must have patience with me,
Ernst," said she, not without pride and some degree of vexation; "I am
not accustomed to renounce all innocent pleasures; my education, my
earlier connexions, have not prepared me for this."

This was like pricking the Judge in the eye, and with more bitterness
and severity than usual he replied:

"You should have thought about that before you gave me your hand; before
you had descended into so humble and care-full a circle. It is too late
now. Now I will----" but he did not finish his sentence, for he himself
perceived a storm rising within him, before which he yielded. He went to
the door, opened it, and said in a calm voice, yet still with an
agitated tone and glance, "I would just tell you that I have taken
tickets for the concert to-morrow, if you would wish to go. I hoped to
have found you at the tea-table; but I see that is not at all thought
of--it is just as desolate and deserted there as if the plague were in
the house. Don't give yourself any trouble, I shall drink my tea at the
club!" and thus saying he banged the door and went away.

Elise seated herself--she really could not stand--and hid her face in
her trembling hands. "Good heavens! is it come to this? Ernst, Ernst!
What words! what looks! And I, wretched being, what have I said?"

Such were Elise's broken and only half-defined thoughts, whilst tears
streamed down her cheeks.

"Words, words, words!" says Hamlet, disparagingly. But God preserve us
from the destructive power of words! There are words which can separate
hearts sooner than sharp swords--there are words whose sting can remain
in the heart through a whole life!

Elise wept long and violently; her whole soul was in excitement.

In moments of violent struggle, bad and good spirits are at hand; they
surrounded Elise and spoke to her thus:

Bad Spirits.--"Think on that which thou hast given up! think on thy own
merits! Recollect the many little acts of injustice which thou hast had
to bear, the bitter moments which the severity of thy husband has
occasioned thee! Why shouldst thou humbly crawl in the dust? Raise
thyself, depressed one! raise thyself, offended wife! think of thy own
worth, of thy own rights! Do not allow thyself to be subjected; show
some character. Requite that which thou hast endured. Thou also canst
annoy; thou also canst punish! Take refuge in thy nerves, in unkindness;
make use of thy power, and enjoy the pleasure of revenge!"

Good Spirits.--"Think on thy wants, on thy faults! Recollect all the
patience, all the kindness, all the tenderness which has been shown
thee! Think on the many beautiful moments! Think on thy husband's worth,
on his beautiful noble qualities! Think also on life, how short it is;
how much unavoidable bitterness it possesses; how much which it is easy
either to bear or to chase away; and think on the all-rectifying power
of affection. Tremble before the chains of selfish feeling; free thyself
from them by a new sacrifice of love, and purify the heaven of home.
Ascending clouds can easily expand into a destructive tempest, or can
disperse and leave not a trace in the air. Oh, chase them hence with the
powerful breath of love!"

The happiness of a long life depends, not unfrequently, upon which of
these invisible counsellors in such moments we give ear to. On this it
depends whether the gates of heaven or of hell shall be opened upon
earth to men. Elise listened to the good counsellors; she conversed long
with them, and the more pure recollections they sent into her soul the
lighter it became therein. The light of love was kindled in her, and in
its light she became clear-sighted in many directions. She saw now what
it was right for her to do respecting her novel, and this revelation
warmed her heart. She knew also that this was the only one she should
ever write, and that her husband should never again miss her from the
tea-table, and therefore be obliged to drink his tea at the club (but he
should be reconciled sometime with the sinner--the novel); and she
would, moreover, prepare a dinner for the Colonel's widow, which should
compensate for the unlucky one of this day; and--"Would that Ernst would
but come home soon," thought she, "I would endeavour to banish all his
displeasure, and make all right between us."

It was the bathing-day of the children, and the message that the hour of
bathing was come interrupted Elise's solitude. She ordered Brigitta to
commence her preparations, and when she had somewhat composed herself,
and washed away the traces of her tears with rose-water, she herself
went down into the chamber.

"God be praised for water!" thought Elise, at the first view of the
scene which presented itself. The soft glowing young forms in the clear
warm water, the glimmering of the open fire, the splashing and
jubileering of the children in their unspeakable comfort, their innocent
sport one with another in the peaceful little lake of the bath, in which
they had no fear of raising stormy waves; nay, even Brigitta's happy
face, under her white cap, her lively activity, amid the continual
phrases of "best-beloved," "little alabaster arm," "alabaster foot,"
"lily-of-the-valley bosom," and such like, whilst over the
lily-of-the-valley bosom, and the alabaster arm, she spread soap-foam
scarcely less white, or wrapped them in snowy cloths, out of which
nothing but little lively, glowing, merry faces peeped and played with
one another at bo-peep--all this united to present a picture full of
life and pleasure.

Elise, however, could not fully enjoy it; the thought of what had just
occurred, longings for reconciliation with her husband, fear that he
might remain long, that he might return too much displeased for her
easily to make all straight again--these thoughts occupied her mind; yet
still she could not help smiling as Gabriele, who had sunk down into the
bath alone, exclaimed, almost beside herself for fright, "I am drowning!
I am drowning!" In order to re-assure her, her mother stretched out her
white hands to her, and under their protection she laughed and splashed
about like a little fish in water.

A shower of flowers streamed suddenly over both mother and child, and
Gabriele screamed aloud for joy, and stretched forth her little arms to
catch gilly-flowers, roses, and carnations, which fell upon and around
her. Elise turned herself round in surprise, and her surprise changed
itself into the most delightful sensation of joy, as the lips of her
husband were pressed to her forehead.

"Ah, you!" exclaimed Elise, and threw her arms round his neck, and
caressingly stroked his cheek.

"I shall get wet through with all this," said he, laughing, yet without
leaving the bath, nay, he even stooped down his head to little Gabriele,
kissed her, and allowed her to splash him with water.

"Thank God! all is right again! and perhaps it will be best to take no
further notice of this unpleasant affair!" thought she, and prepared to
follow her husband into the parlour.

The Judge had, probably, during his bad tea at the club, held with the
invisible speakers the same conversation, with some variations, as his
wife during his absence, the consequence whereof was his visit to the
bathing-room, and the shower of flowers from the nosegay he had brought
with him for her, and the kiss of reconciliation which effaced every
thoughtless and wounding word. He felt now quite pleased that everything
was as it should be, and that the gentle and yielding temper of his wife
would require nothing further. But, perhaps, on that very account, he
was dissatisfied with himself, her eyes red with weeping grieved him,
especially as they beamed so kindly upon him, he felt that he misused
the power which circumstances had given him over his wife; he felt that
he had behaved harshly to her, and therefore he had no peace with
himself, therefore he felt a necessity to pronounce one word--one word,
which it is so hard for the lips of a man to pronounce, yet, which Ernst
Frank was too manly, too firm to shrink from.

When, therefore, his wife entered, he offered her his hand; "Forgive me,
Elise," said he, with the deepest feeling; "I have behaved severely,
nay, absurdly to-day!"

"Oh, forgive me, Ernst!" said Elise, deeply affected, whilst she pressed
his hand to her heart and----

Accursed be all disturbers of peace in this world! Such a one entered at
that moment, and undid that which would otherwise have bound them so
closely to each other. It was a messenger from the Colonel's widow with
a note, together with a book for the Judge, and two little bottles of
select Eau de rose for Elise, "of which, I know," said the note, "she is
very fond."

The Judge's cheek grew crimson as he read the note, which he did not
show to his wife.

"An extremely polite and interesting person," said he; "I will
immediately answer it."

"Ernst," said Elise, "should we not invite her to dinner to-morrow? I
thought of something very nice, which is sure to succeed; then we could
go altogether to the concert, and afterwards she might sup with us."

"Now that is a good idea, and I thank you for it, my sweet Elise," said
he, extremely pleased.

Yes, if the Colonel's widow had not been there--if the Candidate had not
been there--and if there had been no _if_ in the case, all might have
gone on quite smoothly. But it was quite otherwise.




CHAPTER IX.

ONE SWALLOW MAKES NO SUMMER.


Too many chaotic elements had collected together in the family of the
Franks for one sun-gleam to dissipate. Even the married pair did not
clearly understand their own actions.

The Judge, truly, was too much enchanted by his former beloved one; and
the beautiful Emelie did all that was in her power to enslave again her
early adorer.

Judge Frank, who would have been as cold and proud as possible, if he
had been assailed by coarse and direct flattery, was yet by no means
steeled against the refined and almost imperceptible flattery of Emelie,
who, with all her peculiar gifts of soul and understanding, made herself
subordinate to him, in order to be enlightened and instructed by him.

"An extraordinarily amiable and interesting lady," thought he still with
greater animation, although he seldom asserted so much; and exactly in
the proportion in which he found Emelie interesting, it was natural that
he should find Elise less so, especially as he found in Emelie precisely
those very qualities, the want of which he had so much regretted in his
wife; namely, an interest in his activity as a citizen, and in general
for the objects connected with which he occupied himself in the
liveliest manner.

Elise, on her part, was neither calm nor clear. The connexion between
her husband and Emelie was painful to her; and she felt a sort of
consolation from the devotion of Jacobi, even when it was beginning to
assume that passionate character which made her seriously uneasy.

A letter, which she wrote to her sister about this time, exhibits her
state of feeling:

"It is long since I wrote to you, Cecilia--I hardly know why; I hardly
know, indeed, my own feelings--all is so unquiet, so undefined. I wish
it were clear!

"Do you know she is very lovely, this 'old flame' of my husband's, and
very brilliant. I fancy I am jealous of her. Last evening I went out to
a supper-party--the first for several years. I dressed myself with great
care, for I wished to please Ernst, and had flowers in my hair. I was
greatly satisfied with my appearance when I went. My husband was to come
later. I found Emelie already there; she was beautiful, and looked most
elegant. They placed me beside her; a looking-glass was before us, on
which I threw stolen glances, and saw opposite to me--a shadow! I
thought at first it was some illusion, and looked again: but again it
revealed unmercifully to me a pale ghost beside the beautiful and
dazzling Emelie. 'It is all over, irremediably over,' thought I, 'with
my youth and my bloom! But if my husband and children only can love me,
I can then resign youth and beauty.'

"But again I felt compelled to look at the shadow in the glass, and grew
quite melancholy. Emelie also cast glances at the mirror, and drew
comparisons, but with feelings far different to mine. Then came Ernst,
and I saw that he too made comparisons between us.

"He was, all this evening, very much occupied with Emelie. I felt unwell
and weak; I longed so to support myself on his arm; but he did not come
near me the whole time: perhaps he imagined I was out of
humour--perhaps I looked so. Ah! I returned home before supper, and he
remained. As I drove home through those deserted streets in the wretched
hackney-coach, a sense of misery came over my heart such as I cannot
describe; many a bitter thought was awakened within me, before which I
trembled.

"At the door of my own home I met Jacobi; he had sate up for me, and
wished to tell me something amusing about my children. He seemed to have
foreboded my feelings this evening. My favourite fruit, which he had
provided for me, should have refreshed me. His friendship and his
devotion cheered me. There is something so beautiful in feeling oneself
beloved.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Every new emotion, every new connexion, among men, has its danger, its
temptation; the most beautiful, the most noble, may have their dangerous
tendency. Oh! how is this to be prevented without a separation?--how is
the poison to be avoided without deadening the sting? Oh, Cecilia! at
this moment I need a friend; I need you, to whom I could turn, and from
whom, in these disquieting circumstances, I in my weakness could derive
light and strength. I am discontented with myself; I am discontented
with----Ah! he alone it is who, if he would, could make all right!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Oh, Cecilia, this is a mist-enveloped hour of my life!--does it
announce day or night? My glance is dark; I see the path no longer! But
I will resign myself into the hand of Him who said, 'let there be
light.'

       *       *       *       *       *

"All is now better and clearer! God be praised! In a few hours this day
will be over;--I long vehemently for it!

"This evening we have a children's dance at our house. Emelie will be
here also. There is not a good understanding between us two. She is cold
to me, too witty, and too----, but I will do my best to be a good
hostess; and when the day is ended, I will sit and look at my beautiful
sleeping boy, and be happy in my children."




CHAPTER X.

THE END OF THE DAY.


Evening came, and with it lights and guests. A strong, self-sacrificing
amiability governed Elise's manner this evening. She was almost cordial
towards Emelie; cared for the comfort of every one, played the piano for
the children's dance, and appeared to exist only in order to serve
others. The beautiful Emelie, on the contrary, thought of herself; was
livelier and more brilliant than ever, and, as usual, assembled all the
gentlemen around her. The conversation was lively in this group; it
turned from politics to literature, and then dwelt awhile on
theatricals, in which Emelie, equally animated and sarcastic,
characterised the Scribe and Mellesville school as a dramatic
manufactory.

"For the rest," added she, "the stage acts very prudently and sensibly
in letting the curtain fall the moment the hero and heroine approach the
altar; novels do the same, and that, also, with good reason, otherwise
nobody would be able to read them."

"How so?" asked the Judge, with great earnestness.

"Because," answered Emelie, "the illusion of life is extinguished on the
other side of this golden moment, and reality steps forward then in all
its heaviness and nakedness. Look at a young couple in the glowing
morning of their union, how warm love is then; how it penetrates and
beautifies everything; how it glows and speaks in glance and word, and
agreeable action; how its glory changes the whole of life into poetry!
'Thou, thou!' is the one thought of the young people then. But observe
the same couple a few years later--'I, I!' and 'my pleasure,' is the
phrase now. The adoring all-resigning lover is then become the exacting
married man, who will be waited on and obeyed. And the loving
all-sacrificing bride, she is become the unwieldy and care-burdened
housewife, who talks of nothing but trouble, bad saltings, and negligent
maid-servants. And what are _tete-a-tete_ communications between these
two? 'How, my dear! is the butter really used up already? Why, I gave
you money only the other day for butter! You really must look better
after things, and see what the cook does with the butter; I will not
allow such extravagance in the house! Do you want something more?' 'Yes,
indeed, my love, I and the children must have new over-dresses. Little
Peter's coat is worn out, and little Paul has grown out of his; and my
old cloak cannot last to eternity!' People," continued the sarcastic
Emilie, "may thank their stars, too, if out of such interesting
communications as these no hateful quarrels arise; and if, in the happy
repose of their homes, harmless yawnings have only taken place of the
kisses which have left it. Contracted circumstances, meannesses, and
domestic trials, destroy the happiness of marriage, even as the worm
destroys the flower, bringing bitterness and sourness into the temper;
and though the married pair may continue to the very day of their death
to address each other as 'My sweet friend,' yet, very often, _in petto_,
it is 'My sour friend.' Yet, after all, this is nothing, in fact, but
what is perfectly natural; and, in this respect, marriage only follows
the eternal law of nature in all earthly existence. Every form of life
carries in itself decay and dissolution--a poisonous snake-king[3] gnaws
even at the root of the world's tree."

Several of the listeners, and among them the Candidate, had laughed
loudly at Emelie's descriptions; but the Judge had not once moved his
lips, and replied, when she had done, with an earnestness that
confounded even her satire.

"If all this were true, Emelie," said he, "then were life, even in the
best point of view, good for nothing; and with justice might it indeed
be called an illusion. But it is not so; and you have only described
marriage in its lowest, and not either in its best or its truest sense.
I do not deny the difficulties which exist in this as in every other
circumstance of life; but I am confident that they may and must be
overcome; and this will be done if the married pair bring only right
intentions into the house. Then want and care, disturbing, nay even
bitter hours, may come, but they will also go; and the bonds of love and
truth will be consolation, nay, even will give strength. You have
spoken, Emelie, of death and separation as the end of the drama of life;
you have forgotten the awaking again, and the second youth, of which
the ancient northern Vala sings. Married life, like all life, has such a
second youth; yes, indeed, a progressive one, because it has its
foundation in the life which is eternal; and every contest won, every
danger passed through, every pain endured, change themselves into
blessings on home and on the married pair, who have thus obtained better
knowledge, and who are thus more closely united."

He spoke with unusual warmth, and not without emotion, and his
expressive glance sought and dwelt upon his wife, who had approached
unobserved, and who had listened to Emelie's bitter satire with stinging
pain, because she knew that there was a degree of truth in it.

But as her husband spoke, she felt that he perceived the full truth, and
her heart beat freer and stronger, and all at once a clearness was in
her soul. With her head bent forward, she gazed on him with a glance
full of tenderness and confidence, forgetting herself, and listening
with fervour to every word which he uttered. In this very moment their
eyes met, and there was much, inexpressibly much, in their glance; a
clear crimson of delight flushed her cheek, and made her beautiful. The
gentle happiness which now animated her being, together with her lovely
figure, her graceful movements, and the purity of her brow, made her far
more fascinating than her lovely rival. Her husband followed her with
his eyes, as kindly and attentively she busied herself among her guests,
or with the little Gabriele in her arms mingled in the children's dance,
for which Evelina's foster-daughters were playing a four-handed piece.
He had suddenly cooled towards his "old flame," nor was he at all warmed
again by the sharp tone with which the little caressing Petrea was
reproved for being too obtrusive.

"Our little Louise in time will dance very well," remarked the Judge to
his wife, as he noticed with great pleasure the little _brisees_ and
_chassees_ of his daughter whom the twelve-years-old Nils Gabriel
Stjernhoek twirled round, and with whom he conversed with great gravity,
and a certain knightly politeness.

In the mean time Mrs. Gunilla was instructing Emelie on the manners and
character of the French; and Emelie, whose countenance since the
discussion of the marriage question had worn a bitter expression,
endeavoured with a tolerably sharp tone to make her superior
information felt, and in return was mown down, as it were, at one stroke
by Mrs. Gunilla, who--had never been in France.

The Candidate followed Elise everywhere with glances of devotion, and
appeared this evening perfectly enchanted by her amiability.

"Fie, for shame!--to take all the confections to yourself!" moralised
the little Queen-bee to the little S----ne,--a fat, quiet boy, who took
the confections and the reproof with the same stoical indifference.
Louise cast a look of high indignation upon him, and then gave her share
of sweetmeats to a little girl, who complained that she had had none.

Supper came, and Emelie, whose eyes flashed unusual fire, seemed to wish
fervently to win back that regard which she, perhaps, feared to have
lost already, and with her playful and witty conversation electrified
the whole company. Jacobi, who was excited in no ordinary manner, drank
one glass of wine after another, talked and laughed very loud, and
looked between whiles upon Elise with glances which expressed his
sentiments in no doubtful manner. These glances were not the first of
the kind which the quick eye of Elise's rival observed.

"That young man," said she, in a low but significant whisper to the
Judge, and with a glance on Jacobi, "seems to be very charming; he has
really remarkably attractive talents--is he nearly related to Elise?"

"No," returned he, looking at her rather surprised; "but he has been for
nearly three months a member of our family."

"Indeed!" said she, in a significant and grave manner; "I should have
thought--but as for that," added she, in an apparently careless
tone--"Elise is really so kind and so amiable, that for him who is with
her daily, it must be very difficult not to love her."

The Judge felt the sting of the viper, and with a glance which flashed a
noble indignation, he replied to his beautiful neighbour, "You are
right, Emelie; I know no woman who deserves more love or esteem than
she!"

Emelie bit her lip and grew pale; and she would assuredly have grown yet
paler, could she only have understood the sentiment which she had
awakened in the breast of her former admirer.

Ernst Frank had a keen sense of moral meanness, and when this displayed
itself no gifts of genius or of nature had power to conceal it. He
clearly understood her intentions, and despised her for them. In his
eyes, at this moment, she was hateful. In the mean time his composure
was destroyed. He looked on Jacobi, and observed his glances and his
feelings; he looked on Elise, and saw that she was uneasy, and avoided
his eye.

A horrible spasmodic feeling thrilled through his soul; in order to
conceal what he felt he became more than usually animated, yet there was
a something hostile, a something sternly sarcastic in his words, which
still, on account of the general gaiety, remained unobserved by most.

Never before was Assessor Munter so cheerful, so comically cross with
all mankind. Mrs. Gunilla and he shouted as if desperate against each
other. The company rose from the supper-table in full strife, and
adjourned to the dancing-room.

"Music, in heaven's name! music!" exclaimed the Assessor with a gesture
of despair, and Elise and the Colonel's widow hastened to the piano. It
was a pleasant thought, after the screaming of that rough voice had been
heard, to play one of Blangini's beautiful night-pieces, which seem to
have been inspired by the Italian heaven, and which awaken in the soul
of the hearer a vision of those summer nights, with their flowery
meadows, of their love, of their music, and of all their unspeakable
delights.

"_Un' eterna constanza in amor!_" were the words which, repeated several
times with the most bewitching modulations, concluded the song.

"_Un' eterna constanza in amor!_" repeated the Candidate, softly and
passionately pressing his hand to his heart, as he followed Elise to a
window, whither she had gone to gather a rose for her rival. As Elise's
hand touched the rose, the lips of Jacobi touched her hand.

Emelie sang another song, which delighted the company extremely; but
Ernst Frank stood silent and gloomy the while. Words had been spoken
this evening which aroused his slumbering perception; and with the look
he cast upon Jacobi and his wife, he felt as if the earth were trembling
under his feet. He saw that which passed at the window, and gasped for
breath. A tempest was aroused in his breast; and at the same moment
turning his eyes, he encountered, those of another person, which were
riveted upon him with a questioning, penetrating expression. They were
those of the Assessor. Such a glance as that from any other person had
been poison to the mind of Frank, but from Jeremias Munter it operated
quite otherwise; and as shortly afterwards he saw his friend writing
something on a strip of paper, he went to him, and looking over his
shoulder, read these words:

"Why regardest thou the mote in thy brother's eye, yet seest not the
beam in thine own eye?"

"Is this meant for me?" asked he, in a low but excited voice.

"Yes," was the direct reply.

The Judge took the paper, and concealed it in his breast.

He was pale and silent, and began to examine himself. The company broke
up; he had promised Emelie to accompany her home; but now, while she,
full of animation, jested with several gentlemen, and while her servant
drew on her fur-shoes, he stood silent and cold beside his "old flame"
as a pillar of ice. Mrs. Gunilla and the Assessor quarrelled till the
last moment. Whilst all this was going on, Elise went quietly to Jacobi,
who stood somewhat apart, and said to him in a low voice, "I wish to
speak with you, and will wait for you in the parlour, when they are all
gone." Jacobi bowed; a burning crimson flashed to his cheek; the Judge
threw a penetrating glance upon them, and passed his hand over his pale
countenance.

"It gives me great pleasure," cried Mrs. Gunilla, speaking shrilly and
_staccato_--"it gives me great pleasure to see my fellow-creatures, and
it gives me great pleasure if they will see me. If they are not always
agreeable, why I am not always agreeable myself! Heart's-dearest! in
this world one must have patience one with another, and not be
everlastingly requiring and demanding from others. Heaven help me! I am
satisfied with the world, and with my own fellow-creatures, as our Lord
has been pleased to make them. I cannot endure that people should be
perpetually blaming, and criticising, and mocking, and making sour faces
at everything, and saying 'I will not have this!' and 'I will not have
that!' and 'I will not have it so! It is folly; it is unbearable; it is
wearisome; it is stupid!' precisely as if they themselves only were
endurable, agreeable, and clever! No, I have learned better manners than
that. It is true that I have no genius, nor learning, nor talents, as so
many people in our day lay claim to, but I have learned to govern
myself!"

During this moral lecture, and endeavouring all the time to overpower
it, the Assessor exclaimed, "And can you derive the least pleasure from
your blessed social life? No, that you cannot! What is social life, but
a strift to get into the world in order to discover that the world is
unbearable? but a scheming and labouring to get invited, to be offended
and put out of sorts if not invited; and if invited, then to complain of
weariness and vexation, and thus utter their lamentations. Thus people
bring a mass of folks together, and wish them--at Jericho! and all this
strift only to get poorer, more out of humour, more out of health; in
one word, to obtain the perfectly false position, _vis-a-vis_, of
happiness! See there! Adieu, adieu! When the ladies take leave, they
never have done."

"There is not one single word of truth in all that you have said," was
the last but laughing salutation of Mrs. Gunilla to the Assessor, as,
accompanied by the Candidate, she left the door. The Judge, too, was
gone; and Elise, left alone, betook herself to the parlour.

Suddenly quick steps were heard behind her--she thought "Jacobi"--turned
round, and saw her husband; but never before had she seen him looking as
then; there was an excitement, an agitation, in his countenance that
terrified her. He threw his arm violently round her waist, riveted his
eyes upon her with a glance that seemed as if it would penetrate into
her inmost soul.

"Ernst, Ernst, be calm!" whispered she, deeply moved by his state of
mind, the cause of which she imagined. He seized her hand and pressed it
to his forehead--it was damp and cold; the next moment he was gone.

We will now return to the Candidate.

Wine and love, and excited expectation, had so inflamed the imagination
of the young man, that he hardly knew what he did--whether he walked, or
whether he flew; and more than once, in descending the stairs, had he
nearly precipitated Mrs. Gunilla, who exclaimed with kindness, but some
little astonishment, "The Cross preserve me! I cannot imagine,
heart's-dearest, how either you or I go to-night! I think we are all
about to--see, now again, all's going mad.--No, I thank you, I'll take
care of my nose, crooked as it is. I think I can go safer by myself. I
can hold by----"

"A thousand thousand times pardon," interrupted the Candidate, whilst he
pressed Mrs. Gunilla's arm tightly; "it is all my fault. But now we will
go safely and magnificently; I was a little dizzy!"

"Dizzy!" repeated she. "Heart's-dearest, we should take care on that
very account; one should take care of one's head as well as one's heart;
one should take care of that, or it may go still more awry than it now
is with us! He, he, he, he--but listen to me, my friend," said Mrs.
Gunilla, suddenly becoming very grave: "I will tell you one thing, and
that is----"

"Your most gracious Honour, pardon me," interrupted he, "but I think--I
feel rather unwell--I--there, now we are at your door! Pardon me!" and
the Candidate tumbled up-stairs again.

In the hall of the Franks' dwelling he drew breath. The thought of the
mysterious meeting with Elise filled him at the same time with joy and
uneasiness. He could not collect his bewildered thoughts, and with a
wildly-beating heart went into the room where Elise awaited him.

As soon as he saw her white lovely figure standing in the magical
lamplight his soul became intoxicated, and he was just about to throw
himself at her feet, when Elise, hastily, and with dignity, drew back a
few paces.

"Listen to me, Jacobi," said she, with trembling but earnest voice.

"Listen to you!" said he, passionately--"oh, that I might listen to you
for ever!--oh, that I----"

"Silence!" interrupted Elise, with a severity very unusual to her; "not
one word more of this kind, or our conversation is at an end, and we are
separated for ever!"

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Jacobi, "what have----"

"I beseech you, listen to me!" continued Elise; "tell me, Jacobi, have I
given you occasion to think thus lightly of me?"

Jacobi started. "What a question!" said he, stammering, and pale.

"Nevertheless," continued Elise, with emotion, "I must have done so;
your behaviour to me this evening has proved it. Could you think,
Jacobi, that I, a wife, the mother of many children, could permit the
sentiment which you have been so thoughtless as to avow this evening?
Could you imagine that it would not occasion me great uneasiness and
pain? Indeed, it is so, Jacobi; I fear that you have gone sadly wrong;
and if I myself, through any want of circumspection in my conduct, have
assisted thereto, may God forgive me! You have punished me for it,
Jacobi--have punished me for the regard I have felt for you and shown to
you; and if I now must break a connexion which I hoped would gladden my
life, it is your own fault. Only one more such glance--one more such
declaration, as you have made this evening, and you must remove from
this house."

The crimson of shame and indignation burned on Jacobi's cheek. "In
truth," said he, "I have not deserved such severity."

"Ah! examine yourself, Jacobi," said she, "and you will judge yourself
more severely than I have done. You say that you love me, Jacobi, and
you do not dread to destroy the peace and happiness of my life. Already,
perhaps, are poisonous tongues in activity against me. I have seen this
evening glances directed upon me and upon you, which were not mild; and
thoughts and feelings are awakened in my husband's soul, which never
ought to have been awakened there. You have disturbed the peace of a
house, into which you were received with friendship and confidence. But
I know," continued she, mildly, "that you have not intended anything
criminal!--no bad intentions have guided your behaviour; folly only has
led you to treat so lightly that relationship which is the holiest on
earth. You have not reflected on your life, on your duty, and your
situation, in this family, with seriousness."

Jacobi covered his face with his hands, and a strong emotion agitated
him.

"And seriousness," again began Elise, with warmth and deep
earnestness--"seriousness! how it clothes--how it dignifies the
man!--Jacobi, the saviour of my child--my young friend! I would not have
spoken thus to you if I had not had great faith on your better--your
nobler self;--if I had not hoped to have won a friend in you--a friend
for my whole life, for myself and my Ernst. Oh, Jacobi, listen to my
prayer!--you are thrown among people who are willing from their very
hearts to be your friends! Act so that we may love and highly esteem
you; and do not change into grief that hearty goodwill which we both
feel for you! Combat against, nay, banish from your heart, every foolish
sentiment which you, for a moment, have cherished for me. Consider me as
a sister, as a mother! Yes," continued she, pausing over this word, and
half prophetically, "perhaps you may even yet call me mother; and if you
will show me love and faith, Jacobi, as you have said, I will accept
it--from my son! Oh, Jacobi! if you would deserve my blessing, and my
eternal gratitude, be a faithful friend, a good instructor of my boy--my
Henrik! Your talents as a teacher are of no common kind. Your heart is
good--your understanding is capable of the noblest cultivation--your
path is open before you to all that which makes man most estimable and
most amiable. Oh, turn not away from it, Jacobi--tread this path with
seriousness----"

"Say not another word!" exclaimed Jacobi. "Oh, I see all! forgive me,
angelic Elise! I will do all, everything, in order to deserve hereafter
your esteem and your friendship. You have penetrated my heart--you have
changed it. I shall become a better man. But tell me that you forgive
me--that you can be my friend, and that you will!"

Jacobi, in the height of his excitement, had thrown himself on his knee
before her; Elise also was deeply affected; tears streamed from her
eyes, whilst she extended her hand to him, and bending over him said,
from the very depths of her heart, "Your friend, for ever!"

Calmly, and with cheerful countenances, both raised themselves; but an
involuntary shudder passed through both as they saw the Judge standing
in the room, with a pale and stern countenance.

Jacobi went towards him: "Judge Frank," said he, with a firm but humble
voice, "you behold here a----"

"Silence, Jacobi!" interrupted Elise, quickly; "you need not blush on
account of your bended knee, nor is any explanation needful. It is not,
is it, Ernst?" continued she, with the undaunted freshness of innocence:
"you desire no explanation; you believe me when I say that Jacobi now,
more than ever, deserves your friendship. A bond is formed between us
three, which, as I hope before God, nothing will disturb, and no
poisonous tongues censure. You believe me, Ernst?"

"Yes," said he, giving her his hand; "if I could not, then----" he did
not finish his sentence, but fixed his eyes with a stern expression
immovably on her. "I will speak with you," said he, after a moment, and
in a calmer voice. "Good night, Mr. Jacobi."

Jacobi bowed, withdrew a few steps, and then returned. "Judge Frank,"
said he, in a voice which showed the excitement of his feelings, "give
me your hand; I will deserve your friendship."

The outstretched hand was grasped firmly and powerfully, and Jacobi left
the room in haste.

"Come here, Elise," said the Judge, with warmth, leading his wife to the
sofa, and enclosing her in his arms. "Speak to me! Tell me, has anything
in my behaviour of late turned your heart from me!"

Elise's head sunk upon the breast of her husband, and she was silent.
"Ah, Ernst!" said she at length, with a painful sigh, "I also am
dissatisfied with myself. But, oh!" added she more cheerfully, "when I
lean myself on you thus, when I hear your heart beating, and know what
is within that heart, then, Ernst, I feel how I love you--how I believe
on you! Then I reproach myself with being so weak, so unthankful, so
ready to take offence, then--oh, Ernst! love me! Look on me always as
now, then life will be bright to me; then shall I have strength to
overcome all--even my own weakness; then I shall feel that only a cloud,
only a shadow of mist, and no reality can come between us. But now all
is vanished. Now I can lay open to you all the innermost loopholes of my
heart--can tell you all my weaknesses----"

"Be still, be still now," said the Judge, with a bright and affectionate
look, and laying his hand on her mouth. "I have more failings than you;
but I am awake now. Weep not, Elise; let me kiss away your tears! Do you
not feel, as I do now, that all is right? Do we not believe in the
Eternal Good, and do we not believe in each other? Let us forgive and
forget, and have peace together. Hereafter, when the error of this time
has in some measure passed from our remembrance, we will talk it over,
and wonder how it ever came between us. Now, all is so bright between
us, and we both of us see our way clearly. Our errors will serve us for
warnings. Wherefore do we live in the world, unless to become better?
Look at me, Elise. Are you friendly towards me? Can you have confidence
in me?"

"I can! I have!" said she; "there is not a grain of dust any longer
between us."

"Then we are one!" said he, with a joyful voice. "Let us, then, in God's
name, go thus together through life. What He has united, let no man, no
accident, nothing in this world, separate!"

Night came; but light had arisen in the breast both of husband and wife.

       *       *       *       *       *

The furrow of disunion bears commonly thorns and thistles, but it may
likewise bear seed for the granary of heaven.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] According to the Northern mythology, Nidhoegg, the snake-king, lives
in Niflhem, the nether world.




CHAPTER XI.

JACOBI.


When Jacobi entered his room, he found a letter lying on the table near
his bed. He recognised the handwriting as that of Judge Frank, and
quickly opened it. A bank-note of considerable value fell out; and the
letter contained the following words:

      "You are indebted to several persons in the city, Jacobi, with
      whom I wish, for your own sake, that you should have as little to
      do as possible. Within, you will find the means of satisfying
      their demands. Receive it as from a paternal friend, who sincerely
      wishes you to regard him as such, and who embraces with pleasure
      an opportunity of making an acknowledgment to the friend and
      instructor of his children. To the preserver of my child I shall
      always remain indebted; but should you desire anything, or need
      anything, do not apply to any other than

                              "Your friend, E. Frank."

"He! and he, too!" exclaimed Jacobi, deeply agitated. "Oh, the kind,
noble, excellent man! And I--I shall, I will become worthy of him! From
this day I am a new man!"

He pressed the letter to his breast, and looked up to the star-lighted
heaven with silent but fervent vows.




CHAPTER XII.

TIME GOES.


Life has its moments of strength and bloom; its bright moments of
inspiration, in which the human artist (the painter of earthly life)
seizes on, and utters the supremely pure, the supremely beautiful, the
divine. If, in such moments, everything in human life were executed; if
then sacrifices were made, work accomplished, victories won, there would
be but little difficulty in life. But the difficult part is to preserve,
through a long course of years, the flame which has been kindled by
inspiration! to preserve it while the storms come and go, while the
everlasting dust-rain of the moments falls and falls; to preserve it
still and uniform, amidst the uniform changing of uniform days and
nights. To do this, strength from above is required; repeated draughts
from the fountain of inspiration; both for the great and the small--for
all labourers on earth.

It was the good fortune of Ernst and Elise that they knew this; and knew
also how to avail themselves of it. On this account they succeeded more
and more in conquering their natural failings; on this account they came
nearer to each other by every little step, which in itself is so
unobservable, but which yet, at the same time, twines so firmly and
lovingly together the human heart and life, and which may be contained
in the rubric--_regard for mutual inclinations, interest for mutual
interests_.

Through this new-born intimacy of heart, this strengthening and pure
affection, Elise assumed a secure and noble standing with regard to
Jacobi. Her heart was vanquished by no weakness, even when she saw
suffering expressed in his youthful countenance; nay, she remained firm,
even when she saw that his health was giving way, and only besought her
husband to name an earlier day for his and Henrik's departure. This was
also her husband's wish. Like a good angel, at once gentle, yet strong,
he stood at this time by her side. No wonder was it, therefore, that,
with his support, Elise went forward successfully; no wonder was it,
therefore, that from the firm conduct of her husband, and from the
contemplation of the good understanding which existed between the
married pair, the whispered blame, which had already begun to get
abroad at their expense, died of itself, like a flame wanting
nourishment.

Of Judge Frank's "old flame," which Elise had feared so much, we must
relate how that she found herself so wounded, and so cooled likewise, by
the ice-cold behaviour of her former adorer, that she quickly left the
town, which was too monotonous for her, and abandoned all thoughts of
settling there.

"Life there would be too uniform for me, would possess too little
interest," said she, yawning, to the Judge, who was warmly counselling
her return either to France or Italy.

"In our good North," added he, "we must find that which can give
interest and enjoyment to life in ourselves and our own means,--from our
families, from our own breasts."

"She is, nevertheless, extremely beautiful and interesting," said Elise,
with a kindly feeling towards her when she was gone. The Judge made no
reply; he never was heard to speak again of his former beloved one.

Days went by. The Judge had much to do. Elise occupied herself with her
little girls, and the Candidate with Henrik and his own studies.

The children grew like asparagus in June, and the father rejoiced over
them. "The Queen-bee will grow over all our heads," prophesied he many a
time; and when he heard Eva playing "Marlbrough s'en va-t-en guerre," on
the piano, his musical sense awoke, and he said, "what a deal of feeling
there is already in her music!--is there not, Elise?"

The evenings, on which all the members of the family assembled, assumed
constantly a livelier and more comfortable character for every one;
often they played and danced with the children.

The children! What a world of pleasure and pain do they not bring with
them into a house! Of a truth all is not of as rosy a hue as their
cheeks. Elise discovered that in her children which was not always
exactly good. "Do not to others what thou wouldst not that they should
do to thee." "People should think of what they do." "Patience is a good
root." "You do not see that your father and mother do so; look at me,
and do as I do." These standing and going speeches, which have travelled
through the world from the time when "Adam delved and Eve span," down to
the present day, and which to the very end of time will be ever in
use--together with assurances to the children, whenever they were
punished, or when they must learn their lessons yet more--that all this
was done for their benefit, and that the time would come when they would
be thankful for it--which the children very seldom, if ever
believed--this citizen-of-the-world, patriarchal household-fare, which
was dealt out in the family of the Franks, as in every other worthy
family, did not always produce its proper effect.

Perhaps Elise troubled herself too much sometimes about the perpetual
recurrence of the same fault in her children--perhaps she calculated too
little on the invisible but sun-like and powerful influence of paternal
love on the little human-plants. True it is that she often was in great
anxiety on their account, and that the development and future prospects
of her daughters awoke in her soul much disquiet and trouble.

One day, when such thoughts had troubled her more than usual, she felt
the necessity of a prudent, and, in this respect, experienced female
friend, to whom she could open her mind.

"Ernst," said she, as her husband prepared himself to go out immediately
after dinner, "I shall go below for a few minutes to Evelina, but I will
be back again by the time you return."

"Don't trouble yourself about that, dear Elise," said he; "remain as
long as you like; I'll fetch you. Take my arm, and let us go down
together, that I may see exactly where you go, and whence I must fetch
you."




CHAPTER XIII.

A LITTLE EDUCATION AND COFFEE COMMITTEE.


As Elise entered Evelina's room, Pyrrhus sprang, barking, towards her,
and wagging his tail. Mrs. Gunilla was there, and she and the hostess
emulated each other in welcoming their friend.

"Nay! best-beloved, that is charming!" exclaimed Mrs. Gunilla, embracing
Elise cordially. "Now, how does the little lady?--somewhat
pale?--somewhat out of spirits, I fancy? I will tell confidentially that
I know we shall presently get some magnificent coffee, which will cheer
up little Elise."

Evelina took Elise's hand, and looked kindly and sympathising at her
with her calm sensible eyes. Pyrrhus touched her foot gently with his
nose, in order to call her attention, and then seated himself on his
hind legs before her, began growling, in order to express his sympathy
also. Elise laughed, and she and Mrs. Gunilla vied with each other in
caressing the little animal.

"Ah, let me sit down here and chat with you, where everything seems so
kind," said Elise, in reply to Evelina's glance, which spoke such a kind
"How do you do?" "Here all is so quiet and so comfortable. I do not know
how you manage, Evelina, but it seems to me as if the air in your room
were clearer than elsewhere; whenever I come to you it seems to me as if
I entered a little temple of peace."

"Yes, and so it seems to me," said Mrs. Gunilla, cordially.

"Yes, thank God," said Evelina, smiling gratefully, and with tears in
her eyes; "here is peace!"

"And at our little lady's, the young folks raise dust sometimes in the
temper, as well as in the rooms. Is it not so?" said Mrs. Gunilla, with
facetiousness. "Well, well," added she, by way of consolation,
"everything has its time, all dust will in time lay itself, only have
patience."

"Ah, teach me that best thing, Aunt," said Elise, "for I am come here
precisely with the hope of gaining some wisdom--I need it so much. But
where are your daughters to-day, Evelina?"

"They are gone to-day to one of their friends," replied she, "to a
little festival, which they have long anticipated with pleasure; and I
also expect to have my share, from their relation of it to me."

"Ah! teach me, Evelina," said Elise, "how I can make my daughters as
amiable, as good, and as happy, as your Laura and Karin. I confess that
it is the anxiety for the bringing up of my daughters which ever makes
me uneasy, and which lies so heavy on my heart this very day. I distrust
my own ability--my own artistical skill, rightly to form their
minds--rightly to unfold them."

"Ah, education, education!" said Mrs. Gunilla, angrily; "people are
everlastingly crying out now for education. One never can hear anything
now but about education. In my youth I never heard talk and outcry for
education, and yet, thank God, a man was a man in those days for all
that. I confess that when I first heard this talk of education, I
supposed that there would be two sorts, as of everything in the world. I
thought so! But now, ever since _le tiers etat_ have pushed themselves
so much forward, have made so much of themselves, and have esteemed
themselves as something exclusive in the world with their education--now
the whole world cries out, 'educate! educate!' Yes, indeed, they even
tell us now that we should educate the maid-servants. I pray God to
dispense with my living in the time when maid-servants are educated; I
should have to wait myself on them, instead of their waiting on me. Yes,
yes! things are going on towards that point at a pretty rate, that I can
promise you! Already they read Frithiof and Axel; and before one is
aware, one shall hear them talk of 'husband and wife,' and 'wife and
husband;' and that they fancy themselves 'to be vines, which must wither
if they are not supported;' and 'sacrifices,' and other such affecting
things, until they become quite incapable of cleaning a room, or
scouring a kettle. Yes, indeed, there would be pretty management in the
world with all their education! It is a frenzy, a madness, with this
education! It is horrible!"

The longer Mrs. Gunilla talked on this subject, the more she excited
herself.

Elise and Evelina laughed heartily, and then declared that they
themselves, as belonging to the _tiers etat_, must take education, nay,
even the education of maid-servants, under their protection.

"Ah," said Mrs. Gunilla, impatiently, "you make all so artistical and
entangled with your education; and you cram the heads of children full
of such a many things, that they never get them quite straight all the
days of their life. In my youth, people learned to speak 'the language,'
as the French was then called, just sufficient to explain a motto;
enough of drawing to copy a pattern, and music enough to play a _contre
danse_ if it were wanted; but they did not learn, as now, to gabble
about everything in the world; but they learned to think, and if they
knew less of art and splendour, why, they had the art to direct
themselves, and to leave the world in peace!"

"But, your best Honour," said Evelina, "education in its true meaning,
as it is understood in our time, teaches us to take a clearer view of
ourselves and of the world at large, so that we may more correctly
understand our own allotted station, estimate more properly that of
others, and, in consequence, that every one may be fitted for his own
station, and contented therewith."

"Yes, yes," said Mrs. Gunilla, "all that may be very good, but----" But
just then the coffee came in, with biscuits and gingerbread, which made
an important diversion in the entertainment, which now took a livelier
character. Mrs. Gunilla imparted to Elise, with jesting seriousness, a
variety of good counsel on the education of her children. She sent for
and recommended particularly a certain _Orbis Pictus_, which she herself
had studied when a child, and which began with the words, "Come here,
boy, and learn wisdom from my mouth," and in which one could see clearly
how the soul was fashioned, and how it looked. It looked like a pancake
spread out on a table round and smooth, with all the five senses
properly numbered. Mrs. Gunilla assured Elise, that if her children paid
attention to this picture, it would certainly develop and fashion their
ideas of the human soul. Furthermore, she proposed the same educational
course as had been used with such distinguished success upon her
deceased father and his brother, when they went to school, and which
consisted in every boy being combed with a fine comb every Saturday, and
well whipped, whilst an ounce of English salt was allowed per boy, in
order to drive the bad spirits out of him. Beyond this, they had, too,
on the same day, a diet of bread and beer, in which was a dumpling
called "Grammatica," so that the boys might be strengthened for the
learning of the following week.

During the merriment which these anecdotes occasioned, the Judge came
in: delighted with the merriment, and delighted with his wife, he seated
himself beside her, quite covetous of an hour's gossip with the ladies.
Mrs. Gunilla served him up the human soul in the _Orbis Pictus_, and
Elise instigated her still further to the relation of the purification
of the boys. The Judge laughed at both from the bottom of his heart, and
then the conversation turned again on the hard and disputable ground of
education; all conceding, by general consent, the insufficiency of rules
and methods to make it available.

Evelina laid great stress on the self-instruction of the teacher. "In
the degree," said she, "in which man developes in himself goodness,
wisdom, and ability, he succeeds commonly in calling out these in
children."

All the little committee, without exception, gave their most lively
approval; and Elise felt herself quite refreshed, quite strengthened by
the words which showed her so clearly the path to her great object. She
turned now, therefore, the conversation to Evelina's own history and
development. It was well known that her path through life had been an
unusual one, and one of independence, and Elise wished now to know how
she had attained to that serenity and refreshing quiet which
characterised her whole being. Evelina blushed, and wished to turn the
conversation from herself--a subject which she least of all would speak
about, and that probably because she was in harmony with herself--but as
the Judge with his earnest cordiality united in the wish of his wife and
Mrs. Gunilla, that Evelina would relate to them some passages in the
history of her life, she acceded, remarking only that what she had to
relate was in no way extraordinary; and then, after she had bethought
herself for a moment, she began, addressing herself more especially to
Elise, and in the mean time Mrs. Gunilla hastily jotted down the
narrative, which we will here designate


EVELINA'S HISTORY.

Have you ever been conscious, while listening to a beautiful piece of
music, of a deep necessity, an indescribable longing, to find in your
own soul, in your own life, a harmony like that which you perceived in
the tune?--if so, you have then an idea of the suffering and the release
of my soul. I was yet a little child when, for the first time, I was
seized upon by this longing, without at that time comprehending it.
There was a little concert in the house of my parents; the harp, piano,
horn, and clarionette, were played by four distinguished artists. In one
part of the symphony the instruments united in an indescribably sweet
and joyous melody, in the feeling of which my childish soul was seized
upon by a strong delight, and at the same time by a deep melancholy. It
seemed to me as if I had then an understanding of heaven, and I burst
into tears. Ah! the meaning of these I have learned since then. Many
such, and many far more painful, tears of longing, have fallen upon the
dark web of my life.

To what shall I compare the picture of my youthful years? All that it,
and many other such family pictures exhibit, is unclear, indefinite, in
one word, blotted as it were in the formation. It resembled a dull
autumn sky, with its grey, shapeless, intermingling cloud-masses; full
of those features without precision, of those contours without meaning,
of those shadows without depth, of those lights without clearness, which
so essentially distinguish the work of a bungler from that of a true
master.

My family belonged to the middle class, and we were especially well
content to belong to this noble class; and as we lived from our rents,
and had no rank in the state, we called ourselves, not without some
self-satisfaction, people of condition. We exhibited a certain genteel
indifference towards the _haute volee_ in the citizen society, not only
in words but sometimes also in action; yet, nevertheless, in secret we
were extremely wounded or flattered by all those who came in contact
with us from this circle; and not unfrequently too the family
conversation turned, quite accidentally as it were, on the subject of
its being ennobled on the plea of the important service which our father
could render to the state in the House of Knights; and in the hearts of
us young girls it excited a great pleasure when we were addressed as "my
lady." Beyond this agitation of the question nothing came.

The daughters of the house were taught that all pomp and pleasure of
this world was only vanity, that nothing was important and worth
striving after but virtue and inward worth; yet for all this, it so
happened that their most lively interest and endeavours, and the warmest
wishes of the hearts of all, were directed to wealth, rank, and worldly
fortune of every kind. The daughters were taught that in all things the
will of God must alone direct them; yet in every instance they were
guided by the fear of man. They were taught that beauty was nothing, and
of no value; yet they were often compelled to feel, and that painfully,
in the paternal house, that they wore not handsome. They were allowed to
cultivate some talents, and acquire some knowledge, but God forbid that
they should ever become learned women; on which account they learned
nothing thoroughly, though in many instances they pretended to
knowledge, without possessing anything of its spirit, its nourishing
strength, or its pure esteem-inspiring earnestness. But above all
things they learned, and this only more and more profoundly the more
their years increased, that marriage was the goal of their being; and in
consequence (though this was never definitely inculcated in words, but
by a secret, indescribable influence), to esteem the favour of men as
the highest happiness, denying all the time that they thought so.

We were three sisters. As children, it was deeply impressed upon us that
we must love one another; but in consequence of partiality on the side
of our teachers, in consequence of praise and blame, rewards and
punishments, which magnified little trifles into importance, envy and
bitterness were early sown among the sisters. It was said of my eldest
sister and myself, that we were greatly attached to each other; that we
could not live asunder. We were cited as examples of sisterly love; and
from constantly hearing this, we at last came to believe it. We were
compared to the carriage-horses of the family; and we were in the habit,
almost of our own accord, of seating ourselves every day after dinner on
each side of our good father, who caressed us, and called us his
carriage-horses. Yet, in fact, we did not pull together. My sister was
more richly endowed by nature than I, and won favour more easily. Never
did I envy a human being as I envied her, until in later years, and
under altered circumstances, I learned to love her rightly, and to
rejoice over her advantages.

We were not very rich, and we cast a philosophically compassionate
glance upon all who were richer than we, who lived in a more liberal
manner, had more splendid equipages, or who dressed themselves more
elegantly. "What folly--what pitiable vanity!" said we: "poor people,
who know nothing better!" We never thought that our philosophy was
somewhat akin to the fox and the grapes.

If we looked in this manner upon the advantages of the great, we
despised still more the pleasures of the crowd. (We ought to be so
all-sufficient for ourselves. Ah, alas!) And if ever a theatrical piece
was much talked of and visited, we had a kind of pride in saying, with
perfect indifference, that we never had seen it; and whenever there was
a popular festival, and the crowd went towards Haga or the Park, it was
quite as certain that our calesche--if it went out at all--would drive
on the road to Sabbatsberg, or in some other direction equally deserted
at the time; for all which, we prided ourselves on our philosophy. Yet
with all this in our hearts we really never were happy.

The daughters came out into society. The parents wished to see them
loved and wooed; the daughters wished it no less--but they were not
handsome--were dressed without any pretension. The parents saw very
little company; and the daughters remained sitting at balls, and were
nearly unobserved at suppers. Yet from year to year they slid on with
the stream.

The daughters approached to ripened youth. The parents evidently wished
them married; they wished it likewise, which was only natural,
especially as at home they were not happy; and it must be confessed that
neither did they themselves do much to make it pleasant there. They were
peevish and discontented--no one knew exactly what to do or what she
wanted; they groped about as if in a mist.

It is customary to hear unmarried ladies say that they are satisfied
with their condition, and do not desire to change it. In this pretension
there lies more truth than people in general believe, particularly when
the lively feelings of early youth are past. I have often found it so;
and above all, wherever the woman, either in one way or another, has
created for herself an independent sphere of action, or has found in a
comfortable home that freedom, and has enjoyed that pure happiness of
life, which true friendship, true education, can give.

A young lady of my acquaintance made what was with justice called a
great match, although love played but a subordinate part. As some one
felicitated her on her happiness, she replied, quite calmly, "Oh, yes!
it is very excellent to possess something of one's own." People smiled
at her for her thus lightly esteeming what was universally regarded so
great a good fortune; but her simple words, nevertheless, contain a
great and universal truth. It is this "one's own," in the world, and in
his sphere of action, which every man unavoidably requires if he would
develop his own being, and win for himself independence and happiness,
self-esteem, and the esteem of others. Even the nun has her own cell,
where she can prepare herself in peace for heaven, and in which she
possesses her true home. But in social life, the unmarried woman has
often not even a little cell which she can call her own; she goes like a
cloud of mist through life, and finds firm footing nowhere. Hence,
therefore, are there often marriages the genuine children of necessity,
which ought never to have taken place, and that deep longing after the
deep quiet of the grave, which is experienced by so many. But there is
no necessity for this, and in times, in which the middle classes are so
much more enlightened, it becomes still less so; we need, indeed, only
contemplate the masses of people who strive for a subsistence, the
crowds of neglected and uncared-for children that grow up in the world,
in order to see that whatever is one-sided in the view of the
destination of woman vanishes more and more, and opens to her a freer
sphere of action.

But I return to the _pros_ and _cons_ of my own life, one feature of
which I must particularly mention. If young ladies of our acquaintance
connected themselves by marriage with men who were rather above than
below them in property or station, we considered it, without exception,
reasonable and estimable. But if a man, whose connexions and prospects
were similar to our own, looked round him for a wife in our house, we
considered it great audacity, and treated it accordingly. We were
secretly looking out for genteeler and richer individuals, who again, on
their part, were looking out for genteeler and richer individuals than
we.--N. B. This _looking-out_ in the great world is a very useful thing,
both for gentlemen and ladies, although anybody who would be _naive_
enough to acknowledge as much, would not be greatly in favour either
with those who looked-out or those who did not.

In the mean time, a spirit was developed within me, which full of living
energy woke to the sense of its nonentity--to a sense of the enslaving
contradictions in which it moved, and to the most vehement desire to
free itself from them. As yet, however, I did not understand what I was
to do with my restless spirit. By contemplation, however, of noble works
of art, it appeared to me frequently that the enigma of my inner self
became clear to me. When I observed the antique vestal, so calm, so
assured, and yet so gentle--when I saw how she stood, self-possessed,
firm, and serene--I had a foretaste of the life which I needed, and
sought after, both outwardly and inwardly, and I wept tears of
melancholy longing.

Tortured by the distorted circumstances (many of which I have not
mentioned) under which I moved in my own family connexion, I began, as
years advanced, to come in contact with the world in a manner which, for
a temper like mine, was particularly dangerous.

We have heard of the daughters of the Husgafvel family, who grew old
yawning over the spinning-wheel and the weaving-stool; but, better so to
grow old, yes, better a thousand times to grow grey over the
spinning-wheel and the ashes of the cooking-stove, than with artificial
flowers--oh, how artificial!--in the hair, on the benches of the
ball-room, or the seat of the supper-room, smiling over the world, which
smiles over us no longer. This was the case with me.

There are mild, unpretending beings, who bow themselves quietly under
the yoke which they cannot break; move, year after year, through the
social circle, without any other object than to fill a place there--to
ornament or to disfigure a wall. Peace to such patient souls! There,
too, are joyous, fresh, ever youthful natures, who, even to old age, and
under all circumstances, bring with them cheerfulness and new life into
every circle in which they move. These belong to social life, and are
its blessings. Many persons--and it is beautiful that it should be
so--are of this description. I, however, belonged neither to the joyous
and enlivening, nor yet to the patient and unpretending. On this account
I began to shun social life, which occasioned in me, still more and
more, a moral weariness; yet, nevertheless, I was driven into it, to
avoid the disquiet and discomfort which I experienced at home. I was a
labourer who concealed his desire for labour, who had buried his talent
in the earth, as was the hereditary custom of the circle in which I
lived.

The flower yields odour and delight to man, it nourishes the insect with
its sweetness; the dewdrop gives strength to the leaf on which it falls.
In the relationships in which I lived, I was less than the flower or the
dewdrop; a being endowed with power and with an immortal soul! But I
awoke at the right time to a consciousness of my position. I say at the
right time, because there may be a time when it is too late. There is a
time when, under the weight of long wearisome years, the human soul has
become inflexible, and has no longer the power to raise itself from the
slough into which it has sunk.

I felt how I was deteriorating; I felt clearly how the unemployed and
uninterested life which I led, nourished day after day new weeds in the
waste field of my soul. Curiosity, a desire for gossip, an inclination
to malice and scandal, and an increasing irritability of temper, began
to get possession of a mind which nature had endowed with too great a
desire for action for it blamelessly to vegetate through a passive life
as so many can. Ah! if people live without an object, they stand as it
were on the outside of active life, which gives strength to the inward
occupation, even if no noble endeavour or sweet friendship give that
claim to daily life which makes it occasionally, at least, a joy to
live; disquiet rages fiercely and tumultuously in the human breast,
undermining health, temper, goodness, nay, even the quiet of conscience,
and conjuring up all the spirits of darkness: so does the corroding rust
eat into the steel-plate and deface its clear mirror with a tracery of
disordered caricatures.

I once read these words of that many-sided thinker, Steffen:--"He who
has no employment to which he gives himself with true earnestness, which
he does not love as much as himself and all men, has not discovered the
true ground on which Christianity even here brings forth fruit. Such an
occupation becomes a quiet and consecrated temple in all hours of
affliction, into which the Saviour pours out his blessing; it unites us
with all other men, so that we can sympathise in their feelings, and
makes our actions and our wills administer to their wants; it teaches us
rightly to weigh our own circumscribed condition and the worth of
others. It is the true, firm, and fruit-bearing ground of real
Christianity."

These words came like a breath of air on glowing sparks. A light was
kindled in my soul, and I knew now what I wanted, and what I ought to
do. After I had well considered all this with myself, I spoke with my
parents, and opened my whole heart to them. They were surprised, opposed
me, and besought me to think better of it. I had foreseen this; but as I
adhered firmly and decidedly to my wishes and my prayers, they surprised
me by their kindness.

I was very fond of children; my plan was, therefore, to begin
housekeeping for myself, and to undertake some work or occupation which
should, by degrees, enable me to take two or three children, for whom I
would provide, whom I would educate, and altogether adopt as my own. I
was well persuaded that I needed many of the qualifications which make a
good teacher; but I hoped that that new fountain of activity would, as
it were, give to my whole being a new birth. My goodwill, my affection
for children would, I believed, be helpful to make me a good guide to
them; and thus, though I could not become a wife, I might yet enjoy the
blessing of a mother.

"And why could you not--why could you not?" interrupted Elise.

"People say," returned Evelina, smiling, "that you had to make your
selection of a husband from many adorers; you cannot then understand a
case in which there should not even be one choice. But truly, indeed,
that was my case. But do not look at me so amazed--don't look at me as
if I were guilty of high treason. The truth is, sweet Elise, that I
never had an opportunity to say either yes or no to a lover. With my
sisters, who were much more agreeable and much more attractive than I,
it was otherwise."

But now I must return to that moment of my life when I released myself
from every-day paths--but, thank God! not with violence, not amid
discontent; but with the blessing of those who had given me life, for
which I now, for the first time, blessed them.

Touched by my steadfastness of purpose, and by the true goodwill which
they had perceived in me, my parents determined--God reward them for
it!--to bestow upon my desired domestic establishment the sum of money
which they had put aside for my dowry, in case I married. Indeed, their
and my sisters' kindness made them find pleasure in arranging all for me
in the best and most comfortable manner; and when I left the paternal
roof for my own new home, it was with tears of real pain. Yet I had too
clearly studied my own character and position to be undecided.

It was a day in April, my thirtieth birthday, when, accompanied by my
own family, I went to take possession of my new, small, but pretty
dwelling. Two young father-and-motherless girls, not quite without
means, followed me to my new habitation. They were to become my
children, I their mother.

I never shall forget the first morning of my waking in my new abode. At
this very moment it is as if I saw how the day dawned in the chamber;
how all the objects gradually assumed, as it seemed to me, an
unaccustomed definiteness. From the near church ascended the morning
hymn with its pleasant serious melody, which attuned the soul to
harmonious peace. I rose early; I had to care for house and children.
All was cheerful and festival-like in my soul; a sweet emotion
penetrated me like the enlivening breeze of spring. Also without spring
breathed. I saw the snow melt from the roofs, and fall down in
glittering drops, yet never had I seen the morning light in them so
clear as now. I saw the sparrows on the edge of the chimneys twittering
to greet the morning sun. I saw without, people going joyfully about
their employments: I saw the milk-woman going from door to door, and she
seemed to me more cheerful than any milk-woman I had ever seen before;
and the milk seemed to me whiter and more nutritious than common. It
seemed to me as if I now saw the world for the first time. I fancied
even myself to be altered as I looked in the glass; my eyes appeared to
me larger; my whole appearance to have become better, and more
important. In the chamber near me the children awoke--the little
immortals whom I was to conduct to eternal life. Yes, indeed, this was a
beautiful morning! In it the world first beamed upon me, and at the same
time my own inner world, and I became of worth and consequence in my own
estimation.

The active yet quiet life which I led from this time forth, suited me
perfectly well. From this time I became more thoroughly in harmony with
myself, and altogether happier. The day was often wearisome, but then
the evening rest was the sweeter, and the thought that I had passed a
useful day refreshed my soul. The children gave me many cares, many
troubles; but they gave likewise an interest to my life, and happiness
to my heart, and all the while, in pleasure and want, in joy and sorrow,
they became dearer and dearer to me. I cannot imagine that children can
be dearer to their own mother than Laura and Karin are to me.

In this new position I also became a better daughter, a more tender
sister than I had hitherto been; and I could now cheer the old age of my
parents far more than if I had remained an inactive and superfluous
person in their house. Now for the first time I had advantage of all
that was good in my education. Amid lively activity, and with a distinct
object in life, and in affectionate relationships, that which was vain
and false fell gradually away from my disposition; and the knowledge
which I had obtained, the truths which I had known, were productive in
heart and deed since I had, so to say, struck root in life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Evelina ceased. All had heard her with sympathy, but no one more than
Ernst Frank. A new picture of life was opened to his view, and the
truest sympathy expressed itself on his manly features. He suffered by
this picture of so contracted a world, in so oppressive and gloomy a
condition, and his thoughts already busied themselves with plans for
breaking open doors, for opening windows in these premises, to free this
oppressed and captive life.

"Ah, yes!" said Mrs. Gunilla, with a gentle sigh, "everybody here in
this world has their difficult path, but if every one walks in the fear
and admonition of the Lord, all arrive in the end at their home. Our
Lord God helps us all!" And Mrs. Gunilla took a large pinch of snuff.

"Don't forget the _Orbis Pictus_," exclaimed she to Elise, who with her
husband was preparing to go; "don't forget it, and let the children be
educated from it, that they may observe how the soul looks. He, he, he,
he!"




CHAPTER XIV.

THE ORPHAN.


The day was declining, and Ernst and Elise sate in one of the parlour
windows. Mutual communications received with mutual sympathy, had made
them have joy in each other--had let them feel at peace with life. They
were now silent; but a presentiment that for the future they should be
ever happier with each other, like a harmonious tone, responded in their
hearts, and brightened their countenances. In the mean time, the shadows
of evening began to grow broader, and a soft rain pattered on the
window. The sonorous voice of the Candidate, as he told stories to the
children, interrupted occasionally by their questions and exclamations,
was heard in the saloon. A feeling of home-peace came over the heart of
the father; he took the hand of his wife affectionately between his, and
looked joyfully into her gentle countenance, whilst she was projecting
little domestic arrangements. In the midst of this sense of happiness a
cloud suddenly passed over the countenance of the Judge, and tears
filled his eyes.

"What is it, Ernst?--what is amiss, Ernst?" asked his wife tenderly,
whilst she wiped away the tears with her hand. "Nothing," said he, "but
that I feel how happy we are. I see you, I hear our children without
there, and I cannot but think on that unfortunate child opposite, which
will be ruined in that wretched home."

"Ah, yes!" sighed Elise; "God help all unfortunate little ones on the
earth!"

Both cast their eyes involuntarily towards the nearest window of the
before-mentioned house. Something was moving before the window; a female
figure mounted on the window ledge, a dark child's head peeped out from
between her feet, was kicked away, and a large white cloth, which was
quickly unrolled, hid all within.

"He is dead!" said both husband and wife, looking at each other.

The Judge sent over to inquire how it was; the messenger returned with
the tidings that Mr. N. had been dead some hours.

Lights were now kindled behind the blind, and people appeared to be busy
within the chamber. The Judge walked up and down his room, evidently
much affected. "The poor child!--the poor little girl! what will become
of her? Poor child!" were his broken exclamations.

Elise read the soul of her husband. She had now for some time, in
consequence of a wish which she had perceived in his heart, accustomed
herself to a thought, which yet at this moment her lips seemed unwilling
to express: "Ernst," at length, suppressing a sigh, she began, "the pot
which boils for six little mouths will boil also for seven."

"Do you think so?" asked he, with pleasure, and with beaming eyes. He
embraced his wife tenderly, placed her beside him, and inquired--"Have
you proved your own strength? The heaviest part of this adoption would
rest upon you. Yet if you feel that you have courage to undertake it,
you would fulfil the wish of my heart."

"Ernst," said she, repressing a tear, "my strength is small, and nobody
knows that better than you do; but my will is good;--I will undertake
the trouble--you will support me?"

"Yes, we will help one another," said he, rising up joyfully. "Thank
you, Elise--thank you, my sweet friend," continued he, kissing her hand
affectionately. "Shall I go to fetch the child immediately?--but perhaps
it will not come with me."

"Shall I go with you?"

"You!" said he; "but it gets dark--it rains."

"We can take an umbrella," replied she; "and besides that, I will put on
a wrapping cloak, and will soon be ready."

Elise went to dress herself, and her husband went to help her, put on
her cloak for her, and paid her a thousand little affectionate
attentions.

After Elise had given sundry orders to Brigitta, she and her husband
betook themselves to the house, whilst the children set their little
heads together full of curiosity and wonder.

The two crossed the street in wind and rain; and after they had ascended
the dark staircase, they arrived at the room which Mr. N. had inhabited.
The door stood half open; a small candle, just on the point of going
out, burned within, spreading an uncertain and tremulous light over
everything. No living creature was visible within the room, which had a
desolate, and, as one might say, stripped appearance, so naked did it
seem. The dead man lay neglected on his bed, near to which was no trace
of anything which might have mitigated the last struggle. A cloth
covered his face. Ernst Frank went towards the bed, and softly raising
the cloth, observed for a moment silently the terrible spectacle, felt
the pulse of the deceased, and then covering again the face, returned
silently, with a pale countenance, to his wife.

"Where can we find the child?" said she, hastily. They looked
searchingly around; a black shadow, in a human form, seemed to move
itself in one corner of the room. It was the orphan who sate there, like
a bird of night, pressing herself close to the wall. Elise approached
her, and would have taken her in her arms, when the child suddenly
raised her hand, and gave her a fierce blow. Elise drew back astonished,
and then, after a moment, approached again the half-savage girl with
friendly words; again she made a threatening demonstration, but her
hands were suddenly grasped by a strong manly hand, and a look so
serious and determined was riveted upon her, that she trembled before
it, and resigned herself to the power of the stronger.

The Judge lifted her up, and set her on his knee, whilst she trembled
violently.

"Do not be afraid of us," said Elise, caressingly; "we are your good
friends. If you will come with me this evening to my little children,
you shall have sweet milk and wheaten bread with them, and then sleep in
a nice little bed with a rose-coloured coverlet."

The white milk, the rose-coloured coverlet, and Elise's gentle voice,
seemed to influence the child's mind.

"I would willingly go with you," said she, "but what will my father say
when he wakes?"

"He will be pleased," said Elise, wrapping a warm shawl about the
shoulders of the child.

At that moment a sound was heard on the stairs; little Sara uttered a
faint cry of terror, and began to tremble anew. Mr. N.'s housekeeper
entered, accompanied by two boys. The Judge announced to her his
determination to take the little Sara, as well as the effects of her
deceased father, under his care. At mention of the last word, the woman
began to fume and swear, and the Judge was obliged to compel her to
silence by severe threats. He then sent one of the boys for the
proprietor of the house, and after he had in his presence taken all
measures for the security of the effects of the deceased, he took the
little Sara in his arms, wrapped her in his cloak, and, accompanied by
his wife, went out.

All this time an indescribable curiosity reigned among the little
Franks. Their mother had said, in going out, that perhaps, on her
return, she should bring them another sister. It is impossible to say
the excitement this occasioned, and what was conjectured and counselled
by them. The Candidate could not satisfy all the questions which were
let loose upon him. In order, therefore, somewhat to allay their
fermentation, he sent them to hop through the room like crows, placing
himself at the head of the train. A flock of real crows could not have
fluttered away with greater speed than did they as the saloon door
opened and the father and mother entered. Petrea appeared curious in
the highest degree, as her father, opening his wide cloak, softly set
down something which, at the first moment, Petrea, with terror, took for
a chimney-sweeper; but which, on closer inspection, seemed to be a very
nice thin girl of about nine years old, with black hair, dark
complexion, and a pair of uncommonly large black eyes, which looked
almost threateningly on the white and bright-haired little ones which
surrounded her.

"There, you have another sister," said the father, leading the children
towards each other;--"Sara, these are your sisters--love one another,
and be kind to one another, my children."

The children looked at each other, somewhat surprised; but as Henrik and
Louise took the little stranger by the hand, they soon all emulated each
other in bidding her welcome.

Supper was served up for the children, more lights were brought in, and
the scene was lively. Everything was sacrificed to the new comer. Louise
brought out for her two pieces of confectionery above a year old, and a
box in which they might be preserved yet longer.

Henrik presented her with a red trumpet, conferring gratuitous
instruction on the art of blowing it.

Eva gave her her doll Josephine in its new gauze dress.

Leonore lighted her green and red wax tapers before the dark-eyed Sara.

Petrea--ah, Petrea!--would so willingly give something with her whole
heart. She rummaged through all the places where she kept anything, but
they concealed only the fragments of unlucky things; here a doll without
arms; here a table with only three legs; here two halves of a sugar-pig;
here a dog without head and tail. All Petrea's playthings, in
consequence of experiments which she was in the habit of making on them,
were fallen into the condition of that which had been--and even that
gingerbread-heart with which she had been accustomed to decoy Gabriele,
had, precisely on this very day, in an unlucky moment of curiosity, gone
down Petrea's throat. Petrea really possessed nothing which was fit to
make a gift of. She acknowledged this with a sigh; her heart was tilled
with sadness, and tears were just beginning to run down her cheeks, when
she was consoled by a sudden idea--The Girl and the Rose-bush! That
jewel she still possessed; it hung still, undestroyed, framed and behind
glass, over her bed, and fastened by a bow of blue ribbon. Petrea
hesitated only a moment; in the next she had clambered up to her little
bed, taken down the picture, and hastened now with beaming eyes and
glowing cheeks to the others, in order to give away the very loveliest
thing she had, and to declare solemnly that now "Sara was the possessor
of the Girl and the Rose-bush."

The little African appeared very indifferent about the sacrifice which
the little European had made to her. She received it, it is true, but
she soon laid it down again without caring any more about it, which
occasioned Louise to propose that she should keep it for her.

In the midst of these little occurrences the Assessor came in. He looked
with an inquisitive glance round the room, showed his white teeth, and
said to himself, "Yes, it's all right; it is what I expected. So,
indeed," added he aloud, in his angry manner, whilst he cordially shook
the hand of his friend, "I see you thought you had not children enough
of your own in the house, but you must drag in those of other people!
How many do you mean to burden yourselves with? Will there not be
another to-morrow? Were you not satisfied with a whole half-dozen girls
of your own? And what will become of them? One shall presently not be
able to get into the house for children! I suppose that you have such a
superfluity of money and property, that you must go and squander it on
others! Nay! good luck to you!--good luck to you!"

The Judge and his wife replied only by smiles to the grumbling of their
friend, and by the request that he would spend the evening with them.
But he said he had not time; and then, after he had laid large pears,
which he took from his pocket, under the napkins on the children's
plates, he went out.

Every one of those pears had its own distinctive sign: round Sara's was
a gold-coloured ribbon; and upon her plate, under the pear, was found a
bank-note of considerable value. It was his gift to the fatherless, yet
he never would acknowledge it. That was his way.

As the mother took Sara by the hand, in order to conduct her to rest,
Petrea had the indescribable delight of seeing that, from all the little
presents which had been made to her, she only took with her the girl and
the rose-bush, which she appeared to regard with pleasure.

Sara was seized with violent grief in the comfortable bedroom; tears
streamed with wonderful violence from her eyes, and she called loudly
for her father. Elise held her quietly in her arms, and let her weep out
her grief on her bosom, and then gently undressing her, and laying the
weary child in bed, had the pleasure of feeling how affectionately she
clasped her arms around her neck.

The girl and the rose-bush hung over her bed, but still there seemed to
be no rest on the snow-white couch for the "little African." Her dark
eyes glanced wildly about the room, and her hands grasped convulsively
Elise's white dress.

"Don't go," whispered she, "or else they will come and murder me."

Elise took the child's hands in hers, and repeated a simple and pious
little prayer, which she had taught to all her own children. Sara said
the words after her; and though it was only mechanically, she seemed to
become calmer, though shudderings still shook her frame, and she hold
fast by Elise's dress. Elise seated herself by her, and at the request
of the other children, "Mother, sing the song of the Dove--oh, the song
of the Dove!" she sang, with a pleasant low voice, that little song
which she herself had made for her children:

    There sitteth a dove so white and fair,
        All on the lily-spray,
    And she listeneth how, to Jesus Christ,
        The little children pray.

    Lightly she spreads her friendly wings,
        And to heaven's gate hath sped,
    And unto the Father in heaven she bears
        The prayers which the children said.

    And back she comes from heaven's gate,
        And brings--that dove so mild--
    From the Father in heaven, who hears her speak,
        A blessing for every child.

    Then, children, lift up a pious prayer,
        It hears whatever you say,
    That heavenly dove, so white and fair,
        That sits on the lily-spray.

During this song, the dove of peace descended on the soul of the child.
Pleasant images passed before her mind: the girl and the rose-bush and
the singing Elise were the same person--the rose diffused pleasant
odour; and whilst the long dark lashes approached her cheek yet nearer
and nearer, it seemed to her as if a white lovely singing-bird spread
out his wings caressingly and purifyingly over her breast. By degrees
the little hand opened itself, and let go the dress which it had
grasped, the tearful eyes closed, and the sweetness of repose came over
the fatherless and the motherless.

Elise raised herself gently, and went to the beds of the other children.
The dove on the lily-spray sent sleep also to them; and after the mother
had pressed her lips to their cheeks, had spoken with Brigitta about the
new comer, and had received from the child-loving, good-natured old
woman, the most satisfactory promises, she hastened back to her husband.

He listened with curiosity to what she had to relate of Sara. This new
member of the family, this increase of his cares, seemed to have
expanded and animated his soul. His eyes beamed with a gentle emotion as
he spoke of the future prospects of the children. Evelina's history,
which was still fresh in his and Elise's mind, seemed to spur him on to
call forth for his family quite another picture of life.

"We will bring up our children," said he warmly, "not for ourselves, but
for themselves. We will seek for their good, for their happiness; we
will rightly consider what may conduce to this, as much for one child as
for another; we will endeavour to win and to maintain their full
confidence; and should there, dear Elise, be any harshness or severity
in me, which would repel the children from me, you must assist me; let
their secret desires and cares come to me through you!"

"Yes! where else could they go?" returned she, with the deepest feeling;
"you are my support, my best strength in life! Without you how weak
should I be!"

"And without you," said he, "my strength would become sternness. Nature
gave me a despotic disposition. I have had, and have still, many times
the greatest difficulty to control it; but with God's help I shall
succeed! My Elise, we will improve ever. On the children's account, in
order to make them happy, we will endeavour to ennoble our own nature."

"Yes, that we will, Ernst!" said she; "and may the peace in the house
make betimes the spirit of peace familiar to their bosoms!"

"We will make them happy," began the father again, with yet increasing
warmth; "with God's help, not one of them shall wander through life
unhappy and infirm of spirit. My little girls! you shall not grow up
like half-formed human beings; no illusions shall blind your eyes to
what are the true riches of life; no noble desires shall you experience
unsatisfied. Ah, life is rich enough to satisfy all the birds under
heaven, and no one need be neglected on earth! Your innocent life shall
not fail of strength and joy; you shall live to know the actuality of
life, and that will bring a blessing on every day, interest on every
moment, and importance on every occupation. It will give you repose and
independence in sorrow and in joy, in life and in death!"

Whilst Elise listened to these words, she felt as if a refreshing breeze
passed through her soul. Nothing more seemed to her difficult. All the
troubles of life seemed light, on account of the bright end to be
attained. And then, as she thought on the manly warm heart which lived
so entirely for her good and the children's, she felt a proud joy that
she could look up to her husband; and at the same time a sense of
humility slid into her heart, she bowed herself over his hand, and
kissed it fervently.

This did not please the Judge, because, like every other decided and
powerful man, it gratified him rather to pay homage to woman than, at
least by outward bearing, to receive homage from her. He therefore
withdrew his hand with some displeasure.

"Why may I not kiss your hand," inquired Elise, "if it give me
pleasure?"

"Because it gives me no pleasure, and you must not do it again."

"Well, well, dear friend, you need not forbid it so sternly. Perhaps I
shall never again have the desire to do it."

"All the better," said he.

"Perhaps not!" returned Elise. "But let us now go to rest."




PART II.

CHAPTER I.

THE NEW HOUSE.


"Farewell, oh house of my childhood! Farewell, you walls, insensible
witnesses of my first tears, my first smiles, and my first false steps
on the slippery path of life--of my first acquaintance with water-gruel
and A B C! Thou corner, in which I stood with lessons difficult to be
learned; and thou, in which I in vain endeavoured to tame the most
thankless of all created things, a fly and a caterpillar!--you floors,
which have sustained me sporting and quarrelling with my beloved brother
and sisters!--you papers, which I have torn in my search after imagined
treasures;--you, the theatre of my battles with carafts and
drinking-glasses--of my heroic actions in manifold ways, I bid you a
long farewell, and go to live in new scenes of action--to have new
adventures and new fate!"

Thus spake Petrea Frank, whilst, with dignified gestures, she took a
tragic-comic farewell of the home which she and her family were now
about to leave.

It was a rainy day, in the middle of April. A black silk cloak, called
merrily the "Court-preacher," a piece of property held in common by the
Frank family, and a large red umbrella, called likewise the
"Family-roof," which was common property too, were on this day seen in
active promenade on the streets of the city of X----. What all this
passing to and fro denoted might probably be conjectured if one had seen
them accompanied by a tall, fair, blue-eyed maid-servant, and a little
brown, active, servant-man, carrying bandboxes, baskets, packages, etc.,
etc.

Towards twilight might have been seen, likewise, the tall thin figure of
Jeremias Munter, holding the "family-roof" over the heads of himself and
Petrea Frank. Petrea seemed to be carrying something under her cloak,
laughed and talked, and she and the Assessor seemed to be very much
pleased with each other. Alas! this satisfaction did not endure long;
on the steps of the front-door Petrea accidentally trod on the dangling
lace of her boot, made a false step, and fell. A large paper case of
confectionery suddenly proceeded from under the "court-preacher," and
almond-wreaths, "brown sugar-candy, and iced fruits rolled in all
directions. Even amid the shock and the confusion of the first moment it
was with difficulty that Petrea restrained a loud laugh from bursting
forth when she saw the amazement of the Assessor, and the leaps which he
made, as he saw the confections hopping down the steps towards the
gutter. It was the Assessor's own tribute to the festival of the day
which was thus unluckily dispersed abroad.

"Yes, indeed, if there were no ladies," said the Assessor, vexed, "one
should be able to accomplish something in this world. But now they must
be coming and helping, and on that account things always go topsy-turvy.
'Let me only do it--let me only manage it,' say they; and they manage
and make it, so that----'Did one ever see anything so foolish!--To fall
over your foot-lace!'--but women have order in nothing; and yet people
set up such to govern kingdoms!--To govern kingdoms!!! I would ask
nothing more from them than that they should govern their feet, and keep
their boot and shoe strings tied. But from the queen down to the
charwoman, there is not a woman in this world who knows how to fasten
her boot-lace!"

Such was the philippic of Jeremias Munter, as he came into the room with
Petrea, and saw, after the great shipwreck, that which remained of the
confectionery. Petrea's excuses, and her prayers for forgiveness, could
not soften his anger. True it is, that an unfortunate disposition to
laugh, which overcame her, gave to all her professions of distress a
very doubtful appearance. Her distress, however, for all that, was real;
and when Eva came, and said, with a beseeching, flattering voice, "Dear
uncle, do not be angry any longer; poor Petrea is really quite cast
down--besides which she really has hurt her knee," the good man replied
with a very different voice:

"But has she, indeed? But why are people so clumsy--so given to tripping
and stumbling, that one----"

"One can get some more confections at any time," said Eva.

"Can one!" exclaimed Jeremias; "do they grow on trees, then? How? Shall
one then throw away one's money for confectionery, in order to see it
lie about the streets? Pretty management that would be, methinks!"

"Yet just say one kind word to Petrea," besought Eva.

"A kind word!" repeated Jeremias: "I would just tell her that another
time she should be so good as to fasten her shoestrings. Nay, I will go
now after some more confectionery; but only on your account, little Miss
Eva. Yes, yes; say I--I will now go: I can dance also, if it be
for----But how it rains! lend me the 'family-roof,' and the cloak there
I need also. Give it here handsomely! Well then, what is there to gape
at? How! will the people gape at me?--all very good; if it gives them
any pleasure, they may laugh at me, I shall not find myself any the
worse for it. Health and comfort are above all things, and one dress is
just as good as another."

The young girls laughed, and threw the "court-preacher," which hardly
reached to his knees, over the shoulders of the Assessor; and thus
apparelled he went forth with long strides.

The family had this day removed into a new house. Judge Frank had bought
it, together with a small garden, for the lifetime of himself and his
wife, and for the last two years he had been pulling down, building up,
repairing, and arranging: some doors he had built up, others he had
opened, till all was as convenient and as comfortable as he wished. His
wife, in full confidence, had left all to his good judgment, well
pleased for her own part to be spared the noise of bricklayers and
carpenters, which she escaped not without difficulty; to be spared from
going among shavings and under scaffoldings, and from clambering over
troughs full of mortar, etc. Papers for the walls and other ornamental
things had been left to the choice of herself and her daughters.

And now he went, full of pleasure, with his wife's arm in his, from one
story to another, and from one room into another, greatly pleased with
the convenient, spacious, and cheerful-looking habitation, and yet even
more so with his wife's lively gratification in all his work. And thus
she was obliged to promenade through the whole house, from the cellar up
to the roof; into the mangling-room, the wood-chamber, etc.

We will not weary the reader by following them in this promenade, but
merely make him acquainted with some of the rooms in which he will often
meet the family. We merely pass through the saloon and best parlour;
they were handsome, but resembled all such apartments; but the room
which the Judge had arranged with the most especial love, which was
designed for daily use, and as the daily assembling place of the family,
and which deserves our most intimate acquaintance, was the library, so
called. It was a large, very lively room, with three windows on one side
looking into a spacious market-place. Louise rejoiced especially over
this, for thus they could look out of the windows on market-days, and
see at once what they wished to buy; directly opposite lay the church,
with its beautiful churchyard well planted with trees; these objects
pleased Elise greatly. The side of the room opposite to the windows was
entirely covered with books; the shelves consisted of several divisions,
each one of which contained the literature of a different country. In
niches between the several divisions stood, on simple but tasteful
pedestals, busts of distinguished men, great for their heroic and
peaceful actions--standing there, said the Judge, not because they
separated the different nations of the earth, but because they united
them. Ernst Frank's library was truly a select one; it had been the
pleasure of his life, and still it was his delight to be increasing his
collection of book's. Now, for the first time, they were collected and
arranged all in one place. He rejoiced over these treasures, and
besought his daughters freely to make use of them (on this one express
condition, that every book should be restored again to its right place).
To Louise was consigned the office of librarian; to Petrea that of
amanuensis. Both mother and daughters were delighted with this room, and
began to consider where the work-table, the flower-table, and the
bird-cage should stand, and when all were arranged, they were found to
suit their places admirably. Against one of the short walls stood the
green sofa, the appointed place for the mother; and against the opposite
one the piano, and the harp, which was Sara's favourite instrument,
together with a guitar, whose strings were touched by Eva, as she sang
"Mamma mia."

An agreeable surprise awaited Elise as she was led through a curtained
door which conducted from the library into a sort of boudoir, whose one
window had the same prospect as the library--this was solely and
entirely her own consecrated room. She saw with emotion that the
tasteful furniture of the room was the work of her daughters; her
writing-table stood by the window; several beautiful pictures and a
quantity of very pretty china adorned the room. Elise saw, with thankful
delight, that all her favourite tastes, and all her little fancies, had
been studied and gratified both by husband and children.

A small curtained door, likewise, on the other side, conducted Elise
into her sleeping-room; and her husband made her observe how smoothly
these doors turned on their hinges, and how easily she, from either
side, could lock herself in and remain in quiet.

After this room, nothing gave Elise greater delight than the
arrangements for bathing, which the Judge had made particularly
convenient and comfortable; and he now turned the white taps with
remarkable pleasure, to exhibit how freely the warm water came out of
this, and the cold--no, out of this came the warm water, and out of the
other the cold. The cheerfulness and comfort of the whole arrangement
were intended to give to the bathing-day--which was almost as
religiously observed in this family as the Sunday--a double charm. In a
room adjoining that which was appropriated to dressing, the old cleanly
Brigitta had already her fixed residence. Here was she and the great
linen-press to grow old together. Here ticked her clock, and purred her
cat; here blossomed her geraniums and balsams, with the Bible and
Prayer-book lying between them.

The three light and pleasant rooms intended for the daughters lay in the
story above, and were simply but prettily furnished.

"Here they will feel themselves quite at home," said the father, as he
looked round with beaming eyes; "don't you think so, Elise? We will make
home so pleasant to our children that they shall not wish to leave it
without a really important and deserving cause. No disquiet, no
discontent with home and the world within it, shall drive them from the
paternal roof. Here they can have leisure and quiet, and be often alone,
which is a good thing. Such moments are needed by every one in order to
strengthen and collect themselves, and are good for young girls as well
as for any one else."

The mother gave her applause fully and cordially; but immediately
afterwards she was a little absent, for she had something of importance
to say to her eldest daughter; and as at that very moment Louise came
in, an animated conversation commenced between them, of which the
following reached the father's ear:

"And after them, pancakes; and, my good girl, take care that six of them
are excellently thick and savoury; you know, indeed, how Henrik likes
them."

"And should we not," suggested Louise, "have whipped cream and raspberry
jam with the pancakes?"

"Yes, with pleasure," returned the mother,--"Jacobi would unquestionably
recommend that."

Louise blushed, and the Judge besought with animation that there might
be something a little more substantial than "angels' food" for supper,
which was promised him.

The Assessor shook out the "family-roof" in the hall in indignation.
"The most miserable roof in all Christendom," said he; "it defends
neither from wind nor rain, and is as heavy as the ark! and----"

But at the very moment when he was shaking and scolding his worst, he
perceived a sound----exclamations and welcomes, in every possible
variety of joyous and cordial tones. The "court-preacher" was thrown
head and shoulders over the "family-roof," and with great leaps hastened
Jeremias forward to shake hands with the son and the friend of the
house, who were just now returned home from the University.

Tokens of condolement mingled themselves with welcomes and
felicitations.

"How wet, and pale, and cold you are!"

"Oh, we have had a magnificent shower!" said Henrik, shaking himself,
and casting a side glance on Jacobi, who looked both downcast and
doleful in his wet apparel. "Such weather as this is quite an affair of
my own. In wind and rain one becomes so--I don't know rightly how--do
you, _mon cher_?"

"A jelly, a perfect jelly!" said Jacobi, in a mournful voice; "how can
one be otherwise, knocked about in the most infamous of peasant-cars,
and storm, and pouring rain, so that one is perfectly battered and
melted! Hu, hu, u, u, u, uh!"

"Oh, according to my opinion," said Henrik, laughing heartily at the
gestures of his travelling companion, "it is a hardening sort of
weather; there is a proud exalting feeling in it, sitting there quite
calm under the raging of the elements; especially when one looks down
from one's elevation on other fellow-mortals, who go lamenting, and full
of anxiety, under their umbrellas. Thus one sits on one's car as on a
throne; nay, indeed, one gets quite a flattering idea of oneself, as if
one were a little, tiny philosopher. Apropos! I bethink myself now, as
if we had seen, as we came this way, a philosopher in a lady's cloak
walking hither. But, how are you all, sweet, sweet sisters? How long it
is since I saw you!" and he pressed their hands between his cold and wet
ones.

This scene, which took place in twilight, was quickly brought to an end
by the ladies resolutely driving the gentlemen out to their own chamber
to change their clothes. Jacobi, it is true, on his own account, did not
require much driving, and Louise found Henrik's philosophy on this
occasion not so fully adopted. Louise had already taken care that a good
blazing fire should welcome the travellers in their chamber.

In the mean time, the ladies quartered themselves in the library; lights
were kindled, the table spread; the Judge helped all, and was highly
delighted if people only called to him. The Assessor looked enraptured,
as Eva arranged his confections on little plates. Petrea did not venture
to look at them, much less to touch them.

"By Jove, my dear girls, how comfortable it is here!" exclaimed the
Judge in the joy of his heart, as he saw the library thus peopled, and
in its for-the-future every-day state. "Are you comfortable there, on
the sofa, Elise? Let me get you a footstool. No; sit still, my friend!
what are men for in the world?"

The Candidate--we beg his pardon, the Master of Arts, Jacobi--appeared
no longer to be the same person who had an hour before stood there in
his wet dress, as he made his appearance, handsomely apparelled, with
his young friend, before the ladies, and his countenance actually beamed
with delight at the joyful scene which he there witnessed.

People now examined one another nearer. They discovered that Henrik had
become considerably paler as well as thinner, which Henrik received as a
compliment to his studies. Jacobi wished also a compliment on his
studies, but it was unanimously refused to him on account of his
blooming appearance. He protested that he was flushed with the weather,
but that availed nothing. Louise thought privately to herself that
Jacobi had decidedly gained in manly bearing; that he had a simpler and
more vigorous demeanour; he was become, she thought, a little more like
her father. Her father was Louise's ideal of manly perfection.

Little Gabriele blushed deeply, and half hid herself behind her mother,
as her brother addressed her.

"How is your highness, my most gracious Princess Turandotte!" said he;
"has your highness no little riddle at hand with which to confuse weak
heads?"

Her little highness looked in the highest degree confused, and tried to
withdraw the hand which her brother kissed again and again. Gabriele was
quite bashful before the tall student.

Henrik had a little _tete-a-tete_ with every sister, but it was somewhat
short and cold with Sara; after which he seated himself by his mother,
took her hand in his, and a lively and general conversation began,
whilst Eva handed about the confectionery.

"But what is amiss now?" asked Henrik, suddenly. "Why have the sisters
all left us to take council together there, with such important
judge-like faces? Is the nation in danger? May not I go, in order to
save the native land?--If one could only first of all have eaten one's
supper in peace," added he, speaking aside, after the manner of the
stage.

But it was precisely about the supper that they were talking. There was
a great danger that the pancakes would not succeed; and Louise could not
prevent Henrik and Jacobi running down into the kitchen, where, to the
greatest amusement of the young ladies, and to the tragi-comic despair
of the cook, they acted their parts as cooks so ridiculously that Louise
was obliged at length, with an imposing air, to put an end to the
laughter, to the joking, and to the burnt pancakes, in order that she
herself might put her hand to the work. Under her eye all went well; the
pancakes turned out excellently. Jacobi besought one from her own hand,
as wages for his work; graciously obtained it, and then swallowed the
hot gift with such rapture that it certainly must have burnt him
inwardly, had it not been for another species of warmth (which we
consider very probable)--a certain well-known spiritual fire, which
counteracted the material burning, and made it harmless. Have we not
here, in all simplicity, suggested something of a homoeopathic nature?

But we will leave the kitchen, that we may seat ourselves with the
family at the supper-table, where the mother's savoury, white pancakes,
and the thick ones for Henrik, were found to be most excellent, and
where the "angels' food" was devoured with the greatest earthly
enjoyment.

After this, they drank the health of the travellers, and sang a merry
little song, made by Petrea. The father was quite pleased with his
Petrea, who, quite electrified, sang too with all her might, although
not with a most harmonious voice, which, however, did not annoy her
father's somewhat unmusical ear.

"She sings louder than they all," said he to his wife, who was
considerably less charmed than he with Petrea's musical accompaniment.

Although every one in the company had had an exciting and fatiguing day,
the young people began immediately after supper, as if according to a
natural law, to arrange themselves for the dance.

Jacobi, who appeared to be captivated by Sara's appearance, led her in
the magic circle of the waltz.

"Our sensible little Queen-bee," a rather broad-set, but very well-grown
blonde of eighteen, distinguished herself in the dance by her beautiful
steps, and her pleasing though rather too grave carriage. Everybody,
however, looked with greater admiration on Eva, because she danced with
heart and soul. Gabriele, with her golden curls, flew round like a
butterfly. But who did not dance this evening?--Everybody was actually
enthusiastic--for all were infected with the joyous animal spirits of
Henrik. Even Jeremias Munter, to the amazement of everybody, led Eva,
with most remarkable skill, through the Polska,[4] the most artificial
and perplexing of dances.

It was only at midnight that the dance was discontinued, at the
suggestion of Elise. But before they separated, the Judge begged his
wife to sing the well-known little song--"The First Evening in the New
House." She sang it in her simple, soul-touching manner, and the joy
full of peace which this song breathed penetrated every heart; even the
grave countenance of the Judge gleamed with an affectionate emotion. A
quiet glory appeared to rest on the family, and beautified all
countenances; for it is given to song, like the sun, to throw its
glorifying light upon all human circumstances, and to lend them beauty,
at least for a moment. "The spinner," and "the aged man by the
road-side," are led by song into the kingdom of beauty, even as they are
by the Gospel into the kingdom of heaven.

On taking leave for the night, all agreed upon a rendezvous the next
morning after breakfast in the orchard, in order to see what was to be
made of it.

The father conducted the daughters up into their chambers. He wanted to
see yet once more how they looked, and inquired from them again and
again--"Are you satisfied, my girls? Do they please you? Would you wish
anything besides? If you wish anything, speak out right Swedishly."

As now his daughters, assuring him of their contentment, gratefully and
affectionately hung about him, there was not a happier man on the face
of the earth than Judge Frank.

The mother, on her part, had taken her first-born with her into her
little boudoir. She had as yet not been able to speak one word to him
alone. Now she questioned him on everything, small and great, which
concerned him, and how freely and entirely he opened his whole heart to
her!

They talked of the circumstances of the family; of the purchase of this
new property; of the debt which they had thereby contracted; of the
means through which, by degrees, it would be paid off, and of the
necessity there was for greater economy on all sides. They talked, too,
of the daughters of the house.

"Louise is superb," said Henrik, "but her complexion is rather muddy;
could she not use some kind of wash for it? She would be so much
handsomer if she had a fresher complexion; and then she looks, the least
in the world, cathedral-like. What a solemn air she had to-night, as
Jacobi made some polite speech to her! Do you know, mother, I think the
sisters sit too much; it is in that way that people get such grave
cathedral-like looks. We must make them take more exercise; we must find
out some lively exhilarative exercise for them. And Eva! how she is
grown, and how kind and happy she looks! It is a real delight to see
her--one can actually fall in love with her! But what in all the world
is to be done with Petrea's nose? It does, indeed, get so large and
long, that I cannot tell what is to be done! It is a pity, though, for
she is so good-hearted and merry. And Leonore! How sickly and unhappy
she looks at times! We must endeavour to cheer her up."

"Yes, that we will," said the mother; "if she were but healthy, we could
soon manage that; but how does little Gabriele please you?"

"Ah! she is very lovely, with her high-bred little airs--quite
fascinating," said Henrik.

"And Sara!" asked she.

"Yes," said he, "she is lovely--very lovely, I think; but still there is
something, at least to my taste, very unpleasant in her. She is not like
my sisters; there is something about her so cold, so almost repulsive."

"Yes," said the mother, sighing; "there is at times something very
extraordinary about her, more particularly of late. I fear that a
certain person has too great, and that not a happy, influence over her.
But Sara is a richly gifted and truly interesting girl, out of whom
something very good may be made, if--if----She gives us, indeed, anxiety
at times, for we are as much attached to her as if she were our own
child. She has a most extraordinary talent for music--you must hear her.
There really is much that is very distinguished and truly amiable in
her; you will see it, as you remain so much longer time with us."

"Yes, thank God!" said Henrik, "I can now reckon on that, on remaining
some months at home."

The conversation now turned on Henrik's future prospects. His father
wished him to devote himself to mining, and with this end in view he had
studied, but he felt ever, more and more, a growing inclination to
another profession, and this had become a ground of dissatisfaction in
the family. The mother now besought her first-born to prove himself
carefully and seriously before he deserted the path to which his father
was attached, and which Henrik himself had selected in common council
with his father. Henrik promised this solemnly. His soul was warm and
noble. His young heart possessed every fine sentiment, a pure enthusiasm
for virtue and for his country, a glowing desire to live for them, this
belonged to his heart in the richest measure. The wish to be useful to
the community generally, united itself with all his views of
self-advantage, and he only saw his own prosperity in connexion with
that of his family. These thoughts and sentiments poured themselves
forth in that sweet confidential hour freely and fully to his
mother--the happy mother, whose heart beat with joy and with proudest
hope of her first-born, the favourite of her soul, her summer child!

"And when I have made my own way in the world," added Henrik, joyfully
kissing the hand of his mother, "and have a house of my own, then,
mother, you shall come to me, and live with me, will you not?"

"And what would your father say to that?" said she, in a tone like his
own.

"Oh! he has all the sisters who can keep house for him," said Henrik,
"and----"

"Do you intend to sit up here the whole night?" asked a voice at the
door. It was the voice of the Judge, and both mother and son rose up as
if they had been caught in the fact of conspiracy. The conspiracy,
however, was immediately imparted to the Judge, whereupon he declared
that all this would lead to such fearful consequences that they had
better say no more about it.

Both mother and son laughed, and said "Good night" to each other. But as
Henrik conveyed the hand of his mother towards his lips, he fell into a
sort of ecstasy over it.

"Heavens! what a white hand! and what small fingers! nay, how can people
have such small fingers?" And with a sort of comic devotion he kissed
the little finger of that beautiful hand.

"I see I must carry you off forcibly, if I would have you to myself,"
said the Judge merrily, and taking his wife's arm in his, led her out.

But her thoughts still hovered around her first-born, her handsome and
richly endowed son. She uttered a glowing prayer for his perfecting in
all good, whilst all were sleeping sweetly the first night in the new
house.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] A wild and animated Swedish national dance.




CHAPTER II.

THE MORROW.


How pleasant it must have been to the family the next morning to
assemble round the amply-supplied breakfast-table in a handsome and
spacious drawing-room. But drawing-room, and breakfast-table, and all
outward comforts, signify nothing, if the inward are wanting; if
affectionate dispositions and kind looks do not make the room bright,
and the breakfast well-flavoured. But nothing was wanting on this
morning to the family of the Franks--not even the sun. It shone in
brightly to illumine the bright scene.

Henrik made a speech to Madame Folette, in testimony of his love and
reverence for her, and of his joy on meeting her again in so good a
state of preservation.

Louise, with the help of Eva, served tea and coffee, bread and butter,
etc., taking particular care that everybody had just what they liked
best. The basket which held sugar-biscuits was constantly in the
neighbourhood of Jacobi.

"How glorious this is!" exclaimed Henrik, rubbing his hands, and casting
a glance of pleasure around on his parents and sisters, "it is quite
paradisiacal! What does your Majesty desire? Ah, your most devoted
servant! Coffee, if I might ask it, excellent Madame Folette!"

"After breakfast," said the mother, "I have something for you to guess."

"Something to guess?" said Henrik, "what can it be? Tell me, what is it
like, sweet mamma? what name does it bear?"

"A wedding," replied she.

"A wedding? A most interesting novelty! I cannot swallow another morsel
till I have made it out! Jacobi, my best fellow, can I possess myself of
a biscuit? A wedding! Do I know the parties?"

"Perfectly well."

"It cannot possibly be our excellent Uncle Munter, himself?" suggested
he. "He seems to me very odd, and, as it were, a little touched in the
heart."

"Oh, no, no! He'll not marry."

"He is already so horribly old," said Eva.

"Old!" exclaimed the Judge. "He is something above forty, I fancy; you
don't call that so horribly old, my little Eva. But it is true he has
always had an old look."

"Guess better," said the mother.

"I have it! I have it!" said Petrea, blushing. "It is Laura! Aunt
Evelina's Laura!"

"Ah, light breaks in," said Henrik; "and the bridegroom is Major Arvid
G. Is it not?"

"Precisely," said his mother. "Laura makes a very good match. Major G.
is a very good-looking, excellent young man; and beyond this, has a good
property. He has persuaded Evelina to remove with Karin to his beautiful
seat at Axelholm, and to consider Laura's and his home as theirs for the
future. Eva dear, set the ham before Henrik. What do you want, my angel
Gabriele? Another rusk? Heavens! how quick you are! Leonore, may I give
you some more bread and butter, my child? No?"

"But I hope," exclaimed Henrik, "that we shall be invited to the
wedding. Evelina, who is such a sensible woman, must have the good sense
to invite us. Most gracious sister Queen-bee, these rolls--very
nourishing and estimable rolls--were they baked before or after the
Flood?"

"After," replied Louise, a little piqued, yet with a smile.

"Oh! I humble myself in the dust," said he. "I pray your Majesty most
graciously to pardon me--[_aside_--but after all they taste remarkably
either of the ark or of a cupboard]. But what in all the world sort of
breakfast are you making, Petrea? Nay, dear sister, such, a superfluity
in eating never can prosper. I pray you do not eat yourself ill!"

Petrea, who had her curious fancies, or as Louise called them,
her "raptures," had now for some time had the fancy to take only a
glass of cold water and a piece of dry bread for her breakfast. On
account of this abstinence, Henrik now jested, and Petrea answered
him quite gaily; Louise, on the contrary, took up the matter quite
seriously, and thought--as many others did--that this whim of Petrea's
had a distant relationship to folly; and folly, Louise--the sensible
Louise--considered the most horrible of horrors; Louise, who was so very
sensible!

"Now, really, you must not sit gossiping any longer!" exclaimed the
father, when he saw their mouths only put in motion by conversation,
"else I must go away and leave you; and I should very much like to go
into the garden with you first."

A general rising followed these words, and all betook themselves to the
garden, with the exception of Leonore, who was unwell, and the little
Gabriele, who had to be careful on account of the damp.

In the mean time the garden had its own extraordinary circumstances, and
all here did not go on in the usual mode; for although the place was yet
not laid out, and the April snow covered the earth, and still hung in
great masses on the low fruit-trees, which were the only wealth of the
garden, yet these, not at all according to the commonly established laws
of nature, were covered with fruit the most beautiful; rennets and
oranges clustered the twigs, and shone in the sun. Exclamations were
uttered in every variety of tone; and although both Jacobi and Henrik
protested that they could not discover any way of accounting for this
supernatural phenomenon, still they did not escape the suspicion of
being instrumental in the witchcraft, spite of all the means they used
to establish their innocence. The opinion, however, was universally
adopted, that good and not bad elves had been thus busily at work; and
the fruit, therefore, was gathered without fear of bad consequences, and
laid in baskets. The elves were praised both in prose and verse; and
there never was a merrier harvest-feast.

The Judge had some trouble to get anybody to listen to all his plans of
lilac-hedges, strawberry-beds, of his arbour, and his garden-house. The
narrow space, however, in which he had to work troubled him.

"If one could only get possession of the piece of land beyond this!"
said he, striking with his stick upon the tall red-boarded fence which
bounded one side of the garden. "Look here, Elise, peep through that
gap; what a magnificent site it is for building--it extends down to the
river!--what a magnificent promenade it would make, properly laid out
and planted! It might be a real treasure to the whole city, which needs
a regular walk in its neighbourhood; and now it lies there desolate, and
useful to nobody, but only for a few cows, because the proprietor does
not know how to make use of it; and our good men of the city have not
public spirit enough to purchase it out of the common fund for the
general good. If I were but rich enough to buy the place, it should soon
have a different appearance, and instead of cows human beings should be
walking there; these boards should be torn down, and our garden should
be united to the great promenade. What a situation it would be!"

"Would not beehives answer very well here?" asked our sensible
Queen-bee; "the sun strikes directly on these boards."

"You are perfectly right, Louise," said her father, well pleased; "that
is a good thought; this is an excellent place for beehives: to-morrow
I'll see about some. Two or three we must have, and that directly, that
the bees may have the advantage of the apple and cherry bloom. Thus we
can see them working altogether, and learn wisdom from them, and watch
how they collect honey for us. That will be a pleasure--don't you think
so, Elise?"

Elise rejoiced sincerely over the bees, and over the garden. It would
give her great pleasure to lay it out. She would set Provence-roses as
soon as possible; and forcing houses also should be erected. Eva thought
she should give herself up to gardening.

But it was necessary to leave for the present the future home of
radishes and roses, because it was wet and uncomfortable out of doors.

Gabriele made large eyes when she saw the basketful of fruit which had
been gathered in the garden. But the little Princess Turandotte could
not unravel the riddle respecting them, as Henrik presented it to her.

The forenoon was spent in clearing away, and in arranging things in the
house. Sara alone took no part in it, but took lessons on the harp from
a distinguished young musician of the name of Schwartz, who had come a
stranger to the city. She sate the whole morning at her music, which she
loved passionately; in the mean time, Petrea had promised to enact the
part of lady's-maid to her, and to put all her clothes and things in
order.

Henrik sate perfectly happy in his sisters' rooms, and nearly killed
himself with laughing while he watched in part their clearing away and
bustling about, and in part taking a share in all. The quantities of
bundles of pieces, old bonnets, cloaks, dresses, etc., which were here
in motion, and played their parts, formed a singular contrast to his
student-world, in which such a thing as a piece of printed cotton or a
pin might be reckoned quite a curiosity. Then the seriousness with which
all these things were treated, and the jokes and merriment which arose
out of all this seriousness, were for him most delicious things.

Nothing, however, amused him more than Louise and all her "properties,"
as well as the great care which, with a half-comic, half-grave
earnestness, she took of them; but he declared solemnly that he would
disclaim all relationship with her if ever he should see her wearing a
certain pale green shawl, called jokingly "spinage," and a pale grey
dress, with the surname of "water-gruel." None of the sisters had so
many possessions as Louise, and none treated them with so much
importance; for she had in the highest degree that kind of passion which
we will call property-passion. Her bandboxes and bundles burst
themselves out of the space in which she wished to stow them, and came
tumbling down upon her head. She accused Henrik of being guilty of these
accidents; and certain it is that he helped her, not without some
mischievous pleasure, to put them up again in their places.

Louise was well known in the family for her love of what was old; the
more shabby a dress was, the more distinguished she seemed to think it;
and the more faded a shawl, the more, according to her, it resembled a
Cashmere. This affection for old things extended itself sometimes to
cakes, biscuits, creams, etc., which often occasioned Henrik to inquire
whether an article of a doubtful date had its origin before or after the
Flood. We will here add to the description of Louise a few touches,
which may make the reader more fully acquainted with her character.

Pure was she both in Heart and intention, with great love of truth, and
a high moral sense, although too much given to lecturing, and sometimes
a little wanting in charity towards erring fellow-mortals. She had much
of her father's understanding and prudence, but came, of course, far
short of him in knowledge of mankind and in experience, although now, in
her eighteenth year, she considered herself to have a perfect knowledge
of mankind. The moral worth of her soul mirrored itself in her exterior,
which, without her being handsome, pleased, and inspired a degree of
confidence in her, because good sense expressed itself in her calm
glance, and her whole demeanour was that of a decided and well-balanced
character. A certain comic humour in her would often dissolve her solemn
mien and important looks into the most hearty laughter; and when Louise
laughed, she bore a charming resemblance to her mother, for she
possessed Elise's beautiful mouth and teeth.

She was as industrious as an ant, and in the highest degree helpful to
those who were deserving of help, but less merciful than Lafontaine's
ants were to thoughtless crickets and their fellows. Louise had three
hobby-horses, although she never would confess that she had a single
one. The first was to work tapestry; the second, to read sermons; and
the third, to play Patience, and more especially Postillion. A fourth
had of late began to discover itself, and that was for medicine--for the
discovering and administering of useful family medicines; nay, she had
herself decocted a certain elixir from nine bitter herbs, which Henrik
declared would be very serviceable in sending people to the other world.
Louise was no way disturbed by all this, for she did not allow herself
to be annoyed by remarks.

She prized, enjoyed, and sought, above all things, after "the right;"
but she also set a high value on "respectability" and "property," and
seemed to think that these were hers of course. She had the excellent
peculiarity of never undertaking anything that she could not creditably
get through with; but she had a great opinion of her own ability, in
which her family participated, although they sometimes attempted to set
her down. In the mean time she was in many instances the adviser and
support of the family; and she had a real genius for the mighty
department of housekeeping.

The parents called her, with a certain satisfaction--the father with a
secret pride--"our eldest daughter." The sisters styled her rather
waggishly "our eldest sister," and sometimes simply "our eldest;" and
"our eldest" knew exceedingly well how to regard her own dignity in
respect to rank and priority. Beyond this, she had a high idea of the
value of woman.

Louise had an album, in which all her friends and acquaintance had
written down their thoughts or those of others. It was remarkable what a
mass of morality this book contained.

We fear that our readers may be somewhat weary of hearing the names of
Sara, Louise, Eva, Leonore, Petrea, Gabriele, repeated so often one
after another, and we are very sorry that we find it unavoidable yet
once more to present the whole array in connexion with Louise. But we
will see what little variety we can make by taking them at hap-hazard,
and therefore now steps forward


PETREA.

We are all of us somewhat related to chaos; Petrea was very closely so.
Momentary bursts of light and long periods of confusion alternated in
her. There was a great dissimilarity between Louise and Petrea. While
Louise required six drawers and more to contain her possessions, there
needed scarcely half a one for the whole wardrobe of Petrea; and this
said wardrobe too was always in such an ill-conditioned case, that it
was, according to Louise, quite lamentable, and she not unfrequently
lent a helping hand to its repair. Petrea tore her things, and gave away
without bounds or discrimination, and was well known in the sisterly
circle for the bad state of her affairs. Petrea had no turn for
accumulation; on the contrary, she had truly, although Louise would not
allow it, a certain turn for art.

She was always occupied by creations of one kind or another, either
musical, or architectural, or poetical. But all her creations contained
something of that which is usually called trash. At twelve years old she
wrote her first romance: "Annette and Belis loved each other tenderly;
they experienced adversity in their love; were at last, however, united,
and lived henceforth in a charming cottage, surrounded with hedges of
roses, and had eight children in one year," which we may call a very
honourable beginning. A year afterwards she began a tragedy, which was
to be called "Gustavus Adolphus and Ebba Brahe," and which opened with
these verses spoken by one Delagardie:

          Now from Germania's coast returned,
              I see again the much-loved strand;
          From war I come, without a wound,
              Once more into my native land.
    Say, Banner say, what woe has caused these tears,
    Am I not true to thee, or is it idle hope alone that will befool my years?

Whether no sheet of paper was broad enough to contain the lengthened
lines, or any other cause interfered to prevent the completion of the
piece, we know not; but certain it is that it was soon laid aside.
Neither did a piece of a jocular nature, which was intended to emulate
the fascinating muse of Madame Lenngren,[5] advance much further--the
beginning was thus:

    Within the lordly castle Elfvakolastie,
        Which lay, in sooth, somewhere in Sverge,[6]
    There lived of yore the lovely Melanie,
        The only daughter of Count Stjerneberge.

At the present time Petrea was engaged on a poem, the title of which,
written in large letters, ran thus--"The Creation of the World!"

The Creation of the World began thus:

    CHAOS.

    Once in the depths etern of darkness lying,
        This mighty world
    Waited expectantly the moments flying
        When light should be unfurled.
    The world was nothing then, which now is given
        To crowds of busy men;
    And all our beautiful star-spangled heaven
        Was desolate darkness then;
    Yet He was there, who before time existed,
        Who will endure for ever.

The creation of the world ceased with this faint glimmering of light,
and was probably destined under Petrea's hand never to be brought forth
from chaos. Petrea had an especially great inclination for great
undertakings, and the misfortune to fail in them. This want of success
always wounded her deeply, but in the next moment the impulse of an
irresistibly vigorous temperament raised her above misfortune in some
new attempt. The blood rushed up to her young head, and filled it with a
mass of half-formed thoughts, fancies, and ideas; her mind and her
character were full of disquiet. At times joyous and wild beyond bounds,
she became on the other hand wretched and dispirited without reason.
Poor Petrea! She was wanting in every kind of self-regulation and
ballast, even outwardly; she walked ill--she stood ill--she curtseyed
ill--sate ill--and dressed ill; and occasioned, in consequence, much
pain to her mother, who felt so acutely whatever was unpleasing; and
this also was very painful to Petrea, who had a warm heart, and who
worshipped her mother.

Petrea also cherished the warmest affection and admiration for Sara, but
her manner even of evidencing her affection was commonly so entirely
without tact, as rather to displease than please the object of it. The
consciousness of this fact embittered much of Petrea's life; but it
conducted her by degrees to a love in which tact and address are of no
consequence, and which is never unreturned.

Sometimes Petrea was seized with a strong consciousness of the
chaoticness of her state; but then, again, at other times she would have
a presentiment that all this would clear itself away, and then that
something which was quite out of the common way would come forth; and
then she was accustomed to say, half in jest and half in earnest, to her
sisters, "You'll see what I shall turn out sometime!" But in what this
extraordinary turning out should consist nobody knew, and least of all
poor Petrea herself. She glanced full of desire towards many suns, and
was first attracted by one and then by another.

Louise had for Petrea's prophesyings great contempt, but the little
Gabriele believed in them all. She delighted herself, moreover, so
heartily in all that her sister began, that Petrea sacrificed to her her
most beautiful gold-paper temple; her original picture of shepherdesses
and altars; and her island of bliss in the middle of peaceful waters,
and in the bay of which lay a little fleet of nut-shells, with rigging
of silk, and laden with sugar-work, and from the motion of which, and
the planting of its wonderful flowers, and glorious fruit-bearing trees,
Petrea's heart had first had a foretaste of bliss.

Petrea's appearance imaged her soul;--for this too was very variable;
this too had its "raptures;" and here too at times also a glimmering
light would break through the chaos. If the complexion were muddled, and
the nose red and swollen, she had a most ordinary appearance; but in
cooler moments, and when the rose-hue confined itself merely to the
cheeks, she was extremely good-looking; and sometimes too, and that even
in her ugly moments, there would be a gleam in her eye, and an
expression in her countenance, which had occasioned Henrik to declare
that "Petrea was after all handsome!"

To a chaotic mind, the desire for controversy is in-born; it is the
conflict of the elements with each other. There was no subject upon
which Petrea had not her conjectures, and nothing upon which she was not
endeavouring to get a clear idea; on this account she discussed all
things, and disputed with every one with whom she came in contact;
reasoned, or more properly made confusion, on politics, literature,
human free-will, the fine arts, or anything else; all which was very
unpleasant to the tranquil spirit of her mother, and which, in connexion
with want of tact, especially in her zeal to be useful, made poor Petrea
the laughing-stock of every one; a bitter punishment this, on earth,
although before the final judgment-seat of very little, or of no
consequence at all.


LEONORE.

Spite of the mother's embraces, and the appellation, "thou beloved,
plain child!" the knowledge by degrees had come painfully to Leonore
that she was ugly, and that she was possessed of no charm--of no fine
endowment whatever; she could not help observing what little means she
had of giving pleasure to others, or of exciting interest; she saw very
plainly how she was set behind her more gifted sisters by the
acquaintance and friends of the family; this, together with feeble
health, and the discomfort which her own existence occasioned to her,
put her in a discordant state with life and mankind. She was prone to
think everything troublesome and difficult; she fell easily into a state
of opposition to her sisters, and her naturally quick temper led her
often into contentions which were not without their bitterness. All this
made poor Leonore feel herself very unhappy.

But none, no! none, suffer in vain, however for a while it may appear
so. Suffering is the plough which turns up the field of the soul, into
whose deep furrows the all-wise Husbandman scatters his heavenly seed;
and in Leonore, also, it already began to sprout, although, as yet, only
under the earth. She was not aware of it herself yet; but all that she
experienced in life, together with the spirit which prevailed in her
family, had already awakened the beauty of her soul. She was possessed
of deep feeling, and the consciousness of her many wants made her, by
degrees, the most unpretending and humble of human beings; and these are
virtues which, in private life, cannot be exceeded. If you come near a
person of this character, the influence on you is as if you came out of
the sun's heat into refreshing shadow: a soft coolness is wafted over
your soul, which refreshes and tranquillises you at the same time.

In the period at which we have now to meet Leonore, she had just
recovered from the scarlet fever, which had left behind it such an
obstinate and oppressive headache as compelled her almost constantly to
remain in her own room; and although her parents and her sisters visited
her there, it afforded her but little pleasure, for as yet she had not
learned how, by goodness and inward kindness, to make herself agreeable
to others.

But, poor Leonore! when I see thee sitting there in deep thought, thy
weak head supported by thy hand, sunk in sorrowful reflections, I am
ready to lay thy head on my bosom, and to whisper a prophesying in thy
ear--but this may as well remain to a future time. We leave thee now,
but will return another time to thy silent chamber.

And now step forth, thou, the joy and ornament of home, the beautiful


EVA!

Eva was called in the family, "our rose," "our beauty." There are many
in the world like Eva, and it is well that it is so; they are of a
pleasing kind. It is delightful to look upon these blooming young girls,
with smiles on their lips, and goodness and joy of life beaming from
their beautiful eyes. All wish them so well, and they wish so well to
all; everything good in life seems as if it came from themselves. They
have favourable gales in life--it was so with Eva. Even her weakness, a
desire to please, which easily went too far, and an instability of
character which was very dangerous to her, exhibited themselves only on
their pleasing side, within the circle of her family and of her
acquaintance, and helped to make her more beloved.

Eva, although perhaps, strictly speaking, not beautiful, was yet
bloomingly lovely. Her eyes were not large, but were of the most
exquisite form, and of the clearest dark blue colour, and their glance
from under their long black lashes was at once modest, lively, and
amiable. The silky chestnut brown hair was parted over a not lofty but
classically-formed brow. Her skin was white, fine, and transparent, and
the mouth and teeth perfectly beautiful; add to all this, Eva had the
fine figure of her mother, with her light and graceful action. Excellent
health, the happiest temper, and a naturally well-tuned soul, gave a
beautiful and harmonious expression to her whole being. Whatever she
did, she did well, and with grace; and whatever she wore became her; it
was a kind of proverb in the family, that if Eva were to put a black cat
on her head it would be becoming.

A similarity in understanding and talent, as well as companionship
together, had made Louise and Eva hitherto "_les inseparables_," both at
home and abroad; of late, however, without separating herself from
Louise, Eva had been drawn, as it were, by a secret power to Leonore.
Louise, with all her possessions, was so sufficient for herself. Leonore
was so solitary, so mournful, up there, that the good heart of Eva was
tenderly drawn towards her.

But it seems to us as if Gabriele looks rather poutingly, because she
has been so long, as it were, pushed aside. _We_ will therefore hastily
turn to


THE LITTLE LADY.

It did not please "our little lady" to be neglected at all. Gabriele
was, in truth, a spoiled child, and often made "_la pluie_" and the
"_beau temps_" in the house. She was defended from cold, and wind, and
rain, and vexation, and faddled with and indulged in all possible ways,
and praised and petted as if for the best behaviour, if she were only
gracious enough to take a cup of bouillon, or the wing of a chicken for
dinner. She herself is still like the chicken under the mother's wing;
yet she will sometimes creep from under, and attempt little flights on
her own account. Then she is charming and merry, makes enigmas and
charades, which she gives mostly to her mother and Petrea to guess. It
gives her particular pain to be treated as a little girl; and nothing
worse can happen to her than for the elder sisters to say, "Go out just
for a little while, Gabriele, dear!" in order that they may then impart
to each other some important affair, or read together some heart-rending
novel. She will willingly be wooed and have homage paid to her; and the
Assessor is always out of favour with her, because he jokes with her,
and calls her "little Miss Curlypate," and other such ugly names.

Learning and masters are no affairs of hers. She loves a certain "_far
niente_," and on account of delicate health her tastes are indulged. Her
greatest delight is in dancing, and in the dance she is captivating. In
opposition to Petrea, she has a perfect horror of all great
undertakings; and in opposition to Louise, a great disinclination to
sermons, be they by word of mouth or printed. The sun, the warm wind,
flowers, but above all, beloved and amiable human beings, make Gabriele
feel most the goodness of the Creator, and awaken her heart to worship.

She has a peculiar horror of death, and will neither hear it, nor indeed
anything else dark or sorrowful, spoken of; and, happily for Gabriele,
true parental love has a strong resemblance to the Midsummer sun of the
North, which shines as well by night as by day.

If we turn from the bright-haired Gabriele to Sara, to "that Africa," as
the Assessor called her, we go from day to night. Sara was like a
beautiful dark cloud in the house--like a winter night with its bright
stars, attractive, yet at the same time repulsive. To us, nevertheless,
she will become clear, since we possess the key to her soul, and can
observe it in the following


NOTICES FROM SARA'S JOURNAL.

"Yesterday evening Macbeth was read aloud; they all trembled before Lady
Macbeth: I was silent, for she pleased me. There was power in the
woman."

"Life! what is life? When the tempest journeys through space on strong
free pinions, it sings to me a song which finds an echo in my soul. When
the thunder rolls, when the lightning flames, then I divine something of
life in its strength and greatness. But this tame every-day life--little
virtues, little faults, little cares, little joys, little
endeavours--this contracts and stifles my spirit. Oh, thou flame which
consumest me in the silent night, what wilt thou? There are moments in
which thou illuminest, but eternities in which thou tormentest and
burnest me!"

"This narrow sphere satisfies _them_; they find interest in a thousand
trifles; they are able to exert themselves in order to obtain little
enjoyments for each other. Well for them! I was made for something
different."

"Why should I obey? Why should I submit my inclination--my will, to
gratify others?--Why? Ah, freedom--freedom!"

"I have obtained 'Volney's Ruins' from S----. I conceal the book from
these pious fearful people, who tremble at shadows; but
to-night!--to-night!--when their eyes are closed in sleep, mine shall
wake and read it. The frontispiece to this book gives me extraordinary
pleasure. A wreck combats with stormy waves; the moon goes down amid
black clouds; on the shore, among the ruins of a temple, sits a
Mussulman--a beautiful and thoughtful figure--and surveys the scene. I
likewise observe it, and an agreeable shudder passes through me. A vast
ruin is better and far more beautiful than a small and an empty
happiness."

"The book pleases me. It expresses what has long lain silent in me. It
gives clear light to my dark anticipations. Ah! what a day dawns upon
me! A dazzling light that clears away all misty illusions, but my eyes
are strong enough to bear it! Let the net of prejudice, let the
miserable bond of custom be rent asunder, let the fettering supports
fall! My own strength is sufficient for me."

"Why am I a woman? As a man my life and my conduct would have been clear
and easy; as a woman, I must bow myself in order to clear myself.
Miserable dependence! Miserable lot of woman!"

"I do not love S----, but he makes a certain impression upon me. The
dark strength in his eye pleases me, the reckless strong will that will
bow itself only to me; and when he takes the harp in his arms, with what
powerful strength he compels it to express all that which the heart has
dreamt and dreams. Then he grasps the strings of my heart--then I
acknowledge in him my master; but never, he shall never govern me.

"His spirit is not powerful enough for that. He never can be other to me
than as a means to my end. Nor will I herein deceive him. I am too proud
for a hypocrite. I know well whom I could love. I know well the man who
could be the aim of my ambition."

"Nature never created me for this narrow sphere--for this narrow
foot-track through life. S---- shows me another, which captivates my
mind; I feel that I am created for it.

"I have observed myself in the glass, and it tells me, as well as the
glance of mankind, that I am handsome. My growth is strong, and accords
with the character of my countenance. I cannot doubt the assurance of
S----. My person, in connexion with the powers of my mind, and my
talent, will ensure me a brilliant future."

"What purpose would it serve to create illusions? Away with all
illusions! I stand upon a higher point than those around me--than they
who consider themselves entitled to censure my faults, to exalt
themselves in secret above me, perhaps because they have taken me out of
compassion. Taken me out of compassion! Subjecting, humiliating thought!

"Yet, at the same time, they are good; yes, angelically good to me. I
wish they were less so!"

"To-night, now for the second time in my life, I have had the same
extraordinary dream. It appeared to me that I was in my chamber, and saw
in heaven vast masses of black cloud above my head driving towards the
horizon, accompanied with a strong rushing sound in the air.

"'Save thyself, Sara!' cried the voices of my sisters; 'come, come with
us!' But I felt in my limbs that peculiar sluggishness which one
perceives in dreams when one wishes to hasten. My chamber-window flew
open before the tempest, and impelled by a strong curiosity I looked
out. The sun stood opposite to me, pale, watery, without beams; but the
whole firmament around me seemed to burn; a glow of fire passed over all
things. Before me stood a tall aspen, whose leaves trembled and
crackled, whilst sparks of fire darted forth from them. Upon one twig of
the tree sate a huge black bird, looking on me with a fiery glance, and
singing hoarsely and tunelessly, while the tempest and flame rioted
around him. I heard the voices of my adopted mother and sisters
anxiously calling on me from a distance ever further and further
removed.

"I leaned myself out of the window to hear what the black bird with the
wonderful voice sang. I no longer had any fear. I awoke; but the dream
has a charm for me."

"The black bird sings to me, out of my dream. My adopted mother has wept
to-day on my account. I am sorry for it, but----it is best that I go.
They do not love me here--they cannot do it. They do not need me, nor I
them any longer. It is best that we separate."

Thus Sara.

We will now cast a glance on the parents themselves, who were not
greatly altered, excepting that Elise's whole appearance exhibited much
more health and strength than formerly. The energetic countenance of the
Judge had more wrinkles, but it had, besides, an expression of much
greater gentleness. A slight, but perhaps not wholly unpardonable,
weakness might be observed in him. He was completely captivated with his
daughters. God bless the good father!

FOOTNOTES:

[5] Anna Lenngren, a distinguished Swedish poetess, admired especially
for her Idyls. She died in 1817.

[6] Sweden.




CHAPTER III.

THE OBJECT.


We must now say how the family grouped themselves in the new house.
Since the arrival of Henrik and Jacobi, the liveliness of the family had
visibly increased, Henrik zealously followed up his purpose of making
his sisters take more active exercise, and Jacobi assisted him with his
whole heart. Long walks were arranged, but, to Henrik's annoyance, it
seldom was possible to induce Louise to take exercise of that kind
which, according to his opinion, she needed so much. Louise had always
such a vast deal to do at home; Sara lived only for her harp and her
singing; Leonore was not strong enough; and for Gabriele, it was
generally either too cold, or too dirty, or too windy, or she was not in
the humour to walk. Eva, on the contrary, was always in the humour, and
Petrea had always the desire to speed away. It was Henrik's greatest
pleasure to give one of his sisters his arm, especially when they were
well and handsomely dressed.

At seven o'clock in the evening all the members of the family assembled
themselves in the library, where the tea-table was prepared, at which
Louise presided. The evenings were uncommonly cheerful, particularly
when the family were alone. Between tea and supper they either talked,
or read aloud, or had music; after supper they mostly danced, and then
Louise exercised herself with remarkable grace. Sometimes they had
charades or social games. Henrik and Petrea had always some new flash of
merriment or other. It was the greatest delight of the Judge to see all
his children around him, especially in an evening, and to see them happy
too. The door of his study, which adjoined the library, always stood
open, in an evening, and, whether he read or wrote there, he still was
conscious of all that went forward among them. Sometimes he would come
out and take part in their entertainment, or would sit on the green sofa
beside his wife, and watch the dance, rejoicing himself over his
daughters, and sometimes was even taken out into the dance, where he was
in much request.

The young people remarked, that whatever might for the time occupy
Jacobi, he was somewhat absent and incomprehensible; he sighed
frequently, and seemed rather to enjoy quiet conversation with the
ladies than charades and other amusements. It was discovered, between
Henrik and Petrea, that these fits of absence, and these sighs, must
have an object; but it was a long time, that is to say, three or four
days, before they could decide who it really was.

"It cannot be our mamma," said Petrea, "because she is married; and
besides this, she is so much older than any of us, although, prettier
than all of us together; and though Master Jacobi has such pleasure in
talking with her, and conducts himself towards her as if he were her
son, still it cannot be she. Do you know, Henrik, I fancy Sara is the
object--he looks at her so much; or perhaps Eva, for he is always so
lively with her; and I heard him say yesterday to Uncle Munter, that she
was so uncommonly charming. But it is rather improper that he should
pass 'our eldest' so!"

Henrik was greatly amused by Petrea's difficulty and conjectures, for he
had his own peculiar notions about the object, and by degrees Petrea
herself began to have a clearer foreknowledge, and to think that
perhaps, after all, the true object might be no other than "our eldest"
herself. After this insight into things, which Petrea was not slow in
circulating among her sisters, Louise was called, in their jocular
phraseology, "the object." All this while, however, "the object"
herself appeared to pay very little attention to the speculations which
had thus reference to herself. Louise was at the present time greatly
occupied by setting up a piece of weaving, and had in consequence,
greatly to Henrik's horror, brought again into use the dress surnamed
"water-gruel." She had absolutely a sort of rage to wear out her old
clothes--and as it happened, moreover, that the piece of weaving was of
a pattern which was much perplexed and difficult to arrange, she assumed
almost constantly the "cathedral demeanour," which occasioned her to
look all the less attractive. But so it happened, Jacobi looked a great
deal at Sara, joked with Eva, and remained sitting beside Louise, as if
he found by her side only true happiness and satisfaction.

In vain did Petrea draw him into all kind of controversial subjects, in
order to make him, during the contest, somewhat forgetful of "the
object." He did not become abstracted; and it was particularly
observable that the Master had much less desire for disputation than the
Candidate had had; and when Mrs. Gunilla took the field against him more
than once with a whole host of monads and nomads, he only laughed. Now,
indeed, Jacobi had a favourite topic of conversation, and that was his
Excellency O----. The distinguished personal qualities of his
Excellency, his noble character, his goodness, his spirit, his
commanding carriage, his imposing exterior, could not be sufficiently
celebrated and exalted by Jacobi; nay, even his broad lion-like
forehead, his strong glance, and his beautiful patrician hands, were
many a time described.

Jacobi had for some time been attached to his Excellency as his
secretary, and he had now the hope of his assistance in his future
prospects. In the mean time his Excellency had shown him the greatest
kindness; had given him many opportunities of increasing his knowledge,
and had offered to take him with him on a journey to foreign countries;
besides all which, he had himself practised him in French. In one word,
Excellency O---- was the most excellent excellency in all the world, an
actual excellentissimus. Jacobi was devoted to him heart and soul, was
rich in anecdotes about Excellency O----, and in anecdotes which he had
heard of his Excellency.

Louise, more than any member of the family, had the property of being a
good listener, and therefore she heard more than any one else of his
Excellency O----, but yet not alone of him; Jacobi had always a
something to relate to her, a something on which he wanted her
consideration, and if Louise were not too much occupied with her
thoughts about the weaving, he was always quite sure, not only of her
sincere sympathy, but of her most deliberate judgment, as well on moral
questions as on questions of economical arrangement, dress, plans for
the future, and so forth. He himself imparted to her good advice--which,
however, was not often followed--for playing Postillion. He drew
patterns for her embroidery, and read aloud to her gladly, and that
novels in preference to sermons.

But he was not long permitted to sit in peace by her side, for very soon
the seat on the other side of her was occupied by a person whom we will
call "the Landed-proprietor," from the circumstance of his most eminent
distinction being the possession of an estate in the neighbourhood of
the town.

The Landed-proprietor appeared to the Candidate--we will for the future
adhere to this our old appellation, for, in a certain sense, in this
world, all men are Candidates--quite disposed to make a quarrel about
the place he was inclined to take.

Beside his large estate, the Landed-proprietor was possessed of a large
portly body, round cheeks, plump from excess of health, a pair of large
grey eyes remarkable for their unmeaning expression, a little ruddy
mouth, which, preferred eating rather than speaking, which laughed
without meaning, and which now directed to Cousin Louise--he considered
himself related to her father--sundry speeches which we will string
together in our next chapter.




CHAPTER IV.

STRANGE QUESTIONS.


"Cousin Louise, are you fond of fish? for example, bream?" asked the
Landed-proprietor one evening as he seated himself beside Louise, who
was industriously working a landscape in her embroidery-frame.

"Oh, yes! bream is good fish," replied she, very phlegmatically, and
without looking up from her work.

"Oh, with red-wine sauce," said the Landed-proprietor, "delicate! I
have magnificent fishing on my estate at Oestanvik. Big fellows of
bream! I catch them myself."

"Who is that great fish there?" asked Jacobi from Henrik, with an
impatient sneer, "and what matters it to him whether your sister Louise
likes bream or not?"

"Because in that case she might like him, _mon cher_," replied Henrik;
"a most respectable and substantial fellow is my Cousin Thure of
Oestanvik. I advise you to cultivate his acquaintance. Well, now,
Gabriele dear, what wants your highness?--Yes, what is it?--I shall lose
my head about the riddle.--Mamma dear, come and help your stupid son!"

"No, no, mamma knows it already! Mamma must not tell," exclaimed
Gabriele, terrified.

"What king do you set up above all other kings, Master Jacobi?" for the
second time asked Petrea, who this evening had a sort of question mania.

"Charles the Thirteenth," replied he, and listened to Louise's answer to
the Landed-proprietor.

"Cousin Louise, are you fond of birds?" asked the Landed-proprietor.

"Oh, yes, particularly of fieldfares," answered Louise.

"Nay, that's capital!" said the Landed-proprietor. "There are
innumerable fieldfares on my estate of Oestanvik. I often go out myself
with my gun and shoot them for my dinner; piff-paff! with two shots I
have killed a whole dishful!"

"Don't you imagine, Master Jacobi, that the people before the Flood were
much wickeder than those of our time?" asked Petrea, who wished to
occupy the Candidate, nothing deterred by his evident abstraction, and
whom nobody had asked if she liked fieldfares.

"Oh, much--much better," answered Jacobi.

"Cousin Louise, are you fond of roast hare?" asked the
Landed-proprietor.

"Master Jacobi, are you fond of roast hare?" whispered Petrea,
waggishly, to the Candidate.

"Bravo, Petrea!" whispered her brother to her.

"Cousin Louise, are you fond of cold meat?" asked the Landed-proprietor,
as he handed Louise to the supper-table.

"Should you like to be a landed-proprietor?" whispered Henrik to her as
she left it.

Louise answered exactly as a cathedral would have answered--looked very
solemn, and was silent.

Petrea, like something let quite loose, after supper would not let
anybody remain quiet who by any possibility could be made to answer her.
"Is reason sufficient for mankind?" asked she. "What is the foundation
of morals? What is the proper meaning of revelation? Why is the nation
always so badly off? Why must there be rich and poor?" etc., etc.

"Dear Petrea," said Louise, "what can be the use of asking such
questions?"

It was an evening for questions; there was not even an end to them when
people separated for the night.

"Do you not think," asked the Judge from his wife when they were alone
together, "that our little Petrea begins to be quite disagreeable with
her perpetual questions and disputations? She leaves nobody at peace,
and is at times in a sort of unceasing disquiet. She will, some time or
other, make herself quite ridiculous if she goes on so."

"Yes," replied Elise, "_if_ she goes on so; but I think she will not. I
have observed Petrea narrowly for some time, and do you know I fancy
there is something out of the common way in that young girl."

"Yes, yes," said he, "in the common way she certainly is not; the
merriment and the everlasting joviality which she occasions, and the
comical devices that she has----"

"Yes," replied the mother, "do they not indicate a decided turn for art?
And then she has a remarkable thirst for knowledge. Every morning she is
up between three and four, in order to read or write, or to work at her
Creation. It is, in fact, quite uncommon; and may not this unrest, this
zeal to question and dispute, arise from a sort of intellectual hunger?
Ah! from such hunger, which many a woman for want of fitting aliment
suffers through the whole of her life! From such an emptiness of the
soul proceed unrest, discontentedness, nay, innumerable faults!"

"I believe you are right, Elise," said her husband; "and no condition in
life is more melancholy, particularly in advanced years. But this shall
not be the lot of my Petrea--that we will prevent. What do you think now
would be good for her?"

"I fancy," said Elise, "that a course of serious and well-directed
study would assist in regulating her mind. She is too much left to
herself, with her disarranged bent--with her enthusiasm and her
attempts. I myself have too little knowledge to instruct her, you have
too little time, and there is no one here who would undertake the
guidance of her young unsettled mind. I am sometimes extremely grieved
about her; for her sisters do not understand the workings of her mind,
which I must confess sometimes give me pain. I wish I were better able
to help her. Petrea requires a ground on which to take her stand--as yet
she has none; her thoughts require some firm holding-place; from the
want of this comes her unrest. She is like a flower without roots, which
is driven about by wind and wave."

"She shall be firmly rooted; she shall find firm ground to stand upon,
if such is to be found in the world!" said the Judge, with a grave yet
beaming eye, and striking his hand at the same time with such violence
on a volume of West-Gotha law, that it fell to the ground. "We will
think about it," continued he; "Petrea is yet too young for one to say
with certainty what is her decided bent; but we will strengthen her
powers! she shall no longer know hunger of any kind, so long as I live
and can get my own bread. You know my friend, the excellent Bishop
B----. Perhaps we can at first confide Petrea to his guidance. After a
few years we shall see----as yet she is only a child. But don't you
think we might speak with Jacobi, whether he could not read with her and
talk with her--apropos! how is it with Jacobi? I fancy he begins to
think about Louise."

"Yes, yes, you are not wrong," said Elise; "and our Cousin Thure of
Oestanvik--have you remarked nothing there?"

"Yes, I did remark something," replied he. "The thousand! What stupid
questions were those that he put to her! 'Does Cousin like this?' or,
'Does Cousin like that?' But I don't like that! not I! Louise is not yet
grown up, and already shall people come and ask her, does Cousin like?
Nay, perhaps, after all it means nothing; that would please me best.
What a pity it is, however, that our Cousin Thure is not more of a man!
A most beautiful estate he has, and so near us."

"Yes, a pity," said Elise; "because such as he is now, I am quite
convinced Louise would find it impossible to endure him."

"You do not think she would like Jacobi?" asked the father.

"To tell the truth," returned she, "I think it probable she might."

"Nay," said he, "that would be very unpleasant, and very imprudent: I am
very fond of Jacobi, but he has nothing, and he is nothing."

"But, my love," reasoned his wife, "he may become something, and he may
get something. I confess, dear Ernst, that he would suit Louise better
for a husband than almost any one else, and I would willingly call him
son."

"Would you, Elise!" exclaimed the Judge, "then I suppose I must prepare
myself to do the same. You have had most trouble, most labour, with the
children, and you have, therefore, most to say in their affairs."

"You are so good, Ernst," said Elise.

"Say reasonable--nothing more than reasonable," said he; "beyond this I
have the belief that our thoughts and our inclinations do not differ
much. I confess that I consider Louise as a great treasure, and I know
nobody whom, of my own will, I would confer her upon; still, if Jacobi
obtains her affections, I could not find in my heart to oppose a union
between them, although, on account of his uncertain prospects, it would
make me anxious. I am much attached to Jacobi, and on Henrik's account
we have much to thank him for. His excellent heart, his honesty, his
good qualities, will make him as good a citizen as husband and father,
and he belongs at the same time to that class of persons with whom it is
most pleasant to have daily intercourse. But, God forbid! I am talking
just as if I wished the union, and I am a long way from that yet. I
would much rather keep my daughters with me as long as they could feel
themselves happy with me; but when girls grow up, one cannot reckon on
peace. I wish all wooers and question-askers at Jericho! Now, we could
live here as in a kingdom of heaven, since we have got all into such
nice order--some little improvements, it is true, I could yet make,
though things are well enough, if we could be at peace. I have been
thinking that we could so easily make a wardrobe. See on this side, in
the wall; don't you think that if we here opened----Heavens! are you
already asleep, my dear?"




CHAPTER V.

AN INVITATION.


About this time the sisters of the house began to dream a great deal
about conflagrations, and there was no end of the meanings of dreams,
hints, little jokes, and communications among the sisters, none of whom
dreamt more animated or more significant dreams than Petrea. Gabriele,
who, in her innocence, did not dream at all, wondered what all this
extraordinary talk about conflagration meant; but she could not learn
much, for as often as she desired to have her part in the mysteries, it
was said, "Go out for a little while, Gabriele dear."

One evening Sara, Louise, Eva, and Petrea were sitting together at a
little table, where they were deep in the discussion of something which
seemed to possess extraordinary interest for them, when Gabriele came
and asked just for a little place at the table for herself and her
books; but it was impossible, there was no room for the little one.
Almost at the same moment Jacobi and Henrik came up; they too sought for
room at the circle of young ladies, and now see! there was excellent
room for them both, whereupon Gabriele stuck her little head between
Louise and Petrea, and prayed her sisters to solve the following riddle:

"What is that at which six places may be found, but not five?"

The sisters laughed; Louise kissed the little refined moralist; and
Petrea left the table, the gentlemen, and a political discussion, which
she had begun with Henrik, in order to sit on one side and relate to
Gabriele the Travels of Thiodolf, which was one of the greatest
enjoyments of our little lady.

"Apropos!" cried Henrik, "will there not be a wedding celebrated the day
after to-morrow, to which we ought naturally to be invited.--N. B.
According to my reckoning, Aunt Evelina has far less genius than I gave
her credit for, if----"

"Aunt Evelina stands here now ready, if possible, to vindicate her
genius," said a friendly voice, and to the amazement of all Aunt Evelina
stood in the middle of the room.

After the first salutations and questions, Evelina presented an
invitation, not as Henrik expected for the marriage, but for the
entertainment after the marriage.[7]

Laura's marriage with Major G. was to be celebrated in the quietest
manner, at her adopted mother's house, and only in the presence of a few
relations. But the mother of the bridegroom, one of those joyous persons
who in a remarkable manner lightens the world of its cares--and for
which the world thanks them so little--one of those who, if possible,
would entertain and make glad all mankind, and whom mankind on that
account very willingly slanders;--she, the stout and cordial widow of a
Councillor of War, was determined to celebrate the marriage of her only
and beloved son in a festive and cheerful manner, and to make the whole
country partakers of the joy which she herself felt.

The great marriage-festival was to last eight days, and already the
great doors of Axelholm were standing wide open to receive a
considerable party of the notables of the place. The bride and
bridegroom were to invite their respective friends and acquaintances,
and commissioned now by the bride and her future mother-in-law, Evelina
brought a written invitation from her; she came now to beseech the
family--the whole family, Jacobi included, to honour the festivity with
their presence; above all things, desiring that _all_ the daughters
might come--every one of them was wanted for one thing or another. They
reckoned on Petrea, she said, who had a great turn for theatricals, to
take a character in a play which was to be acted; and the others were
wanted for dancing and for _tableaux vivants_. Gabriele must allow
herself to be made an angel of--and naturally they hoped, that out of
all this the young people would find amusement.

They wished and prayed that the whole family would establish themselves
at Axelholm, where everything was prepared for them during the whole
time of the festival, and, if possible, longer, which would contribute
so much to their friends' satisfaction there.

Pitt, Fox, Thiers, Lafitte, Platen, Anckarsvaerd, nay, one may even
assert that all the orators in the world never made speeches which were
considered more beautiful by their hearers, nor which were received with
warmer or more universal enthusiasm than this little oration of Aunt
Evelina. Henrik threw himself on his knee before the excellent, eloquent
Aunt; Eva clapped her hands, and embraced her; Petrea cried aloud in a
fit of rapture, and in leaping up threw down a work-table on Louise;
Jacobi made an _entrechat_, freed Louise from the work-table, and
engaged her for the first _anglaise_ of the first ball.

The Judge, glad from his heart that his children should have so much
enjoyment, was obliged, for his part, to give up the joyful festivity.
Business! Judge Frank had seldom time for anything but business! yet he
would manage it so that at least he would take them there, and on the
following day he would return. Elise sent back her compliments, but
could not take more than two, or at most three, of her daughters with
her; Evelina, however, overruled this, as did also her husband, who
insisted that they _all_ should go.

"Perhaps," said he, "they may never have such another opportunity to
enjoy themselves."

Seldom, indeed, does it happen that people beg and pray and counsel a
mother to take all her six daughters with her. Long may such counsellors
live! But then it must be acknowledged, that the daughters of the Franks
were universally beloved on account of their kind, agreeable manners,
and their many good qualities.

Elise must promise to take them all with her--Sara, Louise, Eva,
Leon----no! It is true Leonore could not go with her; the poor Leonore
must remain at home, on account of indisposition; and very soon,
therefore, Eva and Petrea emulated each other as to which should remain
with her. Leonore declared coldly and peevishly that nobody should stay
at home on her account; she needed nobody; she would much rather be
alone; the sisters might all go, without hesitation; there was no fear
of her not living through it! Poor Leonore had become changed by her
sickness and her sedentary life;--her better self had become hidden
under a cloud of vexation and ill-humour, which chilled the kindliness
and friendliness that people otherwise would have shown to her.

In the mean time there was a stir among the young people of the family;
for much had to be bought, much to be made, and much to be put in order,
that they might be able to make an honourable appearance at the marriage
festival. What a review was there then of dresses, flowers, ribbons,
gloves, etc.! what counsel-takings and projects regarding the new
purchases! what calculations, so that the present of money which the
good father had, all unsolicited, made to each daughter might not be
exceeded. Louise was invaluable to everybody; she had counsel and
contrivance for everybody; besides all this, she was unwearied in
shopping, and never disheartened in buying. She made very few
compliments--would let them in a shop open all they had, if she wanted
only an ell of cloth; and would go to twelve places in order to get a
piece of ribbon cheaper or of better quality--she paid great regard to
_quality_. According to her own opinion, as well as that of her family,
she was an excellent hand at getting good bargains; that is, for
obtaining good wares at unheard-of low prices. With all this our Louise
was held in great consideration in all the shops of the city, and was
served with the greatest zeal and respect; whilst, on the contrary,
Petrea, who never bargained about anything, and always took that which
was first offered to her, at all events when she was alone, was not
esteemed in the least, and always obtained bad, and at the same time
dear goods. True it is that Petrea went a-shopping as little as
possible; whilst Louise, on the contrary, who took the difficult part of
commissioner for all her friends and acquaintance, was about as much at
home in a shop as in her own wardrobe.

It was unanimously decided that Sara, Louise, and Eva should all wear
the same dress on the evening of the great ball at Axelholm, which would
be given on the day they arrived there; namely, that they should wear
white muslin dresses, with pale pink sashes, and roses in their hair.
Petrea was enraptured by this project, and did not doubt but that her
sisters would be universally known by the appellation of "the three
Graces." For her own part, she would willingly have been called Venus,
but, alas! that was not to be thought of. She studied her face in all
the glasses in the house--"It is not so very bad-looking," thought she,
"if the nose were only different." Petrea was to appear at the ball in
sky-blue; and "the little lady" was quite enraptured by the
rose-coloured gauze dress which her mother was making for her.

The toilet occupied every one, body and soul.

FOOTNOTES:

[7] Hemkommeoel, literally, coming-home-ale. The names of many of the
domestic festivities of Sweden remind us very much of those of our own
old festivities; as church-ales, christening-ales, etc.: thus, barnsoel,
the christening-feast; grafoel, burial-feast; arfoel, the feast given by
the heir on descent of property, etc.--M. H.




CHAPTER VI.

CONFUSION.


A fine mizzling rain fell without; and Jacobi, with secret horror,
beheld Louise equipped in the "court-preacher," which became her so ill,
ready to go out with Eva, under shelter of the "family-roof," in order
to make good bargains. In the mean time Sara took her music lesson with
Schwartz, but had promised Petrea to go out with her in the afternoon,
in order to make good bargains likewise.

"Henrik!" said Jacobi to his young friend, "I fancy that we too are
going out on a 'good bargain' expedition. I want a pair of gloves,
and----"

"And perhaps we shall meet the sisters in the shop," said Henrik,
waggishly.

"Quite right," returned Jacobi, smiling; "but, Henrik, cannot you tell
your sister Louise that she should not wear that horrible black cloak? I
declare she does not look as----indeed she does not look well in it."

"Don't you think that I have told her so already?" replied Henrik. "I
have preached so long against the 'court-preacher,' that he ought long
ago to have been banished from respectable society; but it is all to no
purpose. He has worked himself so completely into the good graces of our
gracious oldest, that depend upon it, my brother, we must endure him all
our lives long. And what think you? I almost fancy our Cousin of
Oestanvik likes him!"

"Nay," said Jacobi, "one can very well see that that creature has a
wretched taste--a true Hottentot taste!"

"And is that the reason," remarked Henrik, "that he likes Louise?"

"Hum!" said Jacobi.

At dinner-time the bargaining young ladies came back, attended by the
bargaining gentlemen, who had, after all, gone about peacefully with the
"court-preacher." Louise was quite full of glory; never in her whole
life before had she made more lucky bargains.

"Look, sisters," said she, "this muslin for a crown-banco[8] the ell! Is
it not a charming colour? I have saved in it alone twelve shillings.[9]
And see these ribbons which I have got for four-and-twenty shillings the
ell--thirty were asked. Are they not beautiful?--will they not look
magnificently?--is it not a real discovery?--did you ever hear of
anything like it? Sara, if you will go to the same shop as I do, you
will get all at the same price. I have made that agreement for you at
three places: at Bergvall's, and at Astroem's, and Madame Florea's for
the flowers."

Sara thanked her, but said she had altered her plans; she did not intend
to have the same dress as Louise and Eva, but another, which pleased her
better.

The sisters were astonished, and rather vexed; Louise quite offended.
Had they not already agreed about it? What was to become of the Three
Graces?

Sara answered, that the third Grace might be whoever she would, but for
her part she should not have that honour.

The sisters thought her very ungracious.

Eva ran up to Leonore in order to show her her purchases.

"Look at this rose, Leonore," said she, "is it not very pretty? just as
if it were natural! And these ribbons!"

"Yes, yes," said Leonore, with a depressed voice, regarding these
ornaments with a gloomy look; and then pushing them from her so hastily
that they fell on the floor, burst into tears. Eva was quite concerned;
a book had fallen on her beautiful rose and had crushed it. For one
moment Eva shed tears over her flower, the next over her sister.

"Why have you done so, Leonore?" said she; "you must be very ill, or are
you displeased with me?"

"No, no!" said poor Leonore; "forgive me, and leave me."

"Why?" asked Eva. "Ah, do not weep--do not distress yourself. It was
quite thoughtless of me to come here and----But I will bid farewell to
all the magnificence; I will not go to the ball; I will stop at home
with you, only tell me that you love me, and that you would like me to
do so. Just say so--say so!"

"No, no!" said Leonore, passionately, and turning away from the
affectionate comforter; "I do not like it! You teaze me, all of you,
with this talk of stopping at home on my account. I know very well that
I am not such as any one would wish to please--I am neither merry nor
good. Go, Eva, to those who are merry, and follow them. Leave me, leave
me in peace, that is all that I desire."

Eva retired weeping, and with the crushed rose in her hand.

In the afternoon, when Petrea was ready to go out on the promised
expedition, she found Sara also was in an ill-humour. She would go, but
only on Petrea's account; she had no intention of buying anything; she
had not money enough wherewith to make purchases; she would not go to
the festival; she could not have any pleasure if she did; nothing in the
world gave one any pleasure when one had not things exactly to one's own
wishes.

Petrea was quite confounded by this sudden change, and sought in all
possible ways to discover the cause of it.

"But why," asked she, with tears in her eyes, "will you not go with us?"

"Because I will not go," answered Sara, "if I cannot go with honour, and
in my own way! I will not be mixed up in a mass of every-day mediocre
people! It is in my power to become distinguished and uncommon. That is
now, for once, my humour. I will not live to be trammelled. I would
rather not live at all!"

"Ah!" exclaimed Petrea, who now comprehended what was working in Sara,
whilst her eyes flashed with sudden joy--"ah, is it nothing more than
that? Dear Sara, take all that I possess; take it, I beseech you! Do you
not believe that it gives me a thousand times the pleasure if I see you
happy and beautiful, than if I possessed the most glorious things in the
world? Take it, best, dearest Sara! I pray you, on my knees, to take it,
and then if there be enough you can buy what you like and go with
us--else the whole splendour will be good for nothing!"

"Ah, Petrea, and you?" asked Sara.

"Ah," said Petrea, "I'll just furbish up my gauze dress, and keep a
little money for some ribbon, and then all is done; and as for the rest,
it does not matter how I look. Be only contented, Sara, and do as I bid
you."

"But ought I? Can I?" asked Sara. "Ah, no, Petrea, I could not do it!
Your little all! And then it would not be sufficient."

"Ah, yes," said Petrea, "make it sufficient. We can go to Louise's
shops, and one gets everything so cheap there. I shall never be happy
again if you do not do as I pray you. See now, you are my good, dear
Sara! Thank you, thank you! Ah, now am I so light at heart! Now I need
not trouble myself about the blessed toilet. And that is a great gain
for me!"

The bird that sits on the swinging bough is not lighter of mood than
Petrea was as she went out with Sara, who was far less cheerful, but who
still had never been more friendly towards Petrea.

It went thus with Petrea's purchase of ribbon:--In passing a
gingerbread-booth she saw a little chimney-sweeper, who was casting the
most loving glances on some purple-red apples, and Petrea, with the
money in her hand, could not resist the desire of making him a present
of them, and felt more than rewarded as she saw the boy's white teeth
shining forth from their black neighbourhood, first in smiles at her,
and then as they attacked the juicy fruit. Her own mouth watered at it,
and as she now cast her eyes round the booth, and saw such beautiful
bergamotte-pears--the favourite fruit of her mother--and such
magnificent oranges, that would please Leonore so much!--the result was,
that Petrea's reticule was filled with fruit, and the ribbon--for that
there was not now money enough.

"But," consoled herself Petrea, "Louise has such a deal of old
ribbon--she can very well lend me some." Petrea thought like all bad
managers.

When Sara and Petrea returned from the shopping expedition, Louise saw
directly that the things which Sara had bought must far have exceeded
her means; and besides this, Louise justly thought that they were
unseemly for a young girl of her station. She saw without saying one
word the white silk; the blue gauze for the tunic; the beautiful white
and yellow asters for the hair, and the other ornaments which Sara, not
without vanity, displayed.

"And what have you bought, Petrea?" now asked Louise; "let us see your
bargains."

Petrea replied, with a blush, that she--had bought nothing yet.

Not long afterwards Petrea came to Louise, and besought her, with a
certain bashfulness, to lend her some ribbon.

"Good Petrea," said Louise, displeased, "I want my ribbons myself, and
you have had money just as well as I or any of the others, to buy what
you may want."

Petrea was silent, and tears were in her eyes.

"I did not think, Louise," said Sara, hotly, "that you would have been
so covetous as to refuse Petrea some old ribbons which you are certain
not to want yourself."

"And I, Sara," returned Louise in the same tone, "I could not have
believed that you would have so abused Petrea's good-nature and weakness
towards you as to take from her her little share, just to indulge your
own vanity! It appears to me especially blameworthy, as it has led to
expenses which far exceed the means of our parents."

"Sara did not desire anything from me," said Petrea, with warmth; "I
insisted upon it; I compelled her."

"And above all, Sara," continued Louise, with stern seriousness, "I must
tell you that the dress you have chosen appears to me neither modest nor
becoming. I am quite persuaded that Schwartz has induced you to deviate
from our first project; and I must tell you, dear Sara, that were I in
your place I would not allow such a person to have such an influence
with me; nor is this the only instance in which your behaviour to him
has not appeared to me what it ought to be, not such as becomes the
dignity of a woman, or what I should wish in a sister _of mine_. I am
very sorry to say this."

"Oh, you are quite too good!" returned Sara, throwing back her head, and
with a scornful smile; "but don't trouble yourself, Louise, for I assure
you that it gives me very little concern what pleases you or what does
not."

"So much the worse for you, Sara," said Louise, "that you concern
yourself so little for those who are your true friends. I, besides, am
not the only one whom your behaviour to Schwartz displeases. Eva----"

"Yes, Sara," interrupted Eva, blushing, "I think too that you do not
conduct yourself towards him as is becoming, for----"

"Sisters," said Sara, with warmth and pride, "you cannot judge of what
is seemly for me. You have no right to censure my conduct, and I will
not endure----"

"I think, too," said Petrea, warmly, "that if our mother has said
nothing, nobody else has any right----"

"Silence, dear Petrea," said Louise; "you are silly and blind to----"

At this moment of disunion and confusion, when all the sisters were
beginning to speak at once, and that with the tongues of indignation and
reproof, a deep and mournful sigh was suddenly heard, which silenced
all, and turned every eye to the door of the little boudoir. The mother
stood there, with her hands clasped against her breast, pale, and with
an expression of pain on her countenance, which sent a quick pang of
conscience through the hearts of the daughters. As all remained silent,
she came softly forward, and said, with a voice of emotion:

"Why? ah, why, my dear girls, is all this? No! Now, no explanations;
there is error and blame on one side, perhaps also on more. But why this
bitterness, this incautious outbreak of injurious words? Ah, you know
not what you are doing! You know not what a hell sisters can make for
one another, if they cherish such tempers. You know not how bitterness
and harshness may grow among you to a dreadful habit; how you may become
tormenting spirits to each other, and embitter each others' lives. And
it could be so different! Sisters might be like good angels the one to
the other, and make the paternal home like a heaven upon earth! I have
seen both the one and the other in families: a greater contrast is not
to be found on earth. Ah, think, think only that every day, nay, every
hour, you are working to shape the future. Reflect that you may gladden
and beautify your lives, or embitter them, according as you now act. My
dear girls, bethink you that it is in your power to make your parents,
your family, yourselves, either very happy or very unhappy!"

The daughters were silent, and were penetrated by the deep emotion which
expressed itself in the words of their mother, in her pale countenance,
and in her tearful looks. They felt strongly the truth of all that she
had said. With a torrent of tears, Petrea ran out of the room; Sara
followed her silently; Eva threw herself caressingly on her mother's
neck; but Louise said:

"I have only spoken the truth to Sara. It is not my fault if it be
unpleasant for her to hear it."

"Ah, Louise!" returned her mother, "this is constantly said in the
world, and yet so much division and hatred prevail between those who say
it. It is the blind belief in our own faultlessness, it is the hard and
assuming spirit of correction, which excite the temper, and make the
truth unproductive of good. Why should we present truth in a disfiguring
dress, when she is in herself so pure and beautiful? I know, my dear
girl, that you only wish to do that which is right and good, and whoever
aims rightly at that object will not fail of the means also."

"Must I then dissimulate?" asked Louise. "Must I conceal my thoughts,
and be silent respecting that which I think wrong? That may indeed be
prudent, but it certainly is not Christian."

"Become Christian in temper, my child," said the mother, "and you will
easily discover the means of doing what is right in a proper and
effectual manner. You will learn to speak the truth without wounding; a
truly pure, truly affectionate spirit wounds no one, not even in
trifles. For that reason, one need not to be silent when one should
speak, but----"

"'_C'est le ton qui fait la chanson!_' Is it not so? he, he, he!"
interposed the shrill voice of Mrs. Gunilla, who had come in unobserved,
and who thus put an end to the discourse. Soon afterwards the Assessor
made his appearance, and they two fell into conversation, though not, as
commonly, into strife with each other. Mrs. Gunilla lamented to him
respecting Pyrrhus; she was quite in trouble about the little animal,
which had now for some time had a pain in the foot, which it always lay
and licked, and which, spite of that and of other means, got rather
worse than better. She did not know what she was to do with the little
favourite. The Assessor besought her, in the kindest manner, to allow
him to undertake his treatment. He said he had always been much more
successful in curing dogs than men, and that dogs were far more
agreeable, and far nicer patients than their masters. Mrs. Gunilla
thanked him much, and was heartily glad of his offer, and the following
morning, she said, Pyrrhus should be conveyed to him.

The family assembled themselves for tea, and the quick eyes of Mrs.
Gunilla soon discovered that all was not quite as it should be.

"Listen, now," said she, "my little Elise. I know that there will be
festivities, and balls, and banquets, given there at----_chose_! what do
they call it? and of course the young people here should all be at them
and figure a little. If there be any little embarrassments about the
toilet in which I can help, tell me candidly. Good heavens! one can
imagine that easily. Young girls!--a rosette is wanted here, and a
rosette is wanted there, and one thing and another--heart's-dearest! it
is so natural. I know it all so well. Now tell me----"

Elise thanked her cordially, but must decline this offer; her daughters,
she said, must learn betimes to moderate their desires to their means.

"Yes, yes," said Mrs. Gunilla, "but I must tell you, my dear friend,
there is no rule without its exception, and if any trifles are wanted,
so--think on me."

Mrs. Gunilla was to-day in such a happy humour; she looked like somebody
who was determined to make some fellow-creature happy. The Assessor
could not get into dispute with her. She rejoiced herself in the
country, to which she should soon remove; in the spring which was at
hand, and in the greenness which was approaching. The Assessor rejoiced
himself not at all. "What had one to rejoice about in such a hateful
spring? It was quite impossible to live in such a climate, and it must
be the will of our Lord God that man should not live, or he would not
have sent such springs. How could people plant potatoes in ice? and how
otherwise could they be planted at all this year? And if people could
get no potatoes, they must die of hunger, which was then perhaps the
best part of the history of life."

On her side, Mrs. Gunilla bethought herself that she would willingly
live. "Our Lord God," she said, "would take care that people had
potatoes!" and then she looked with an expression of cordial sympathy on
the troubled and distressed countenances of the young girls.

"When Eva, dear, is as old as I," said she, patting her gently on her
white neck, "she will know nothing more of all that which so distresses
her now."

"Ah! to be sixty years old!" exclaimed Eva, smiling, though with a tear
in her eye.

"You'll get well on to sixty--well on; he, he, he, he!" said Mrs.
Gunilla, consolingly. "Heart's-dearest! it goes before one thinks of it!
But only be merry and cheerful. Amuse yourselves at----_chose_! what do
you call it? and then come and tell me all about it. Do that nicely, and
then I shall get my share of the fun though I am not there. That comes
of the so-to-be envied sixty years, Eva, dear! he, he, he, he!"

The sun set bright and glorious. Mrs. Gunilla went to the window, and
sent a little greeting towards the sun, whose beams, glancing through
the trees of the opposite churchyard, seemed to salute her in return.

"It looks as if one should have a fine day to-morrow," said Mrs. Gunilla
to herself, gently, and looking very happy.

People place youth and age opposite to each other, as the light and
shade in the day of life. But has not every day, every age, its own
youth--its own new attractive life, if one only sets about rightly to
enjoy them? Yes, the aged man, who has collected together pure
recollections for his evening companions, is many degrees happier than
the youth who, with a restless heart, stands only at the beginning of
his journey. No passions disturb the coffee-cup of the other--no
restless endeavours disturb the cheerful gossip of the evening twilight;
all the little comforts of life are then so thoroughly enjoyed; and we
can then, with more confidence, cast all our cares and anxieties on God.
We have then proved Him.

FOOTNOTES:

[8] Crown-banco, equal to one shilling and sixpence English money.

[9] A shilling Swedish is equal to about one farthing English.




CHAPTER VII.

DISENTANGLING.


"There are certainly too many bitter almonds in this almond-mass;
nothing tastes good to me this afternoon," said Elise, who set down a
glass of almond-milk, and sighed--but not for the almond-milk.

"Be pleased with us, dear mother," whispered Eva, tenderly; "we are all
friends again!"

The mother saw it in their beautiful beaming eyes; she read it in
Louise's quiet glance as she turned round from the table, where she was
helping Sara with her tunic, and looked at her mother. Elise nodded
joyfully both to her and Eva, and drank to them the glass of
almond-milk, which now appeared to have become suddenly sweet, so
pleased did she look as she again set down the glass.

"Mamma, dear," said Gabriele, "we must certainly do something towards
poor Petrea's toilet, otherwise she will not be presentable."

But Louise took Petrea's gauze-dress secretly in hand, and sate up over
it till midnight, and adorned it so with her own ribbons and lace that
it was more presentable than it had ever been before.

Petrea kissed her skilful hands for all that they had done. Eva--yet we
will, for the present, keep silent on her arrangements.

But dost thou know, oh, reader!--yes, certainly thou dost!--the zephyrs
which call forth spring in the land of the soul--which call forth
flowers, and make the air pure and delicious? Certainly thou knowest
them--the little easy, quiet, unpretending, almost invisible, and yet
powerful--in one word, human kindnesses.

Since these have taken up their abode in the Franks' family we see
nothing that can prevent a general joyful party of pleasure. But
yes!--it is true--


PETREA'S NOSE!

This was, as we have often remarked, large and somewhat clumsy. Petrea
had great desire to unform it, particularly for the approaching
festivities.

"What _have_ you done to your nose? What is amiss with your nose?" were
the questions which assailed Petrea on all sides, as she came down to
breakfast on the morning of the journey.

Half laughing and half crying, Petrea related how she had made use of
some innocent machinery during the night, by which she had hoped
somewhat to alter the form of this offending feature, the consequence of
which had unfortunately been the fixing a fiery red saddle across it,
and a considerable swelling beside.

"Don't cry, my dear girl," said her mother, bathing it with
oatmeal-water, "it will only inflame your nose the more."

"Ah," burst forth poor Petrea, "anybody is really unfortunate who has
such a nose as mine! What in the world can they do with it? They must go
into a convent."

"It is very much better," said the mother, "to do as one of my friends
did, who had a very large nose, much larger than yours, Petrea."

"Ah, what did she do?" asked Petrea, eagerly.

"She made herself so beloved, that her nose was beloved too," said her
mother. "Her friends declared that they saw nothing so gladly as her
nose as it came in at the door, and that without it she would have been
nothing."

Petrea laughed, and looked quite cheerful. "Ah," said she, "if my nose
can but be beloved, I shall be quite reconciled to it."

"You must endeavour to grow above it!" said the good, prudent mother,
jestingly, but significantly.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE DAY OF THE JOURNEY.


On the morning of the important day all was in lively motion. The
Assessor sent Eva a large bouquet of most remarkably beautiful natural
flowers, which she immediately divided among her sisters. The Judge
himself, in a frenzy of activity, packed the things of his wife and
daughters, and protested that nobody could do it better than he, and
that nobody could make so many things go into one box as he could. The
last was willingly conceded to him, but a little demur arose as to the
excellency of the packing. The ladies asserted that he rumpled their
dresses; the Judge asserted that there was no danger on that account,
that everything would be found remarkably smooth, and stood zealous and
warm in his shirt-sleeves beside the travelling-case, grumbling a little
at every fresh dress that was handed to him, and then exclaiming
immediately afterwards, "Have you more yet, girls? I have more room. Do
give me more! See now! that? and that? and that? and----now, in the name
of all weathers, is there no end of your articles? Give them here, my
girls! Let that alone, child! I shall soon lay it straight! What?
rumple them, shall I? Well, they can be unrumpled again, that's all! Are
there no smoothing-irons in the world? What? so, so, my girls! Have you
any more? I can yet put something more in."

They were to set off immediately after dinner, in order to be at
Axelholm, which lay about two miles[10] from the city, ready for the ball
in the evening. By dinner-time all boxes were packed, and all tempers
cleared, more especially that of the Judge, who was so contented with
his morning's work that he almost imparted his delight to those who at
first were not altogether satisfied with it.

Petrea ate nothing but a pancake, with a little snow milk to it, in
order that she might dance all the lighter.

"Above all things, my friends," prayed the Judge, "be precise, and be
ready at half-past three; the carriages come then to the door, do not
let me have to wait for you."

Precisely at half-past three the Judge went to the doors of his wife and
daughters.

"Mamma! girls! it is time to go!" said he. "The clock has struck
half-past three! The carriages are here!"

"Directly, directly!" was answered from all sides. The Judge waited; he
knew from experience what this "directly" meant.

In the fever of his punctuality his blood began to boil, and he walked
up and down the hall with great steps, talking with himself: "It is
shocking, though," argued he, "that they never are ready! but I won't be
angry! Even if they make me angry, I will not spoil their pleasure. But
patience is necessary, more than Job had!"

Whilst he was thus moralising with himself, he heard the voice of his
wife saying, with decision, in the library, "Come now, dear girls! In
heaven's name, don't keep the father waiting! I know, indeed, how it
annoys him----!"

"But he said nothing the day before yesterday," Petrea's voice was heard
to return, "though he had then to wait for us. (I can't think what I
have done with my gloves!)"

"And precisely on that account he shall not wait a moment longer for
us," said the mother; "and never again, if I can help it; so, if you are
not ready girls, I shall run away without you!"

The mother ran, and all the daughters ran merrily after her.

The father remarked with pleasure, that love has a far more effectual
power than fear, and all were soon seated in the carriage.

We will allow them to roll away, and will now pay a little visit to


LEONORE'S CHAMBER.

Leonore sate solitary. She supported her sick head on her hand. She had
impelled herself to answer kindly the leave-taking kiss of her mother
and sisters; she had seen how they sought to repress their joy before
her; and she had particularly remarked a sort of half-concealed roguish
joy in the glance which was exchanged between Eva and her mother, which
had pained her. She had heard their happy voices on the stairs, and then
the driving away of the carriages. Now they were gone; now all was still
and desolate in the house, and large tears traced their way down
Leonore's cheeks. She seemed to herself so forlorn, so uncared for, so
solitary in the world!

At that moment the door was softly opened, a smiling face looked in, and
a light fascinating figure sprang forward through the chamber towards
her, kissed her, laughed, and glanced with roguish and ardent affection
into her astonished face.

"Eva!" exclaimed Leonore, scarcely trusting her eyes; "Eva, are you
here? How! whither came you? Are you not gone with the others?"

"No, as you see," returned Eva, embracing her, laughing, and looking
quite happy; "I am here, and mean to stay here."

"But why? What is the meaning of it?" asked Leonore.

"Because I would much rather remain here with you than go anywhere
else," said Eva. "I have bid Axelholm with all its splendours good day."

"Ah! why have you done so? I would much rather you had not!" said
Leonore.

"See you! I knew that," returned her sister, "and therefore I put on a
travelling dress, like the rest, and took leave of you with them. I
wanted to take you by surprise, you see. You are not angry with me, are
you? You must now be contented with it--you can't get rid of me! Look a
little happy on me, Leonore!"

"I cannot Eva," said Leonore, "because you have robbed yourself of a
great pleasure on my account, and I know that it must have been
difficult for you. I know that I am neither agreeable nor pleasing, and
that you cannot love me, nor yet have pleasure with me, and on that
account I cannot have pleasure in your sacrifice. It becomes you to be
with the joyful and the happy. Ah! that you had but gone with them!"

"Do not talk so, unless you would make me weep," said Eva; "you do not
know how the thought of giving up all these festivities in order to
remain alone with you has given me pleasure for many days, and this
precisely because I love you, Leonore! yes, because I feel that I could
love you better than all the rest! Nay, do not shake your head--it is
so. One cannot help one's feelings."

"But why should you love me?" argued the poor girl; "I am, indeed, so
little amiable, nobody can endure me, nobody has pleasure in me; I would
willingly die. Ah! I often think it would be so beautiful to die!"

"How can you talk so, Leonore?" said her sister; "it is not right! Would
you wish such horrible grief to papa and mamma, and me, and all of us?"

"Ah!" said Leonore, "you and the sisters would soon comfort yourselves.
Mamma does not love me as much as any of you others; nor papa either.
Ottil R. said the other day that everybody talked of it--that I was
beloved neither by father nor mother."

"Fie!" exclaimed Eva, "that was wicked and unjust of Ottil. I am quite
certain that our parents love us all alike. Have you ever observed that
they unjustly make any difference between us?"

"That I never have," said Leonore; "they are too good and perfect for
that. But, do you think I have not observed with how different an
expression my father regards me to that with which he looks on you or
Louise? Do you think that I do not feel how cold, and at times
constrained, is the kiss which my mother gives me, to the two, the
three, yes, the many, which, out of the fulness of her heart, she gives
to you or to Gabriele? But I do not complain of injustice. I see very
well that it cannot be otherwise. Nature has made me so disagreeable,
that it is not possible people can bear me. Ah! fortunate indeed are
they who possess an agreeable exterior! They win the good-will of people
if they only show themselves. It is so easy for them to be amiable, and
to be beloved! But difficult, very difficult is it for those who are
ill-favoured as I!"

"But, dear Leonore, I assure you, you are unjust towards yourself. Your
figure, for example, is very good; your eyes have something so
expressive, something at the same time so soft and so earnest; your hair
is fine, and is of a beautiful brown;--it would become you so if it were
better dressed; but wait awhile, when you are better I will help you to
do it, and then you shall see."

"And my mouth," said poor Leonore, "that goes from ear to ear, and my
nose is so flat and so long--how can you mend that?"

"Your mouth?" replied Eva, "why yes, it is a little large; but your
teeth are regular, and with a little more care, would be quite white.
And your nose?--let me see--yes, if there were a little elevation, a
little ridge in it, it would be quite good, too! Let me see, I really
believe it begins to elevate itself!--yes, actually, I see plainly
enough the beginning of a ridge! and do you know, if it come, and when
you are well, and have naturally a fresh colour, I think that you will
be really pretty!"

"Ah! if I can ever believe that!" said Leonore, sighing, at the same
time that an involuntary smile lit up her countenance.

"And even if you are not so very lovely," continued Eva, "you know that
yet you can be infinitely agreeable; you have something peculiarly so in
your demeanour. I heard papa say so this very day to mamma."

"Did he really say so?" said Leonore, her countenance growing brighter
and brighter.

"Yes, indeed he did!" replied her sister. "But, ah! Leonore, after all,
what is beauty? It fades away, and at last is laid in the black earth,
and becomes dust; and even whilst it is blooming, it is not
all-sufficient to make us either beloved or happy! It certainly has not
an intrinsic value."

Never was the power of beauty depreciated by more beautiful lips!
Leonore looked at her and sighed.

"No, Leonore," continued she, "do not trouble yourself to be beautiful.
This, it is true, may at times be very pleasant, but it certainly is not
necessary to make us either beloved or happy. I am convinced that if you
were not in the least prettier than you are, yet that you might if you
would, in your own peculiar way, be as much in favour and as much
beloved as the prettiest girls in the world."

"Ah!" said Leonore, "if I were only beloved by my nearest connexions!
What a divine thing it must be to be beloved by one's own family!"

"But that you can be--that you will be, if you only will! Ah! if you
only were always as you are sometimes--and you are more and more so--and
I love you more and more--infinitely I love you!"

"Oh, beloved Eva," said Leonore, deeply affected, whilst she leaned
herself quietly on her sister, "I have very little deserved this from
you; but, for the future, I will be different--I will be such as you
would have me. I will endeavour to be good and amiable."

"And then you will be so lovely, so beloved, and so happy!" said Eva,
"that it would be a real delight. But now you must come down into
Louise's and my room. There is something there for you; you must change
the air a little. Come, come!"

"Ah, how charming!" was Leonore's exclamation as she entered Eva's
chamber; and in fact nothing could be imagined more charming than that
little abode of peace, adorned as it now was by the coquetry of
affection. The most delicious odour of fruit and flowers filled the air,
and the sun threw his friendly beams on a table near the sofa, on which
a basket filled with beautiful fruit stood enticingly in the midst of
many pretty and tastefully arranged trifles.

"Here, dear Leonore," said Eva, "you will remain during this time. It
will do you good to leave your room a little. And look, they have all
left you an offering! This gothic church of bronze is from Jacobi. It is
a lamp! do you see? Light comes through the church window;--how
beautiful! We will light it this evening. And this fruit here--do you
see the beautiful grapes? All these are a plot between Henrik and
Petrea. The copperplate engravings are from my father; Louise has worked
you the slippers; and the little lady, she----"

Leonore clasped her hands. "Is it possible," said she, "that you all
have thought so much about me! How good you are--ah, too good!"

"Nay, do not weep, sweet Leonore," said Eva; "you should not weep, you
should be joyful. But the best part of the entertainment remains yet
behind. Do you see this new novel of Miss Edgeworth's? Mamma has given
us this, for us to read together. I will read to you aloud till
midnight, if you will. A delicate little supper has been prepared for us
by Louise, and we shall sup up here. We'll have a banquet in our own
way. Take now one of those big grapes which grow two on one stem, and I
will take the other. The king's health! Oh, glorious!"

Whilst the two sisters are banqueting at their own innocent feast, we
will see how it goes on in the great company at


AXELHOLM.

Things are not carried on in so enviably easy and unconstrained a manner
at every ball as at that of the citizens in the good little city of
* * * ping, where one saw the baker's wife and the confectioner's wife
waltzing together, but altogether in a wrong fashion, to which the rest
only said, "It does not signify, if they only go on!" Oh, no! such
simplicity as that is very rarely met with, and least of all among those
of whom we write.

At Axelholm, as at other great balls, the rocky shores of
conventionality made it impossible to move without a thousand
ceremonies, proprieties, dubiosities, formalities, and all the rest,
which, taken together, make up a vast sum of difficulties. The great
ball at Axelholm was not without pretension, and on that account not
without its stiff difficulties. Among these may be reckoned that several
of the young gentlemen considered themselves too old, or too----to dance
at all, and that, in consequence, many of the dance-loving ladies could
not dance at all either, because, on account of the threatening
eye-glasses of the gentlemen, they had not courage to dance with one
another. Nevertheless the scene looked like one of pure delight. The
great saloon so splendidly lighted, and a vast assembly collected there!

It is now the moment just before the dancing begins; the gentlemen stand
in a great group in the middle of the room, spreading themselves out in
direct or wavy lines towards the circle of ladies. These sit, like
flowers in the garden beds, on the benches round the room, mostly in
bashful stillness; whilst a few, in the consciousness of zephyr-like
lightness, float about the room like butterflies. All look happy; all
talk one with another, with all that animation, that reciprocal
good-will, which the sight of so much beauty, united to the
consciousness that they themselves are wearing their best looks, as well
as the expectation of pleasure, infuses.

Now the music begins to sound; now young hearts beat with more or less
disquiet; now go the engaged ones, amid the jostlings of the servants,
who are perpetually soliciting the young ladies to partake of the now
disdained tea. There one saw several young girls numerously surrounded,
who were studying the promised dances which were inscribed on the ivory
of their fans, declining fervent solicitations for the third, fourth,
fifth--nay, even up to the twelfth dance; but, fascinatingly-gracious,
promising themselves for the thirteenth, which perhaps may never be
danced; whilst others in their neighbourhood sit quiet and undisturbed,
waiting for the first invitation, in order thereto to say a willing and
thankful yes. Among the many-surrounded and the much-solicited, we may
see Sara and even Louise. With these emulated the three Misses
Aftonstjerna--Isabella, Stella, and Aurora--who stood constantly round
the chair of the Countess Solenstrale, which was placed before the great
mirror at the far end of the saloon. Among those who sat expectantly, in
the most beautiful repose, we shall discover our Petrea, who
nevertheless, with her bandeau of pearls in her hair, and a certain
bloom of innocence and goodness in her youthful countenance, looked
uncommonly well. Her heart beat with an indescribable desire to be
engaged.

"Ah!" sighed she, as she saw two most elegant young men, the two
brothers B----, walking round the circle of ladies, with their
eye-glasses in their hands. Their eye-glasses rested for a moment on
Petrea; the one whispered something in the ear of the other; both
smiled, and went on. Petrea felt humiliated, she knew not why.

"Now!" thought she, as Lieutenant S---- approached her quickly. But
Lieutenant S---- came to engage Miss T----, and Petrea remained sitting.
The music played the liveliest _anglaise_, and Petrea's feet were all in
agitation to be moving.

"Ah!" thought she, "if I were but a man I would engage Petrea."

The _anglaise_ streamed past Petrea's nose.

"Where is Eva?" asked Jeremias Munter, in a hasty and displeased tone,
from Louise, in the pause between the _anglaise_ and the waltz.

"She has remained at home with Leonore," said Louise; "she was
determined upon it."

"How stupid!" exclaimed he; "why did I come here then."

"Nay, that I really cannot tell!" returned Louise, smiling.

"Not!" retorted the Assessor. "Now then I will tell you, sister Louise,
I came here entirely to see Eva dance--solely and altogether on that
account, and for nothing else. What a stupid affair it was that she
should stop at home! You had a great deal better, all the rest of you,
have stopped at home together; you yourself, dear sister, reckoned into
the bargain! Petrea, there! what has she to do here? She was always a
vexation to me, but now I cannot endure her, since she has not
understanding enough to stay at home in Eva's place; and this little
curly-pate, which must dance with grown people just as if she were a
regular person; could not she find a piece of sugar to keep her at home,
instead of coming here to be in a flurry! You are all wearisome
together; and such entertainments as these are the most horrible things
I know."

Louise floated away in the waltz with Jacobi, laughing over this sally;
and the Countess Solenstrale, the sun of the ball, said as she passed
her chair, "Charmant, charmant!"

Besides this couple, who distinguished themselves by their easy
harmonious motion, there was another, which whirled past in wild
circles, and drew all eyes upon them likewise: this was Sara and the
boisterous Schwartz. Her truly beaming beauty, her dress, her haughty
bearing, her flashing eyes, called forth a universal ah! of astonishment
and admiration. Petrea forgot that she was sitting while she looked upon
her. She thought that she had never seen anything so transporting as
Sara in the whirl of the dance. But the Countess Solenstrale, as she
sate in her chair, said of this couple--nothing; nay, people even
imagined that they read an expression of displeasure in her countenance.
The Misses Aftonstjerna sailed round with much dignity.

"My dear girl," said Elise kindly, but seriously, to Sara after the
waltz, "you must not dance thus; your chest will not allow it. How warm
you are! You really burn!"

"It is my climate," answered Sara; "it agrees with me excellently."

"I beseech you sit this dance. It is positively injurious to you to heat
yourself thus," said Elise.

"This dance?" returned Sara; "impossible! I am engaged for it to Colonel
H----."

"Then, do not dance the next," besought Elise; "if you would do me a
pleasure, do not dance it with Schwartz. He dances in such a wild manner
as is prejudicial to the health; besides which, it is hardly becoming."

"It gives me pleasure to dance with him," answered Sara, both with pride
and insolence, as she withdrew; and the mother, wounded and displeased,
returned to her seat.

The Countess Solenstrale lavished compliments on Elise on account of her
children. "They are positively the ornament of the room," said
she;--"_charmant!_ and your son a most prepossessing young man--so
handsome and _comme il faut_! A charming ball!"

Isabella Aftonstjerna threw beaming glances on the handsome Henrik.

"What madness this dancing is!" said Mr. Munter, as with a strong
expression of weariness and melancholy he seated himself beside Evelina.
"_Nay_, look how they hop about and exert themselves, as if without this
they could not get thin enough; then, good heavens! how difficult it
seems, and how ugly it is! As if this could give them any pleasure! For
some of them it seems as if it were day-labour, and as if it were a
frenzy to others; and for a third, a kind of affectation; nay, I must go
my ways, for I shall become mad or splenetic if I look any longer on
this super-extra folly!"

"If Eva Frank were dancing too, you would not think it so," said
Evelina, with a well-bred smile.

"Eva!" repeated he, whilst a light seemed to diffuse itself over his
countenance, and his eyes suddenly beamed with pleasure--"Eva! no! I
believe so too. To see her dance is to see living harmony. Ah! it
enlivens my mind if I only see her figure, her gait, her slightest
movement; and then to know that all this harmony, all this beauty, is
not mere paint--not mere outside; but that it is the true expression of
the soul! I find myself actually better when I am near her; and I have
often a real desire to thank her for the sentiments which she instils
into me. In fact, she is my benefactress; and I can assure you that it
reconciles me to mankind and to myself, that I can feel thus to a
fellow-creature. I cannot describe how agreeable it is, because commonly
there is so much to vex oneself about in this so-called masterpiece of
the Creator!"

"But, best friend," said Evelina, "why are you so vexed? Most people
have still----"

"Ah, don't go and make yourself an _ange de clemence_ for mankind," said
he, "in order to exalt secretly yourself over me, otherwise I shall be
vexed with you; and you belong to the class that I can best endure. Why
do I vex myself? What a stupid question! Why are people stupid and
wearisome, and yet make themselves important with their stupidity? And
wherefore am I myself such a melancholy personage, worse than anybody
else, and should have withal such a pair of quick eyes, as if only on
purpose to see the infirmities and perversions of the world? There may,
however, in my case be sufficient reason for all this. When one has had
the fancy to come into the world against all order and Christian usage;
has seen neither father nor mother beside one's cradle; heard nothing,
seen nothing, learned nothing, which is in the least either beautiful or
instructive--one has not entered upon life very merrily. And then, after
all, to be called Munter![11] Good heavens! Munter! Had I been called
Blannius, or Skarnius, or Brummerius, or Grubblerius, or Rhabarberius,
there might have been some sense in the joke; but Munter! I ask you now,
is it not enough to make a man splenetic and melancholy all the days of
his life? And then, to have been born into the world with a continual
cold, and since then never to have been able to look up to heaven
without sneezing--do you find that merry or edifying. Well, and then!
after I had worked my way successfully through the schools, the dust of
books, and the hall of anatomy, and had come to hate them all
thoroughly, and to love that which was beautiful in nature and in art,
am I to thank my stars that I must win my daily bread by studying and
caring for all that is miserable and revolting in the world, and hourly
to go about among jaundice, and colic, and disease of the lungs? On this
account I never can be anything but a melancholy creature! Yes, indeed,
if there were not the lilies on the earth, the stars in heaven, and
beyond all these some one Being who must be glorious--and were there not
among mankind the human-rose Eva--the beautiful, fascinating Eva,
then----"

He paused; a tear stood in his eye; but the expression of his
countenance soon was changed when he perceived no less than five young
girls--they danced now the "free choice"--and among them the three
enchanting Miss Aftonstjernas, who, all locked together, came dancing
towards him with a roguish expression. He cast towards them the very
grimmest of his glances, rose up suddenly, and hastened away.

Sara danced the second waltz with Schwartz, yet wilder than the first.
Elise turned her eyes away from her with inward displeasure; but
Petrea's heart beat with secret desire for a dance as wild, and she
followed their whirlings with sparkling eyes.

"Oh," thought she, "if one could only fly through life in a joyful whirl
like that!"

It was the sixth dance, and Petrea was sitting yet. She felt her nose
red and swollen. "See now!" thought she, "farewell to all hopes of
dancing! It must be that I am ugly, and nobody will look at me!" At the
same moment she was aware of the eye of her mother fixed upon her with a
certain expression of discomfort, and that glance was to her like a stab
at the heart; but the next moment her heart raised itself in opposition
to that depressing feeling which seemed about to overcome her. "It is
unpleasant," thought she, "but it cannot be altered, and it is no fault
of mine! And as nobody will give me any pleasure, I will even find some
for myself."

Scarcely had Petrea made this determination, than she felt herself quite
cheered; a spring of independence and freedom bubbled up within her; she
felt as if she were able even to take down the chandelier from the
ceiling, and all the more so when she saw so many life-enjoying people
skipping around her.

At this moment an old gentleman rose up from a bench opposite Petrea,
with a tea-cup in his hand. In a mania of officiousness she rushed
forward in order to assist him in setting it aside. He drew himself
back, and held the cup firmly, whilst Petrea, with the most firm and
unwearying "Permit me, sir," seemed determined to take it. The strife
about the cup continued amid the unending bows of the gentleman, and the
equally unending curtseys of Petrea, until a passing waltzing couple
gave a jostle, without the least ceremony whatever to the
compliment-makers, which occasioned a shake of the tea-cup, and revealed
to Petrea the last thing in the world which she had imagined, that the
cup was not empty! Shocked and embarrassed, she let go her hold, and
allowed the old gentleman, with what remained of his cup of tea, to go
and find out for himself a securer place. Petrea seated herself, she
hardly knew how, on a bench near an elderly lady, who looked at her very
good-naturedly, and who helped very kindly to wipe off the ablution of
tea which she had received. Petrea felt herself quite confidential with
this excellent person, and inquired from her what was her opinion of
Swedenborg, beginning also to give her own thoughts on spectral visions,
ghosts, etc. The lady looked at her, as if she thought she might be a
little deranged, and then hastened to change her place.

A stout military gentleman sat himself down ponderously, with a deep
sigh, on the seat which the old lady had left, as if he were saying to
himself, "Ah, thank God! here I can sit in peace!" But, no! he had not
sate there three minutes and a half when he found himself called upon by
Petrea to avow his political faith, and invited by her to unite in the
wish of speedy war with Russia. Lieutenant-Colonel Uh----turned rather a
deaf ear to the battery by which his neighbour assailed him, but for all
that he probably felt it not the less heavy, because after several
little sham coughs he rose up, and left our Petrea alone with her
warlike thoughts.

She also rose, from the necessity she felt of looking elsewhere for more
sympathy and interest.

"In heaven's name, dear Petrea, keep your seat!" whispered Louise, who
encountered her on her search for adventures.

Petrea now cast her eyes on a young girl who seemed to have had no
better dancing fortune than herself, but who seemed to bear it much
worse, appeared weary of sitting, and could hardly refrain from tears.
Petrea, in whose disposition it lay to impart to others whatever she
herself possessed--sometimes overlooking the trifling fact that what she
possessed was very little desired by others--and feeling herself now in
possession of a considerable degree of prowess, wished to impart some of
the same to her companion in misfortune, and seated herself by her for
that purpose.

"I know not a soul here, and I find it so horribly wearisome," was the
unasked outpouring of soul which greeted Petrea, and which went directly
to her sympathising heart.

Petrea named every person she knew in the company to the young
unfortunate, and then, in order to escape from the weight of the
present, began to unfold great plans and undertakings for the future.
She endeavoured to induce her new acquaintance to give her her _parole
d'honneur_ that she would sometime conduct a social theatre with her,
which would assist greatly to make social life more interesting; and
further than that, that they should establish together a society of
Sisters of Charity in Sweden, and make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem;
furthermore, that they would write novels together; and that on the
following day, or more properly in the night, they would rise at
half-past two o'clock, and climb to the top of a high mountain in order
to see the sun rise; and finally, after all these, and sundry other
propositions, Petrea suggested to her new acquaintance a thee-and-thou
friendship between them! But, ah! neither Petrea's great prowess, nor
her great plans; neither the social theatre, nor the pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, least of all the thee-and-thou friendship, availed anything
towards enlivening the churlish young girl. Petrea saw plainly that an
invitation to dance would avail more than all her propositions, so,
sighing deeply because she was not a man to offer so great a pleasure,
she rose up, and left the object of her vain endeavours.

She looked round for a new subject, and her eye fell on the Countess
Solenstrale. Petrea was dazzled, and became possessed of the frenzied
desire to become acquainted with her, to be noticed by her; in short, in
some kind of way to approach the sun of the ball, fancying thereby that
a little glory would be reflected upon herself. But how was she to
manage it? If the Countess would but let fall her handkerchief, or her
fan, she might dart forward and pick it up, and then deliver it to her
with a compliment in verse. Petrea, hereupon, began to improvise to
herself; there was something, of course, about the sun in it.
Undoubtedly this would delight the Countess, and give occasion to more
acquaintance, and perhaps--but, ah! she dropped neither handkerchief nor
fan, and no opportunity seemed likely to occur in which she could make
use of her poem with effect. In the mean time she felt drawn as by a
secret influence (like the planet to the sun) ever nearer and nearer to
the queen of the saloon. The Aftonstjernas were now standing, beaming
around her, bending their white and pearl-ornamented necks to listen to
her jesting observations, and between whiles replying with smiles to the
politeness and solicitations of elegant gentlemen. It looked magnificent
and beautiful, and Petrea sighed from the ardent longing to ascend to
the _haute volee_.

At this moment Jacobi, quite warm, came hastening towards her to engage
her for the following quadrille.

Petrea joyfully thanked him; but suddenly reddening to the resemblance
of a peony with her mania of participation, she added, "Might I accept
your invitation for another person? Do me the great pleasure to ask that
young girl that sits there in the window at our left."

"But why?" asked Jacobi; "why will not you?"

"I earnestly beseech you to do it!" said Petrea. "It would give me
greater pleasure to see her dancing than if I danced myself."

Jacobi made some friendly objections, but did in the end as she
requested.

It was a great pleasure to Petrea to perceive the influence of this
engagement on her young friend. But Fate and the Candidate seemed
determined to make Petrea dance this quadrille; and a young officer
presented himself before her in splendid uniform, with dark eyes, dark
hair, large dark moustache, martial size, and very martial mien. Petrea
had no occasion, and no disposition either, to return anything but a
"yes" to this son of Mars. In fact, she never expected to receive a more
honourable invitation; and a few minutes later she found herself
standing close beside the chair of the Countess Solenstrale, dancing in
the same quadrille with the Aftonstjernas, and _vis-a-vis_ with the
Candidate. Petrea felt herself highly exalted, and would have been
perfectly prosperous had it not been for her restless demon, which
incessantly spurred her with the desire of coming in closer contact with
the beautiful, magnificent lady to whom she stood so near. To tread upon
her foot or her dress, might, it is true, have furnished an easy
occasion for many fine and reverential excuses; but, at the same time,
this would be neither polite nor agreeable. To fall in some kind of way
before her feet, and then, when graciously raised by the Countess, to
thank her in a verse, in which the _sun_ played a conspicuous part,
would have been incontestibly better; but now--Petrea must dance on!

Was it that our Petrea really was so addled (if people will graciously
allow us such an expression) that she had no right power over her limbs,
or did it happen from want of ballast, in consequence of the slender
dinner she had eaten, or was it the result of her usual distraction--we
know not; but this much is certain, that she in _chassee_-ing on the
right hand, on which she had to pass her _vis-a-vis_, made an error, and
came directly up to him. He withdrew to the other side, but Petrea was
already there: and as the Candidate again withdrew to the right, there
was she again; and amid all this _chassee_-ing her feet got so entangled
with his, that as he made a despairing attempt to pass her, it so
happened that both fell down in the middle of the quadrille!

When Petrea, with tears in her eyes, again stood upright, she saw before
her the eye-glass gentlemen, the two brothers B., who were nearly dying
with laughter. A hasty glance convinced Petrea that her mother saw
nothing of it; and a second glance, that she had _now_ attracted the
attention of the Countess Solenstrale, who was smiling behind her fan.
The first observation consoled her for the last; and she fervently
assured Jacobi, who was heartily distressed on her account, that she had
not hurt herself; that it signified nothing; that it was her fault,
etc., etc.; cast a tranquil glance on the yet laughing gentlemen, and
_chasseed_ boldly back again. But what, however, made the deepest
impression on Petrea, was the conduct of her partner, and his suddenly
altered behaviour. He brought the continued and unbecoming merriment of
the brothers B. to an end by one determined glance; and he who hitherto
had been parsimonious of words, and who had only answered all her
attempts at being entertaining by a yes or a no, now became quite
conversable, polite, and agreeable, and endeavoured in every possible
way to divert her attention from the unpleasant accident which had just
occurred, engaging her moreover for the _anglaise_ after supper.

Petrea understood his kindness; tears came into her eyes, and her heart
beat for joy at the thought of hastening to her mother after the
quadrille, and saying, "Mamma, I am engaged for the _anglaise_ after
supper."

But no thought, no feeling, could remain in tranquillity with the poor
little "Chaos;" so many others came rushing in, that the first were
quite effaced. Her first impression of the kindness of Lieutenant Y.
was, "how good he is!" the second was, "perhaps he may endure me!" And
hereupon a flood of imagined courtesy and courtship poured in, which
almost turned her head. But she would not marry, heaven forbid! yet
still it would be a divine thing to have a lover, and to be oneself "an
object" of passion, like Sara and Louise. Perhaps the young Lieutenant
Y. might be related to the Countess Solenstrale, and, oh heavens! how
well it would sound when it was said, "A nephew of the Countess
Solenstrale is a passionate admirer of Petrea Frank!" What a coming
forth that would be! A less thing than that might make one dizzy. Petrea
was highly excited by these imaginings, and was suddenly changed by them
into an actual coquette, who set herself at work by all possible means
to enslave "her object;" in which a little, and for the moment very
white, hand (for even hands have their moments), figuring about the
head, played a conspicuous part. Petrea's amazing animation and
talkativeness directed the eye-glass of her mother--for her mother was
somewhat short-sighted--often in this direction, and called forth
glances besides from Louise, which positively would have operated with a
very subduing effect, had not Petrea been too much excited to remark
them. The observations and smiles of her neighbours Petrea mistook for
tokens of applause; but she deceived herself, for they only amused
themselves with the little coquetting, but not very dangerous lady.
Lieutenant Y., nevertheless, seemed to find pleasure in her liveliness,
for when the quadrille was ended, he continued a dispute which had
commenced during it, and for this purpose conducted her into one of the
little side rooms, which strengthened her in the idea of having made a
conquest. Isabella Aftonstjerna was singing there a little French song,
the refrain of which was--

    Hommage a la plus belle,
    Honneur au plus vaillant!

The world was all brightness to Petrea: the song carried her back to the
beautiful days of knighthood: Lieutenant Y. appeared to her as the ideal
of knightly honour, and the glass opposite showed her own face and nose
in such an advantageous light, that she, meeting herself there all
beaming with joy, fancied herself almost handsome. A beautiful rose-tree
was blossoming in the window, and Petrea, breaking off a flower,
presented it to the Lieutenant, with the words--

    Honneur au plus vaillant.

Petrea thought that this was remarkably striking and apropos, and
secretly expected that her knight would lay the myrtle-spray with which
he was playing at her feet, adding very appropriately--

    Hommage a la plus belle.

"Most humble thanks!" said Lieutenant Y., taking the rose with
misfortune-promising indifference. But Fate delivered Petrea from the
unpleasantness of waiting in vain for a politeness she desired, for
suddenly there arose a disturbance in the ball-room, and voices were
heard which said, "She is fainting! Gracious heaven! Sara!"

Myrtle-spray, knight, conquest, all vanished now from Petrea's mind, and
with a cry of horror she rushed from Lieutenant Y. into the ball-room at
the very moment when Sara was carried out fainting. The violent dancing
had produced dizziness; but taken into a cool room, and sprinkled with
eau de Cologne and water, she soon recovered, and complained only of
horrible headache. This was a common ailment of Sara's, but was quickly
removed when a certain remedy was at hand.

"My drops!" prayed Sara, in a faint voice.

"Where? where?" asked Petrea, with a feeling as if she would run to
China.

"In the little box in our chamber," said Sara.

Quick as thought sped the kind Petrea across the court to the east wing.
She sought through the chamber where their things were, but the box was
not to be found. It must have been left in the carriage. But where was
the carriage? It was locked up in the coach-house. And where was the key
of the coach-house?

Great was Petrea's fatigue before she obtained this; before she reached
the coach-house; and then before, with a lantern in her hand, she had
found the missing box. Great also, on the other hand, was her joy, as
breathless, but triumphant, she hastened up to Sara with the little
bottle of medicine in her hand, and for reward she received the not less
agreeable commission of dropping out sixty drops for Sara. Scarcely,
however, was the medicine swallowed, when Sara exclaimed with violence:

"You have killed me, Petrea! You have given me poison! It is
unquestionably Louise's elixir!"

It was so! The wrong bottle had been brought, and great was the
perplexity.

"You do everything so left-handedly, Petrea!" exclaimed Sara, in
ill-humour; "you are like the ass in the fable, that would break the
head of his friend in driving away a fly!"

These were hard words for poor Petrea, who was just about to run off
again in order to redeem her error. This, added to other agitation of
mind, brought tears to her eyes, and blood to her head. Her nose began
violently to bleed. Louise, excited against Sara by her severity to
Petrea, and some little also by her calling her elixir poison, threw
upon her a look of great displeasure, and devoted herself to the weeping
and bleeding Petrea.

Whether it was the spirit of anger that dispersed Sara's headache, or
actually Louise's elixir (Louise was firmly persuaded that it was the
latter), we know not; but certain it was that Sara very soon recovered
and returned to the company, without saying one consoling word to
Petrea.

Petrea was in no condition to appear at the supper-table, and Louise
kindly remained with her. Aunt Evelina, Laura, Karin, and even the lady
of the War-Councillor herself, brought them delicacies. Amid so much
kindness, Petrea could not do otherwise than become again tranquil and
lively. She should, she thought, after all, dance the _anglaise_ after
supper with "le plus vaillant," as she called the Lieutenant, who had
truly captivated her evidently not steeled heart.

The _anglaise_ had already begun as the sisters entered the ball-room.
The Candidate hastened to meet them quite in an uneasy state of mind; he
had engaged Louise for this dance, and they now stood up together in the
crowd of dancers. Petrea expected, likewise, that "le plus vaillant"
would rush up to her and seize her hand; but as she cast a hasty glance
around, she perceived him, not rushing towards her, but dancing with
Sara, who was looking more beautiful and brilliant than ever. The rose
which Petrea had given him--faithless knight!--together with the
myrtle-sprig on which she had speculated, were both of them placed in
Sara's bosom. The eyes of "le plus vaillaut" were incessantly riveted
upon "la plus belle," as Sara was then unanimously declared to be. The
glory of the Aftonstjernas paled in the night, as they were too much
heated by dancing, but Sara's star burned brighter and brighter. She was
introduced to the Countess Solenstrale, who paid her charming
compliments, and called her "la reine du bal," at which the
Aftonstjernas looked displeased.

"Thousand devils, how handsome she is!" exclaimed the old gentleman who
had striven with Petrea about the tea-cup, and who now, without being
aware of it, trod upon her foot as he thrust himself before her to get a
better view of "la reine du bal."

Overlooked, humiliated, silent, and dejected, Petrea withdrew into
another room. The scenes of the evening passed in review before her
soul, and appeared now quite in an altered light. The mirror which a few
hours before had flattered her with the notion that she might be called
_la plus belle_, now showed her her face red and unsightly; she thought
herself the most ridiculous and unfortunate of human beings. She felt at
this moment a kind of hostility against herself. She thought on
something which she was preparing for Sara, and which was to be an
agreeable surprise to her, and which was to be made known to her in a
few days--she thought of this, and in that moment of trouble the thought
of it, like a sunbeam on dark clouds, brightened the night in her soul.
The thought of gratifying one, who on this evening had so deeply
wounded her, gave a mild and beneficial turn to her mind.

After supper, a balcony in the saloon adjoining the ball-room was
opened, in order somewhat to cool the heated atmosphere of the room.

Two persons, a lady and gentleman, stepped into the balcony; a light
white shawl was thrown over the lady's shoulders; stars garlanded her
dark hair; stars flashed in her black eyes, which glanced fiercely
around into free space.

There lay over the landscape the deliciously mysterious half-darkness of
a May-night, a magical veil which half hides and half reveals its
beauty, and which calls forth mysterious forebodings. A mighty and
entrancing revelation of the gloriousness of life seemed to sing in the
wind, which passed tranquilly murmuring through space, shone in the
stars, and wandered high above earth.

"Ah, life! life!" exclaimed she, and stretched forth her arms towards
space, as if she would embrace it.

"Enchanting girl!" said he, while he seized her hand, "my life belongs
to you!"

"Conduct me forth into free, fresh life," said she, without withdrawing
her hand, and looking haughtily at him all the while, "and my hand
belongs to you! But remember you this, that I will be free--free as the
wind which now kisses your forehead, and lifts those topmost branches of
the tree! I love freedom, power, and honour! Conduct me to these, help
me to obtain these, and my gratitude will secure to you my love; will
fetter me to you with stronger bonds than those of ceremony and
prejudice, to which I only submit out of regard to those who otherwise
would weep over me, and whom I would not willingly distress more than
there is need for. It shall not bind us more than we ourselves wish.
Freedom shall be the knitting and the loosening of our bond!"

"Beautiful woman!" answered he, "raised above the hypocrisy of
weakness--above the darkness of prejudice--I admire you and obey you!
Only to such a woman can my will submit! My beautiful scholar is become
my teacher! Well, then, let the hand of the priest unite us; my hand
shall conduct you up to that brilliant throne which your beauty and your
talents deserve! I will only elevate you in order, as now, to fall
before your feet the most devoted of your servants!"

He dropped upon one knee before her; and she, bending herself towards
him, let her lips touch his forehead. He threw his arms round her, and
held her for one moment bent towards him. A supercilious, scornful
expression, unobserved by her, played upon his lips.

"Release me, Hermann! some one comes," said she; he did so, and as she
raised her proud neck against his will, a dark flash of indignation
burned in her eyes.

They withdrew, and another couple stepped out into the balcony.

He. Wait, let me wrap my cloak better round you; the wind is cool.

She. Ah, how beautiful to feel how it wraps us both! Do you see how we
are here standing between heaven and earth, separated from all the
world?

He. I do not see it--I see my lovely world in my arms! I have you,
Laura! Laura, tell me, are you happy?

She. Ah, no!

He. How?

She. Ah, I am not happy because I am too happy! I fancy I never can have
deserved this happiness. I cannot conceive how it came to my share. Ah,
Arvid! to live thus with you, with my mother, my sister, all that I most
love--and then to be yours ever, ever!

He. Say eternally, my Laura! Our union belongs as much to heaven as to
earth, here as there; to all eternity I am yours, and you are mine!

She. Hush, my Arvid! I hear my mother's voice--she calls me. Let us go
to her.

They returned into the room, and presently another couple stepped on the
balcony.

He. Cousin Louise, do you like evening air? Cousin Louise, I fancy, is
rather romantic. Cousin, do you like the stars? I am a great friend of
the stars too; I think on what the poet sings:

    ----silently as Egypt's priests
    They move.

Look, Cousin Louise, towards the corner, in the west there lies
Oestanvik. If it would give you any pleasure to make a little tour
there, I would beg that I might drive you there in my new landau. I
really think, Cousin Louise, that Oestanvik would please you: the
peaches and the vines are just now in full bloom; it is a beautiful
sight.

A deep sigh is heard.

She. Who sighs so?

A Voice. Somebody who is poor, and who now, for the first time, envies
the rich.

He. Oh rich! rich! God forbid! rich I am not exactly. One has one's
competency, thank God! One has wherewith to live. I can honestly
maintain myself and a family. I sow two hundred bushels of wheat; and
what do you think, Cousin Louise--but where is Cousin Louise?

A Voice. It seemed to her, no doubt, as if a cold wind came over here
from Oestanvik.

At the moment when the gentlemen returned to the room, a girl came into
the balcony. She was alone. The misfortunes of the evening depressed her
heart, and were felt to be so much more humiliating because they were of
such a mean kind. Some burning tears stole quickly and silently over her
cheeks. The evening wind kissed them gently away. She looked up to
heaven; never had it seemed to her so high and glorious. Her soul raised
itself, mounted even higher than her glance, up to the mighty friend of
human hearts; and He gave to hers a presentiment that a time would come,
when, in his love, she would be reconciled to and forget all adversities
of earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The days at Axelholm wore on merrily amid ever-varying delights. Petrea
wrote long letters, in prose and in verse, to her sisters at home, and
imparted to them all that occurred here. Her own misfortunes, which she
even exaggerated, she described in such a comic manner that those very
things which were at first distressing to her, were made a spring of
hearty merriment both to herself and to her family.

She received one day a letter from her father, which contained the
following words:

           "My good Child,

      "Your letters, my dear child, give me and your sisters great
      pleasure; not merely on account of the lively things which they
      contain, but more especially on account of your way of bearing
      that which is anything but lively. Continue to do thus, my child,
      and you--my heart rejoices in the thought--will advance on the way
      to wisdom and happiness, and you will have joyfully to acknowledge
      the blessed truth which the history of great things, as well as of
      small, establishes, that there is nothing evil which may not be
      made conducive to good; and thus our own errors may be made steps
      on our way to improvement.

      "Greet your sisters cordially from their and your tenderly devoted

                              "Father."

Petrea kissed these lines with tears of grateful joy. She wore them for
several days near her heart; she preserved them through her whole life
as one of the endeared means by which she had gone happily through the
chromatic scale of existence.

Louise was joked much about Cousin Thure; Cousin Thure was joked much
about Louise; it pleased him very much to be joked about her, to be told
that Oestanvik wanted a mistress, that he himself wanted a pretty wife,
and that without doubt Louise Frank was one of the most sensible as well
as one of the prettiest girls in the country; and more than this, was
besides of such a respectable family! The Landed-proprietor received
already felicitations on his betrothal.

What the bride-elect, however, thought on the matter was more difficult
to fathom. She was certainly always polite to Cousin Thure; still this
politeness seemed expressive rather of indifference than friendship; and
she declined, with a decision amazing to many people, his pressing and
often repeated solicitations to make an excursion to Oestanvik in his
new landau, drawn by what he styled "his foxes--his four horses in one
rein." Many people asserted that the agreeable and cordial Jacobi was
much nearer to Louise's heart than the rich Landed-proprietor! but even
towards Jacobi her conduct was so equal, so tranquil, so unconstrained,
that nobody could exactly tell how it might be. Nobody knew so well as
we do, that Louise considered it consistent with the dignity of woman to
show only perfect indifference to the attentions or _doux-propos_ of
men, until they had been openly and fully declared. Louise despised
coquetry so far as to dread anything which bordered on the very limits
of it. Her young female friends joked with her upon her strict notions
on this head, and fancied that she would remain unmarried.

"That may be," said Louise, calmly.

They told her one day of a gentleman who said "I will not stand up
before any girl who is not some little of a coquette."

"Then he may remain sitting," answered Louise, with much dignity.

Louise's views of the dignity of woman, her grave and decided
principles, and her manner of expressing them, amused her young friends,
whilst at the same time they inspired for her a true esteem, and gave
occasion for many little contentions and discussions, in which Louise
intrepidly, though not without some little warmth, maintained the rights
of the cause. These contentions, however, which began in merriment, did
not always terminate so.

A young and rather coquettish lady was one day wounded by the severity
with which Louise spoke of the coquetry of her sex, and particularly of
married ladies, and in revenge she used an expression which excited
Louise's astonishment and anger. An explanation followed between the
two, the result of which was not only their perfect estrangement, but an
altered state of mind in Louise which she in vain endeavoured to
conceal.

During the first days of her stay at Axelholm she had been uncommonly
joyous and lively; now she was quiet, thoughtful, often absent, and
towards the Candidate, as it seemed, less friendly than formerly, whilst
she lent a more willing ear to the Landed-proprietor, although she still
resolutely withstood his proposal of a drive to Oestanvik.

On the evening of the day after this explanation, Elise was engaged in a
lively conversation with Jacobi on the balcony.

"And if," said he, "I endeavour to win her heart, would her
parents--would her mother see it without displeasure? Ah, speak candidly
with me; the well-being of my life depends upon it."

"You have my accordance, my good wishes, Jacobi," returned Elise. "I say
to you what I have already said to my husband, that I should willingly
call you son."

"Oh!" exclaimed Jacobi, deeply moved, and falling on one knee, whilst he
pressed her hand to his lips--"oh that my whole life might evidence to
you my gratitude and my love--!"

At this very moment, Louise, who had been seeking her mother, approached
the balcony; she saw Jacobi's action, and heard his words: she withdrew
quickly, as if she had been stung by a snake.

From this time a great change was more and more perceptible in her.
Still, reserved, and very pale, she moved about like one in a dream,
amid the lively circles of Axelholm, and agreed willingly to the
proposition which her mother, who was uneasy on her account, made of
their stay being shortened. Jacobi, as much astonished as distressed by
the sudden unfriendliness of Louise towards him, began to think that the
place must in some kind of way be bewitched, and desired more than
anybody else to get away from it.

FOOTNOTES:

[10] A mile Swedish is equal to six English miles.

[11] Merry, in Swedish.




CHAPTER IX.

THE RETURN HOME.


What was it that Jacobi and Henrik had so much to arrange together
before their departure from Axelholm, and even whilst they were there?
Petrea's curiosity was terribly excited, but she could not come at any
clue by which to satisfy it. Some kind of plot which concerned the
family, seemed to be in agitation.

Henrik and his friend had long intended to give a little entertainment
to the family, and the opportunity to do so now seemed favourable, as
well as also to combine it with an agreeable surprise; the scene of
which should be a pretty and good Inn, half way between Axelholm and the
city. Here, on their return, they would halt under pretence of some
repair being necessary to one of the carriages, and the ladies should be
persuaded to enter the house, where, in the mean time, all should be
prepared.

The two friends had greatly delighted themselves over this scheme, and
in order to obtain for Louise her favourite luxury of ices, Jacobi had
drained his already reduced purse.

In going to Axelholm the family had so divided themselves that Louise
with Petrea went in what is called a Medewi-carriage, the Judge's own
equipage, which was driven by Jacobi, with whom Henrik sate on the
driving-box, whilst the mother and the other daughters went in a covered
hired carriage, driven by the Judge himself. On the return, the same
arrangement was to be observed, with the difference of Jacobi driving
the large carriage, and Henrik driving his sisters.

The mother, and even the young gentlemen, declared with becoming
discretion that they would not confide the reins to less skilful hands,
because the road was rough and hilly, and moreover bad from rain.
Notwithstanding all this, however, Jacobi intrigued so that, contrary to
the established arrangement, he mounted the coach-box of the young
ladies, and Henrik that of his mother. But the Candidate had not much
pleasure from so doing, since "the object" was no longer such as she was
during the drive thither. At that time she was more cheerful than
common; rejoiced so heartily over the spring air, over the song of the
lark; over fields, and cows, and cottages, and over everything that she
saw, communicating all her delight to Jacobi, who sate all the way on
the driving-box with his face turned towards the carriage (Henrik
solemnly advised him to fix himself in this reversed position), and
their blue eyes then rested on each other with a spring of pure
devotion. Now, everything was otherwise: "the object" appeared to give
attention to nothing. She leaned back in the carriage with her veil over
her face, and a cathedral is far more conversable than she; for it
speaks through the tongue in its tower, but Louise's tongue was
perfectly dumb, and Petrea's, which once never ceased, enlivened her
not. In vain Jacobi sought to catch Louise's eye. She avoided him, and
he was quite cast down.

After having been many times most properly jogged and shaken, they
arrived fortunately at the wayside inn; yet no! not so fortunately
either, one of the carriage-wheels was discovered to be somewhat broken:
it was not dangerously so, oh no, heaven forbid that! but it must of
necessity be mended before they could proceed further. Henrik prayed his
mother and sisters while this was doing to alight and enter the inn, the
host and hostess of which now stood at the door, and with bows and
curtseys besought the travellers to enter. The host came himself and
opened the carriage-doors. Elise was startled, and uttered an
exclamation of surprise;--the host really and truly must be her husband;
and the hostess, the very prettiest hostess in the world, was bodily her
daughter Eva! The travelling daughters, too, were as much astonished,
made all kinds of exclamations, and recognised in host and hostess
father and sister. But neither host nor hostess were confounded, nor
allowed themselves to be confused by the confusion of the travellers;
they knew themselves too well who they were, and knew, too, how to
conduct themselves in their office. They led their guests, with many
apologies and politenesses, up to two large and handsome rooms, and here
the host, quite in despair, began to bustle about, and to summon both
maid and waiter. At last the waiter came in his blue apron. A new
miracle! He was a living image of the Candidate! And now came the maid.
A new amazement! A handsomer person, or one that more nearly resembled
Henrik it would have been impossible to find! But she went about
clumsily, and had nearly fallen down, stumbling first with this, and
then with that. The host scolded her vehemently on account of her
clumsiness, and scolded the waiter also till he made them both cry, at
least so it seemed; whereupon he chased them both out with the order to
return instantly with refreshments. The host, now again in brilliant,
excellent, polite humour, let fly with his own hand the corks of two
champagne bottles, poured out, and drank with the ladies. After they had
refreshed themselves with all kinds of delicious eating, amid the most
lively conversation, some person, who called himself Noah's grandson,
was announced, requesting permission to exhibit to the company various
strange animals and other beautiful curiosities, which had been found in
the ark. The grandson of Noah was called in by a great majority of
voices, and a face presented itself at the door which, with the
exception of a certain grey beard, bore a great resemblance to Jeremias
Munter. His menagerie, and his cabinet of art, were set out in another
room, into which the company were conducted; and there many
strangely-formed creatures were exhibited, and little scenes
represented, to which Noah's grandson gave explanations and made
speeches which were almost as humorous and witty (to be quite so was
impossible) as those of Japhet, in that wonderful and exquisite book,
"Noah's Ark."[12] Two other grandsons of Noah, who bore no resemblance to
any acquaintance of the family, assisted at this exhibition, at the end
of which Noah's learned grandson gave to each of the spectators a little
souvenir from the contents of the ark, and that with so much tact, that
every one received precisely the thing which gave him pleasure. Louise,
moreover, received a remarkable sermon, which was preached by Father
Noah himself on the first Sunday of his abode in the ark. But near the
title-page of this same sermon she found a piece of poetry which
evidently bore a later date. Louise did not, however, read it then, but
blushing very deeply, put it carefully by.

The whole affair might have been as merry as it was droll, had not
Louise--herself the most important person in the entertainment--been in
no state of mind to enjoy it. But although she used her utmost endeavour
to take part in all the diversion, and to appear cheerful, she became
every moment more depressed; and when at last the ices came, and the
waiter, with the utmost cordiality beaming from his eyes, urged her to
take a vanilla-ice, she was only just able to taste it, upon which she
set it down, rushed out of the room, and burst into a convulsive fit of
weeping. This was a thing so unusual with Louise, that it occasioned a
general perplexity. Host, hostess, maid, waiter, Noah's grandson, all
threw off their characters; and all illusion, as well as all reality of
festivity, were at an end. It is true that Louise composed herself
speedily, besought pardon, and assigned as the cause of her emotion
sudden spasm in the chest. Elise and Eva, and more particularly Petrea,
endeavoured, on account of Henrik and Jacobi, to jest back again the
former merriment, but it would not come, and nothing more could succeed.
Everybody, but more especially Jacobi, were out of tune, and they now
began to speak of returning home.

But now all at once the heavy trampling of horses, and a bustle at the
inn door was heard, and at the same moment a splendid landau, drawn by
four prancing bays, drew up before it. It was the Landed-proprietor,
who, unacquainted with returning there after a short absence, and who
had drawn up at this inn for a moment's breathing-time for his horses,
and to order for himself a glass of the beer for which the place was
renowned. The company which he here so unexpectedly encountered
occasioned an alteration in his first plan. He determined to accompany
the family to the city, and besought his aunt and cousins to make use of
his landau. It would certainly please them so much; it went with such
unexampled ease; was so comfortable that one could sleep therein with
perfect convenience even on the heaviest roads, etc., etc. Elise, who
really had suffered from the merciless shaking of the hired carriage,
was inclined to accept the offer; and as it immediately began to rain,
and as the Judge preferred the carriage to the chaise in which he had
driven with Eva, the affair was quickly arranged. Elise and some of the
daughters were to go in the landau, which was turned in the mean time
into a coach; and the Judge and the rest of the company were to divide
themselves among the other carriages. As these were ready to receive the
company, Jacobi drove his Medewi-carriage close on the landau of the
Landed-proprietor, who looked more than once with a dark countenance to
see whether any profane or injurious contact had taken place between the
great and the little carriage.

Jacobi's heart beat violently as Louise came out on the steps of the inn
door. The Landed-proprietor stood on one side offering her his hand, and
Jacobi on the other offering his also, to conduct her to her former
seat. She appeared faint, and moved slowly. She hesitated for one
moment, and then gave, with downcast eyes, her hand to the
Landed-proprietor, who assisted her triumphantly into the carriage to
her mother, and mounting the box himself, away the next moment dashed
the landau with its four prancing bays. Jacobi laid his hand on his
heart, a choking sensation seemed to deprive him of breath, and with
tears in his eyes he watched the handsome departing carriage. He was
roused out of his painful observations by the voice of Petrea, who
jestingly announced to him that the enviable happiness awaited him of
driving herself and the Assessor in the Medewi-carriage. He took his
former seat in silence; his heart was full of disquiet; and
intentionally he remained far behind the others, in order that he might
not have the least glimpse of the landau.

Scarcely had the Medewi-carriage again made acquaintance with the ruts
of the road, than a violent shock brought off one of the fore wheels,
and the Candidate, Petrea, and the Assessor, were tumbled one over the
other into the mud. Quickly, however, they were all three once again on
their feet; Petrea laughing, and the Assessor scolding and fuming. When
Jacobi had discovered that all which had life was unhurt, he looked
lightly on the affair, and began to think how best it might be remedied.
A short council was held in the rain, and it was concluded that Jacobi
should remain with the carriage till some one came to his assistance,
and that in the mean time Petrea and the Assessor should make the best
of their way on foot towards the city, and send, as soon as possible,
some people to his help. A labourer, who came by immediately afterwards,
promised to do the same, and Petrea and Assessor Munter, who, however,
was anything but consistent with his name, began their walk through rain
and mud. All this while, however, Petrea became more joyful and happy:
firstly, all this was an adventure for her; secondly, she never before
had been out in such weather; thirdly, she felt herself so light and
unencumbered as she scarcely ever had done before; and because she
looked upon her clothes as given up to fate--to a power against which
none other on earth could contend, she walked on in joy of heart,
splashing through the puddles, and feeling with great delight how the
rain penetrated her dress, and seeing how the colour was washed away
both from shawl and bonnet. She held her nose high in the air, in order
to enjoy the glorious rain.

Petrea had in all this a resemblance to her brother, and flattered
herself also that she might have some resemblance to Diogenes; and as
her inclination lay towards extremes, she would very willingly be
Diogenes, since she could not, as she very well knew, be Alexander. Now
she perceived that in reality she needed very little of outward comforts
to make her happy; she felt herself in her adverse circumstances so free
and rich; she had become on thee-and-thou terms with the rain-drops,
with the wind, with the shrubs and grass, with all nature in short; she
had not here the mishaps and the humiliations to fear which annoyed her
so often in company. If the magpies laughed at her, she laughed at them
in return. Long life to freedom!

With all these feelings, Petrea got into such excessively high spirits,
that she infected therewith her companions in misfortune; or, according
to her vocabulary, good fortune. But now, however, came on a horrible
tempest, with hail, whose great stones made themselves _thou_ to such a
degree with Petrea's nose as astonished and almost offended her. The
Assessor looked out for shelter; and Petrea, quite charmed that she was
nearly blown away, followed him along a narrow footpath that led into
the wood, onward in the direction of a smoke, which, driven towards them
by the storm, seemed to announce that a hospitable hut was at hand where
they might obtain shelter from the tempest. Whilst they were wandering
about to discover this, Petrea's fancy, more unrestrained than the
storm, busied itself with unbounded creations of robbers' castles, wise
hermits, hidden treasures, and other splendours, to which the smoke was
to conduct her. But ah! they were altogether built up of smoke, since it
arose from no other than a charcoal-burner's kiln, and Petrea had not
the smallest desire to make a nearer acquaintance with the hidden
divinity of which this smoke was the evidence. The small hut of the
charcoal-burner, in the form of a sugar-loaf, stood not far from the
kiln, the unbolted door of which was opened by the Assessor. No hermit,
nor even robber, had his abode therein; the hut was empty, but clean and
compact, and it was with no little pleasure that the Assessor took
possession of it, and seated himself with Petrea on the only bench which
it possessed. Petrea sighed. What a miserable metamorphosis of her
glorious castle in the air!

The prospect which the open door of the hut presented, and which had no
interest for Petrea, appeared, on the contrary, captivating to her
companion. He was there deep in the wood, in a solitude wild, but still
of an elevating character. The hut stood in an open space, but round
about it various species of pine-trees stood boldly grouped, and bowed
themselves not before the storm which howled in their tops. Several lay
fallen on the ground, but evidently from age; grass and flowers grew on
the earth, which these patriarchs of the wood had torn up with their
powerful roots. Among others, two tall pine-trees stood together: the
one was decayed, and seemed about to separate itself from its root; but
the other, young, green, and strong, had so entwined it in its
branches, that it stood upright, mingling its withered arms with the
verdure of the other, and yielding not, although shook by the tempest.
The expressive glance of the Assessor rested long on these trees; his
eyes filled with tears; his peculiar, beautiful, but melancholy smile
played about his lips, and kindly sentiments seemed to fill his breast.
He spoke to Petrea of a people of antiquity who dwelt in deserts; he
spoke of the pure condition of the Essenes, a morning dawn of
Christendom, and his words ran thus:

"A thirst after holiness drove men and women out of the tumult of the
world, out of great cities, into desert places, in order that they might
dedicate themselves to a pure and perfect life. There they built for
themselves huts, and formed a state, whose law was labour and devotion
to God. No earthly possession was enjoyed merely on account of pleasure,
but only as the means of a higher life. They strove after purity in soul
and body; tranquillity and seriousness characterised their demeanour.
They assembled together at sunrise, and lifted up hymns and prayers to
the Supreme Being. Seventeen hours of each day were devoted to labour,
study, and contemplation. Their wants were few, and therefore life was
easy. Their discourse was elevated, and was occupied by subjects of the
sublime learning which belonged to their sect. They believed on one
Eternal God, whose existence was light and purity. They sought to
approach him by purity of heart and action, by renunciation of the
pleasures of the world, and by humility of heart and mind to understand
the works of the allwise Creator. They believed in quiet abodes on the
other side of the desert pilgrimage, where clear waters ran and soft
winds blew, where spring and peace had their home; there they hoped to
arrive at the end of their journey through life."

There is no want of rays of light on earth; they penetrate its misty
atmosphere in manifold directions, although human perception is not as
much aware of them at one time as at another. The words of the Assessor
made at this moment an indescribable impression on Petrea. She wept from
the sweet emotion excited by the description of a condition which was so
perfect, and of endeavours which were so holy. It appeared to her as if
she knew her own vocation, her own path through life; one which would
release her soul from all trifles, all vanities, all disquiets, and
which would speed her on to light and peace. Whilst these thoughts, or
rather sentiments, swelled in her breast, she looked through her tears
on her companion, as he sate there with his expressive countenance and
his large beautiful eyes fixed on the scene before him, and she saw in
him, not Jeremias Munter, but a wise hermit, with a soul full of sublime
and holy knowledge. She longed to throw herself at his feet, and beseech
his blessing; to propose to him that he should remain in this solitude,
in this hut, with her; that he should teach her wisdom; and she would
wait upon him as a daughter, or as a servant, would rise with him and
pray at sunrise, and do in all things like the Essenes. Thus would they
die to the world, and live only for heaven.

Overpowered by her excited feelings, surrendered to the transports of
the moment, and nearly choked with tears, Petrea sank on the breast of
Jeremias, stammering forth her undefined wishes.

If a millstone had fallen round his neck, our good Assessor could not
have been more confounded than he was at that moment. Deeply sunk in his
own thoughts, he had quite forgotten that Petrea was there, till
reminded of her presence in this unexpected manner. But he was a man,
nevertheless, who could easily understand the excitement of mind in a
young girl, and with a pure fervour of eye, whilst a good-humoured
satire played about his mouth, he endeavoured to tranquillise her
over-wrought feelings. Beautiful, then, was the discourse he held with
her on all that which calms and sanctifies life; on all that on which
man may found his abode whether in the desert or in the human crowd. He
spoke words then which Petrea never forgot, and which often, in a future
day, broke the chaotic state of her soul like beams of pure light.

In the mean time the tempest had dispersed itself, and the Assessor
began to think of a return; for Petrea thought nothing about it, but
would willingly have seen herself compelled to pass the night in the
gloomy wood. But now the thought of relating her adventures at home
attracted her, and before she got out of the wood these adventures were
increased, since fate presented her with the good fortune of assisting,
with the help of her companion, an old woman, who had fallen with her
bundle of sticks, upon her legs again, and of carrying the said bundle
to her cottage, and of lighting her fire for her; with releasing two
sparrows which a boy had made captive; and, last of all, with releasing
the Assessor himself from a thorn-bush, which, as it appeared, would
have held him with such force as vexed even himself. Petrea's hands bled
in consequence of this operation, but that only made her the livelier.

When they came out of the wood, the rain had ceased altogether, the wind
had abated, and the setting sun illumined the heavens, and diffused over
the landscape a peculiar and beautiful radiance. The countenance of
Jeremias Munter was cheerful; he listened to the ascending song of the
lark, and said, "That is beautiful!" He looked upon the rain-drops which
hung on the young grass, and saw how heaven reflected itself in them,
and smiled, and said, "That is pure indeed!" Petrea gave to little
children that she met with all her savings from the feast at Axelholm,
and would willingly also have given them some of her clothes, had she
not had the fear of Louise and her mother before her eyes. She wished in
her bravery for more adventures, and more particularly for a longer way
than it at this time appeared to be; she thought she arrived at home too
soon; but the Assessor thought not, neither did the rest of the party,
who were beginning to be very uneasy on account of their long absence.
In the mean time Petrea and her companion had become very good friends
on the walk; Petrea was complimented for her courage, and Henrik
pathetically declaimed in her praise--

    Not every one such height as Xenophon can gain,
    As scholar and as hero, a laurel-wreath obtain;

and they laughed.

FOOTNOTES:

[12] half-dramatic poem, remarkable for its wit and humour, from the pen
of the Swedish poet Fahlcrantz.




CHAPTER X.

FIRESIDE SCENES.


"From home may be good, but at home is best!" said Elise from the bottom
of her heart, as she was once more in her own house, and beside her own
husband.

The young people said nothing in opposition to this sentiment as they
returned to their comfortable every-day life, which they now enlivened
with recollections and relations out of the lately-past time. They hoped
that Louise would become pleasant and contented with her calm activity
in the house and family as formerly, but it was not so; a gnawing pain
seemed to consume her; she became perceptibly thinner; her good humour
had vanished, and her eyes were often red with weeping. In vain her
parents and sisters endeavoured, with the tenderest anxiety, to fathom
the occasion of the change; she would confess it to no one. That the
root of her grief lay at her heart she would not deny, but she appeared
determined to conceal it from the eye of day. Jacobi also began to look
pale and thin, since he lamented deeply her state of feeling, and her
altered behaviour, especially towards himself, which led him to the
belief that he unconsciously had wounded her, or in some other way that
he was the cause of her displeasure; and never had he felt more than now
what a high value he set upon her, nor how much he loved her. This
tension of mind, and his anxiety to approach Louise, and bring back a
friendly understanding between them, occasioned various little scenes,
which we will here describe.


FIRST SCENE.

Louise sits by the window at her embroidery-frame: Jacobi seats himself
opposite to her.

Jacobi (sighing). Ah, Mamselle Louise!

Louise looks at her shepherdess, and works on in silence.

Jacobi. Everything in the world has appeared to me for some time
wearisome and oppressive.

Louise works on, and is silent.

Jacobi. And you could so easily make all so different. Ah, Louise! only
one kind word, one friendly glance!--Cannot you bestow one friendly
glance on him who would gladly give everything to see you happy?
[_Aside._ She blushes--she seems moved--she is going to speak! Ah, what
will she say to me!]

Louise. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten
stitches to the nose--the pattern is here not very distinct.

Jacobi. You will not hear me, will not understand me; you play with my
distress! Ah, Louise!

Louise. I want some more wool;--I have left it in my room. [She goes.]


SECOND SCENE.

The family is assembled in the library; tea is just finished. Louise, at
Petrea's and Gabriele's urgent request, has laid out the cards on a
little table to tell them their fortunes. The Candidate seats himself
near them, and appears determined to amuse himself with them, and to be
lively; but "the object" assumes all the more her "cathedral air." The
Landed-proprietor steps in, bows, snorts, and kisses the hand of the
"gracious aunt."

Landed-proprietor. Very cold this evening; I fancy we shall have frost.

Elise. It is a gloomy spring. We have lately read a most affecting
account of the famine in the northern provinces. It is the misfortune of
these late springs.

Landed-proprietor. Oh, yes, the famine up there. No, we'll talk of
something else--that's too gloomy. I've had my peas covered with straw.
Cousin Louise, are you fond of playing Patience? I am very fond of it
too; it is so composing. At my seat at Oestanvik I have little, little
patience-cards. I fancy really that they would please my cousin.

The Landed-proprietor seats himself on the other side of Louise: the
Candidate gives some extraordinary shrugs.

Louise. This is not patience, but a little witchcraft, by which I read
Fate. Shall I prophesy to you, Cousin Thure?

Landed-proprietor. Oh, yes! prophesy something to me. Nothing
disagreeable! If I hear anything disagreeable in an evening, I always
have bad dreams at night. Prophesy me prettily--a little wife--a wife as
lovely and as amiable as Cousin Louise.

The Candidate (with a look as if he would send the Landed-proprietor
head-over-heels to Oestanvik). I don't know whether Mamselle Louise
likes flattery.

Landed-proprietor (who seems as if he neither heard nor saw his rival).
Cousin Louise, are you fond of blue?

Louise. Blue? That is truly a lovely colour; but yet I prefer green.

Landed-proprietor.. Nay, that is good! that is excellent! At Oestanvik
my dressing-room furniture is blue, beautiful light blue silk damask;
but in my sleeping-room I have green moreen. I fancy really, Cousin
Louise, that----

The Candidate coughs, and then rushes out of the room. Louise looks
after him, sighs, and then examines the cards, in which she finds so
many misfortunes for Cousin Thure that he is quite terrified: the peas
frosted, conflagration in the dressing-room, and last of all a
rejection! The Landed-proprietor declares, notwithstanding, that he
finds nothing of this unpleasant. The sisters smile, and make remarks.


THIRD SCENE.

The family assembled after supper:

The Assessor puts the question--What is the bitterest affliction?

Jacobi. Unreturned love.

Petrea. Not to know what one shall be.

Eva. To have offended some one that one loves beyond reconciliation.

The Mother. I am of Eva's opinion; I think nothing can be more painful.

Louise. Ah! there is yet something more painful than that--something
more bitter--and that is to lose one's faith in those whom one has
loved; to doubt--(Louise's lip trembles, she can say no more, becomes
pale, rises, and goes out quickly; a general sensation ensues).

The Father. What is amiss with Louise? Elise, we must know what it is!
She should, she must tell us! I cannot bear any longer to see her thus;
and I will go this moment and speak with her, if you will not rather do
it. But you must not be satisfied till you know her very inmost
feelings. The most horrible thing, I think, is mystery and vapours!

The Mother. I will go directly to her. I have now an idea what it is,
dearest Ernst; and if I am somewhat long with her, let the others go to
bed; I shall then find you alone. [She goes out.]


FOURTH SCENE.

_The Mother and Daughter._

The daughter on her knees, her face buried in her hands; the mother
goes softly up to her and throws her arms around her.

Mother. Louise, my good girl, what is amiss with you? I have never seen
you thus before. You must tell me what is at your heart--you must!

Louise. I cannot! I ought not!

Mother. You can! you ought! Will you make me, will you make all of us
wretched by going on in this way? Ah, Louise, do not let false shame, or
false tenderness mislead you. Tell me, do you break any oath, or violate
any sacred duty, by confessing what it is which depresses you?

Louise. No oath; no sacred duty--and yet----yet----

Mother. Then speak, in heaven's name, my child! Unquestionably some
unfounded suspicion is the cause of your present state. What do the
words mean with which you left us this evening? You weep! Louise, I
pray, I beseech of you, if you love me, conceal nothing from me! Who is
it that you love, yet can no more have faith in--no longer highly
esteem? Answer me--is it your mother?

Louise. My mother! my mother! Ah, while you look on me thus I feel a
pain, and yet a confidence! Ah, my God! all may be an error--a miserable
slander, and I----Well then, it shall out--that secret which has gnawed
my heart, and which I conceived it my duty to conceal! But forgive me,
my mother, if I grieve you; forgive me if my words disturb your peace;
forgive me, if in my weakness, if in my doubt I have done you injustice,
and remove the grief which has poisoned my life! Ah, do you see, mother,
it was mine, it was my sisters' happiness, to consider you so
spotless--so angelically pure! It was my pride that you were so, and
that you were my mother! And now----

Mother. And now, Louise?

Louise. And now it has been whispered to me----Oh, I cannot speak the
words!

Mother. Speak them--I demand it! I desire it from you! We both stand
before the Judgment-seat of God!

Louise. I have been led to believe that even my mother was not
blameless--that she----

Mother. Go on, Louise!

Louise. That she and Jacobi loved one another--that evil tongues had not
blamed them without cause, and that still--I despised these words, I
despised the person who spoke them! I endeavoured to chase these
thoughts as criminal from my soul. On this account it happened that I
went one day to find you--and I found Jacobi on his knee before you--I
heard him speaking of his love. Now you know all, my mother!

Mother. And what is your belief in all this?

Louise. Ah, I know not what I ought to believe! But since that moment
there has been no peace in my soul, and I have fancied that it never
would return--that I should never lose the doubt which I could make
known to no one.

Mother. Let peace return to your soul, my child! Good God! how
unfortunate I should be at this moment if my conscience were not pure!
But, thank heaven, my child, your mother has no such fault to reproach
herself with; and Jacobi deserves your utmost esteem, your utmost
regard. I will entirely and freely confess to you the entire truth of
that which has made you so uneasy. For one moment, when Jacobi first
came to us, a warmer sentiment towards me awoke in his young,
thoughtless heart, and in part it was returned by me. But you will not
condemn me on account of an involuntary feeling which your father looked
on with pardoning eyes. In a blessed hour we opened to each other our
hearts, and it was his love, his strength and gentleness, which gave me
power to overcome my weakness. Jacobi, at the same moment, woke to a
consciousness of his error, struggled against it, and overcame it. We
separated soon after, and it was our mutual wish not to meet again for
several years. In the mean time Henrik was committed to his care, and
Jacobi has been for him an exemplary friend and instructor. Three years
later, when I again met him, I extended my hand to him as a sister; and
he----yes, my dear girl! and I err greatly if he did not then begin in
his heart to love me as a mother. But that which then had its beginning,
has since then had its completion--it was in the character of a son that
you saw him kneel to me; thanking me that I would favour his love to my
daughter--to my Louise, who, therefore, has so unnecessarily conjured up
a spectre to terrify herself and us all.

In the latter part of this conversation the mother spoke in a quiet
jesting tone, which, perhaps, did more even than her simple explanation
to reassure the heart of her daughter. She pressed her hands on her
heart, and looked thankfully up to heaven.

"And if," continued her mother, "you yet entertain any doubt, talk with
your father, talk with Jacobi, and their words will strengthen mine. But
I see you need it not--your heart, my child, is again at peace!"

"Ah, thank God! thank God!" exclaimed Louise, sinking on her knees
before her mother, and covering her hands and even her dress with
kisses. "Oh, that I dared look up again to you, my mother! Oh, can you
forgive my being so weak: my being so easy of belief? Never, never shall
I forgive myself!"

Louise was out of herself, her whole frame trembled violently; she had
never before been in a state of such agitation. Her mother was obliged
to apply remedies both for mind and body, tender words and soothing
drops--to tranquillise her excited state. She besought her therefore to
go to rest, seated herself beside her bed, took her hands in hers, and
then attempted to divert her mind from the past scene, endeavouring with
the utmost delicacy to turn her mind on the Candidate and on the
Landed-proprietor as lovers. But Louise had only one thought, one
sentiment--the happy release from her doubt, and thankfulness for it.
When her mother saw that she was calmer, she embraced her, "And now go
to sleep, my dear girl," said she; "I must now leave you, in order to
hasten to one who waits impatiently for me, and that is your father. He
has been extremely uneasy on your account, and I can now make him easy
by candidly communicating all that has passed between us. For the rest I
can assure you that you have said nothing that can make us uneasy. That
I was calumniated by one person, and am so still, he knows as well as I
do. He has assisted me to bear it calmly, he is truly so superior, so
excellent! Ah, Louise, it is a great blessing when husband and wife,
parents and children, cherish an entire confidence in each other! It is
so beautiful, so glorious, to be able to say everything to each other in
love!"


FIFTH SCENE.

The garden. It is morning! the larks sing, the jonquils fill the air
with odour; the bird's cherry-tree waves in the morning breeze; the
cherry blossoms open themselves to the bees which hum about in their
bosom. The sun shines on all its children.

Louise is walking in the middle alley, Father Noah's sermon in her hand,
but with her eyes fixed on the little poem appended to it, which by no
means had anything to do with Father Noah. The Candidate comes towards
her from a cross walk, with a gloomy air, and with a black pansy in his
hand.

The two meet, and salute each other silently.

Jacobi. Might I speak one moment with you? I will not detain you long.

Louise bows her head, is silent, and blushes.

Jacobi. In an hour's time I shall take my departure, but I must beseech
of you to answer me one question before I say farewell to you!

Louise. You going! Where? Why?

Jacobi. Where, is indifferent to me, so that I leave this place; why,
because I cannot bear the unkindness of one person who is dear to me,
and who, I once thought, cherished a friendship for me! For fourteen
days you have behaved in such a way to me as has embittered my life; and
why? Have I been so unfortunate as to offend you, or to excite your
displeasure? Why then delay explaining the cause to me? Is it right to
sentence any one unheard, and that one a friend--a friend from
childhood? Is it right--pardon me, Louise--is it Christian, to be so
severe, so immovable? In the sermons which you are so fond of rending,
do you find nothing said of kindness and reconciliation!

Jacobi spoke with a fervour, and with such an almost severe seriousness,
as was quite foreign to his gentle and cheerful spirit.

"I have done wrong," replied Louise, with a deep emotion, "very wrong,
but I have been misled; at some future time, perhaps, I may tell you
how. Since last evening, I know how deceived I have been, how I have
deceived myself; and now God be thanked and praised, I know that nobody
is to blame in this affair but myself. I have much, very much, to
reproach myself with, on account of my reserve towards my own family,
and towards you also. Forgive me, best Jacobi," continued she, offering
her hand with almost humility; "forgive me, I have been very unkind to
you; but believe me," added she, "neither have I been happy either!"

"Thanks! thanks, Louise!" exclaimed Jacobi, grasping her hand, and
pressing it to his breast and to his lips; "oh, how happy this kindness
makes me! Now I can breathe again! Now I can leave you with a cheerful
heart!"

"But why will you leave us?" asked she, in a half-discontented tone.

"Because," answered Jacobi, "it would not give me pleasure to witness a
betrothal which will soon be celebrated; because, from your late
behaviour, I must be convinced you cannot entertain any warmer
sentiments towards me."

"If that were the case," replied she, in the same tone as before, "I
should not have been depressed so long."

"How!" exclaimed Jacobi, joyfully. "Ah, Louise, what words! what bold
hopes may they not excite! Might I mention them to you? might I venture
to say to you what I some time have thought, and still now think?"

Louise was silent, and Jacobi continued:

"I have thought," said he, "that the humble, unprovided-for Jacobi could
offer you a better fortune than your rich neighbour of Oestanvik. I have
hoped that my love, the true dedication of my whole life, might make you
happy; that a smaller portion of worldly wealth might satisfy you, if it
were offered you by a man who know deeply your worth, and who desired
nothing better than to be ennobled by your hand. Oh, if this beloved
hand would guide me through life, how bright, how peaceful would not
life be! I should fear neither adversity nor temptation! and how should
I not endeavour to be grateful to Providence for his goodness to me! Ah,
Louise! it is thus that I have thought, and fancied, and dreamed! Oh,
tell me, was it only a dream, or may not the dream become a reality?"

Louise did not withdraw the hand which he had taken, but looked upon the
speaker with infinite kindness.

"One word," besought Jacobi, "only one word! Might I say _my_ Louise?
Louise--mine?"

"Speak with my parents," said Louise, deeply blushing, and turning aside
her head.

"My Louise!" exclaimed Jacobi, and, intoxicated with tenderness and joy,
pressed her to his heart.

"Think of my parents," said Louise, gently pushing him back; "without
their consent I will make no promise. Their answer shall decide me."

"We will hasten together, my Louise," said he, "and desire their
blessing."

"Go alone, dear Jacobi," said Louise. "I do not feel myself calm enough,
nor strong enough. I will wait your return here."

       *       *       *       *       *

With this fifth scene we conjecture that the little drama has arrived at
the desired conclusion, and therefore we add no further scene to that
which naturally follows.

As the Candidate hastened with lover's speed to Louise's parents he
struck hard against somebody in the doorway, who was coming out. The two
opponents stepped back each a few paces, and the Candidate and the
Landed-proprietor stared in astonishment on each other.

"Pardon me," said the Candidate, and was advancing; but the
Landed-proprietor held him back, whilst he inquired with great
earnestness, and with a self-satisfied smile, "Hear you, my friend: can
you tell me whether Cousin Louise is in the garden? I came this moment
from her parents, and would now speak with her. Can you tell me where
she is?"

"I--I don't know!" said Jacobi, releasing himself, and hastening with a
secret anxiety of mind up to her parents.

In the mean time the Landed-proprietor had caught a glimpse of "Cousin
Louise's" person in the garden, and hastened up to her.

It was, in fact, no surprise to Louise, when, after all the preliminary
questions, "Cousin, do you like fish? do you like birds?" there came at
last the principal question, "Cousin, do you like me?"

To this question, it is true, she gave a somewhat less blunt, but
nevertheless a decided negative reply, although it was gilded over with
"esteem and friendship."

The Candidate, on his side, in the fulness and warmth of his heart, laid
open to Louise's parents his love, his wishes, and his hopes. It is true
that Jacobi was now without any office, as well as without any property;
but he had many expectations, and amid these, like a sun and a support,
his Excellency O----. The Judge was himself no friend to such supports,
and Elise did not approve of long engagements: but then both of them
loved Jacobi; both of them wished, above all things, the true happiness
and well-being of their daughter; and so it happened that, after much
counsel, and after Louise had been questioned by her parents, and they
found that she had sincerely the same wishes as Jacobi, and that she
believed she should be happy with him, and after Jacobi had combated
with great fervency and effect every postponement of the
betrothal--that, after all this had been brought to a fortunate issue,
he received a formal yes, and he and Louise, on the afternoon of the
same day, whose morning sun had seen their explanation, were betrothed.

Jacobi was beyond description happy; Louise tranquil but gentle. Henrik
declared that her Majesty appeared too merciful. Perhaps all this
proceeded from her thoughts being already occupied with the increasing
and arranging of Jacobi's wardrobe. She began already to think about
putting in hand a fine piece of linen-weaving. She actually had
consented to the quick betrothal, principally, as she herself confessed
to Eva, "in order to have him better under her hands."

Good reader--and if thou art a Candidate, good Candidate--pardon "our
eldest" if she gave her consent somewhat in mercy. We can assure thee,
that our Jacobi was no worse off on that account; so he himself seemed
to think, and his joy and cordiality seemed to have great influence in
banishing "the cathedral" out of Louise's demeanour.

This view of the connexion, and the hearty joy which Louise's brother
and sisters expressed over this betrothal, and which proved how beloved
Jacobi was by them all, smoothed the wrinkles from the brow of the
Judge, and let Elise's heart feel the sweetest satisfaction. Henrik,
especially, declared loudly his delight in having his beloved friend and
instructor for a brother-in-law--an actual brother.

"And now listen, brother-in-law," said he, fixing his large eyes on
Louise; "assume your rights as master of the house properly, brother
dear; and don't let the slippers be master of the house. If you marry a
queen, you must be king, you understand that very well, and must take
care of your majesty; and if she look like a cathedral, why then do you
look like the last judgment, and thunder accordingly! You laugh; but
you must not receive my advice so lightly, but lay it seriously to
heart, and----but, dear friend, shall we not have a little bowl this
evening? shall we not, mamma dear? Yes, certainly we will! I shall have
the honour of mixing it myself. Shall we not drink the health of your
majesties? I shall mix a bowl--sugar and oranges!--a bowl! a bowl!"

With this exclamation Henrik rushed with outstretched arms to the door,
which at that moment opened, and he embraced the worthy Mrs. Gunilla.

"He! thou--good heaven! Best-beloved!" exclaimed she, "he, he, he, he!
what is up here? He never thought, did he, that he should take the old
woman in his arms! he, he, he, he!"

Henrik excused himself in the most reverential and cordial manner,
explained the cause of his ecstasy, and introduced to her the
newly-betrothed. Mrs. Gunilla at first was astonished, and then affected
to tears. She embraced Elise, and then Louise, and Jacobi also. "God
bless you!" said she, with all her beautiful quiet cordiality, and then,
somewhat pale, seated herself silently on the sofa, and seemed to be
thinking sorrowfully how often anxious, dispiriting days succeed the
cheerful morning of a betrothal. Whether it was from these thoughts, or
that Mrs. Gunilla really felt herself unwell, we know not, but she
became paler and paler. Gabriele went out to fetch her a glass of water,
and as she opened the door ran against the Assessor, who was just then
entering.

With a little cry of surprise she recovered from this unexpected shock.
He looked at her with an astonished countenance, and the next moment was
surrounded by the other young people.

"Now, see, see! what is all this?" exclaimed he; "why do you overwhelm
me thus? Cannot one move any longer in peace? I am not going to dance,
Monsieur Henricus! Do not split my ears, Miss Petrea! What? betrothed!
What? Who? Our eldest? Body and bones! let me sit down and take a pinch
of snuff. Our eldest betrothed! that is dreadful! Usch!--usch! that is
quite frightful! uh, uh, uh, uh! that is actually horrible! Hu, u, u,
hu!"

The Assessor took snuff, and blew his nose for a good while, during
which the family, who knew his way so well, laughed heartily, with the
exception of Louise, who reddened, and was almost angry at his
exclamations, especially at that of horrible.

"Nay," said he, rising up and restoring the snuff-box again to his
pocket, "one must be contented with what cannot be helped. What is
written is written. And, as the Scripture says, blessed are they who
increase and multiply the incorrigible human race, so, in heaven's name,
good luck to you! Good luck and blessing, dear human beings!" And thus
saying, he heartily shook the hands of Jacobi and Louise, who returned
his hand-pressure with kindness, although not quite satisfied with the
form of his good wishes.

"Never in all my life," said Henrik, "did I hear a less cheerful
congratulation. Mrs. Gunilla and good Uncle Munter to-day might be in
melancholy humour: but now they are sitting down by each other, and we
may hope that after they have had a comfortable quarrel together, they
will cheer up a little."

But no; no quarrel ensued this evening between the two. The Assessor had
tidings to announce to her which appeared difficult for him to
communicate, and which filled her eyes with tears--Pyrrhus was dead!

"He was yesterday quite well," said the Assessor, "and licked my hand as
I bade him good night. To-day he took his morning coffee with a good
appetite, and then lay down on his cushion to sleep. As I returned home,
well pleased to think of playing with my little comrade, he lay dead on
his cushion!"

Mrs. Gunilla and he talked for a long time about the little favourite,
and appeared in consequence to become very good friends.

Jeremias Munter was this evening in a more censorious humour than
common. His eyes rested with a sad expression on the newly betrothed.

"Yes," said he, as if speaking to himself, "if one had only confidence
in oneself; if one was only clear as to one's own motives--then one
might have some ground to hope that one could make another happy, and
could be happy with them."

"One must know oneself thus well, so far," said Louise, not without a
degree of confidence, "that one can be certain of doing so, before one
would voluntarily unite one's fate with that of another."

"_Thus well!_" returned he, warmly. "Yes, prosit! Who knows thus well?
You do not, dear sister, that I can assure you. Ah!" continued he, with
bitter melancholy, "one may be horribly deceived in oneself, and by
oneself, in this life. There is no one in this world who, if he rightly
understand himself, has not to deplore some infidelity to his
friend--his love--his better self! The self-love, the miserable egotism
of human nature, where is there a corner that it does not slide into?
The wretched little _I_, how it thrusts itself forward! how thoughts of
self, designs for self, blot actions which otherwise might be called
good!"

"Do you then acknowledge no virtue? Is there, then, no magnanimity, no
excellence, which you can admire?" asked some one. "Does not history
show us----"

"History!" interrupted he, "don't speak of history--don't bring it
forward! No, if I am to believe in virtue, it is such as history cannot
meddle with or understand; it is only in that which plays no great part
in the world, which never, never could have been applauded by it, and
which is not acted publicly. Of this kind it is possible that something
entirely beautiful, something perfectly pure and holy, might be found. I
will believe in it, although I do not discover it in myself. I have
examined my own soul, and can find nothing pure in it; but that it _may_
be found in others, I believe. My heart swells with the thought that
there may exist perfectly pure and unselfish virtue. Good heaven, how
beautiful it is! And wherever such a soul may be found in the world, be
it in palace or in hut, in gold or in rags, in man or in woman, which,
shunning the praise of the world, fearing the flattery of its own heart,
fulfils unobserved and with honest zeal its duties, however difficult
they may be, and which labours and prays in secrecy and stillness--such
a being I admire and love, and set high above all the Caesars and Ciceros
of the world!"

During this speech the Judge, who had silently risen from his seat,
approached his wife, laid his hand gently on her shoulder, and looked
round upon his children with glistening eyes.

"Our time," continued the Assessor, with what was an extraordinary
enthusiasm for him, "understands but very little this greatness. It
praises itself loudly, and on that account it is the less worthy of
praise. Everybody will be remarkable, or at least will appear so.
Everybody steps forward and shouts I! I! Women even do not any longer
understand the nobility of their incognito; they also come forth into
notoriety, and shout out their _I!_ Scarcely anybody will say, from the
feeling of their own hearts, _Thou!_--and yet it is this same _Thou_
which occasions man to forget that selfish _I_, and in which lies his
purest part; his best happiness! To be sure it may seem grand, it may be
quite ecstatic, even if it be only for a moment, to fill the world with
one's name; but as, in long-past times, millions and millions of men
united themselves to build a temple to the Supreme, and then themselves
sank silently, namelessly, to the dust, having only inscribed His name
and His glory; certainly that was greater, that was far worthier!"

"You talk like King Solomon himself, Uncle Munter!" exclaimed Petrea,
quite enraptured. "Ah, you must be an author: you must write a book
of----"

"Write!" interrupted he, "on what account should I write? Only to
increase the miserable vanity of men? Write!--Bah!"

"Every age has its wise men to build up temples," said Henrik, with a
beautiful expression of countenance.

"No!" continued the Assessor, with evident abhorrence, "I will not
write! but I will live! I have dreamed sometimes that I could live----"

He ceased; a singular emotion was expressed in his countenance; he
arose, and took up a book, into which he looked without reading, and
soon after stepped quietly out of the house.

The entertainment in the family this evening was, spite of all that had
gone before, very lively; and the result, which was expressed in jesting
earnestness, was, that every one, in the spirit which the Assessor had
praised, should secretly labour at the temple-building, every one with
his own work-tool, and according to his own strength.

The Judge walked up and down in the room, and took only occasional part
in the entertainment, although he listened to all, and smiled
applaudingly. It seemed as if the Assessor's words had excited a
melancholy feeling in him, and he spoke warmly in praise of his friend.

"There does not exist a purer human soul than his," said he, "and he
has thereby operated very beneficially on me. Many men desire as much
good, and do it also; but few have to the same extent as he the pure
mind, the perfectly noble motive."

"Ah! if one could only make him happier, only make him more satisfied
with life!" said Eva.

"Will you undertake the commission?" whispered Petrea, waggishly.

Rather too audible a kiss suddenly turned all eyes on the Candidate and
Louise; the latter of whom was punishing her lover for his daring by a
highly ungracious and indignant glance, which Henrik declared quite
pulverised him. As they, however, all separated for the night, the
Candidate besought and was permitted, in mercy, a little kiss, as a
token of reconciliation and forgiveness of his offence regarding the
great one.

"My dear girl," said the mother to Louise as the two met, impelled by a
mutual desire to converse together that same night in her boudoir, "how
came Jacobi's wooing about so suddenly? I could not have believed that
it would have been so quickly decided. I am perfectly astonished even
yet that you should be betrothed."

"So am I," replied Louise; "I can hardly conceive how it has happened.
We met one another this morning in the garden; Jacobi was gloomy, and
out of spirits, and had made up his mind to leave us because he fancied
I was about to be betrothed to Cousin Thure. I then besought him to
forgive my late unkindness, and gave him some little idea of my
friendliness towards him; whereupon he spoke to me of his own feelings
and wishes so beautifully, so warmly, and then--then I hardly know how
it was myself, he called me _his_ Louise, and I--told him to go and
speak with my parents."

"And in the mean time," said the mother, "your parents sent another
wooer to their daughter, in order for him to receive from her a yes or
no. Poor Cousin Thure! He seemed to have such certain hope. But I trust
he may soon console himself! But do you know, Louise, of late I have
fancied that Oestanvik and all its splendour might be a little
captivating to you! And now do you really feel that you have had no loss
in rejecting so rich a worldly settlement?"

"Loss!" repeated Louise, "no, not now, certainly; and yet I should say
wrong if I denied that it has had temptations for me; and for that
reason I never would go to Oestanvik, because I knew how improper it
would be if I allowed it to influence me, whilst I never could endure
such a person as Cousin Thure; and, besides that, I liked Jacobi so
much, and had done so for many years! Once, however, the temptation was
very powerful, and that was on our return from Axelholm. As I rode along
in Cousin Thure's easy landau, it seemed to me that it must be very
agreeable to travel through life so comfortably and pleasantly. But at
that time I was very unhappy in myself; life had lost its best worth for
me; my faith in all that I loved most was poisoned! Ah! there arose in
me then such a fearful doubt in all that was good in the world, and I
believed for one moment that it would be best to sleep out life, and
therefore the easy rocking of the landau seemed so excellent. But now,
now is this heavy dream vanished! now life is again bright, and I
clearly see my own way through, it. Now I trouble myself no more about a
landau than I do about a wheelbarrow; nay, I would much rather now that
my whole life should be a working day, for which I could thank God! It
is a delight to work for those whom one highly esteems and loves; and I
desire nothing higher than to be able to live and work for my own
family, and for him who is to-day become my promised husband before
God!"

"God will bless you, my good, pure-hearted girl!" said the mother,
embracing her, and sweet affectionate tears were shed in the still
evening.




CHAPTER XI.

YET MORE WOOING.


Early on the following morning Eva received a nosegay of beautiful
moss-roses, among which was a letter to herself; she tore it open, and
red the following words:

      "I have dreamed that I could live; and truly a life more beautiful
      and more perfect than any romance makes one dream of. Little Miss
      Eva, whom I have so often carried in my arms--good young girl,
      whom I would so willingly sustain on my breast through, life, thou
      must hear what I have dreamed, what I sometimes still dream.

      "I dreamed that I was a rough, unsightly rock, repulsive and
      unfruitful. But a heart beat in the rock--a chained heart. It beat
      against the walls of its prison till it bled, because it longed to
      be abroad in the sunshine, but it could not break its bonds. I
      could not free myself from myself. The rock wept because it was so
      hard, because it was a prison for its own life. There came a
      maiden, a light gentle angel, wandering through the wood, and laid
      her warm lily-white hand on the rock, and pressed her pure lips
      upon it, breathing a magical word of freedom. The rocky wall
      opened itself, and the heart, the poor captive heart, saw the
      light! The young girl went into the chamber of the heart, and
      called it her home; and suddenly beautiful roses, which diffused
      odours around, sprang forth from that happy heart towards its
      liberator, whilst the chambers of the heart vaulted itself high
      above her into a temple for her, clothing its walls with fresh
      foliage and with precious stones, upon which the sunbeams played.

      "I awoke from a sense of happiness that was too great to be borne
      on earth; I awoke, and ah! the roses were vanished, the lovely
      girl was vanished, and I was once again the hard, unsightly, and
      joyless rock. But do you see, young maiden, the idea will not
      leave me, that those roses which I saw in my dream are hidden in
      me; that they may yet bloom, yet rejoice and make happy. The idea
      will remain with me that this reserved, melancholy heart might yet
      expand itself by an affectionate touch; that there are precious
      stones within it, which would beam brightly for those who called
      them forth into light.

      "Good young maiden, will you not venture on the attempt? Will you
      not lay your warm hand on the rock? Will you not breathe softly
      upon it? Oh, certainly, certainly under your touch it would
      soften--it would bring forth roses for you--it would exalt itself
      into a temple for you, a temple full of hymns of thanksgiving,
      full of love!

      "I know that I am old, old before my time; that I am ugly and
      disagreeable, unpleasant, and perhaps ridiculous; but I do not
      think that nature intended me to be so. I have gone through life
      in such infinite solitude; neither father nor mother, brother nor
      sister, have followed my path; no sunshine fell upon my childhood
      or my youth; I have wandered solitarily through life, combating
      with difficulties. Once I bound myself to a friend--he deserted
      me, and thence grew the rock about my heart; thence became my
      demeanour severe, unattractive, and rough. Is it to remain so
      always? Will my life never bloom upon earth? Will no breath of
      heaven call forth my roses?

      "Do you fear my melancholy temperament? Oh, you have not seen how
      a glance, a word of yours chases every cloud from my brow; not
      because you are beautiful, but because you are good and pure. Will
      you teach me to be good? I will learn willingly from you! From you
      I would learn to love mankind, and to find more good in the world
      than I have hitherto done. I will live for you, if not for the
      world. By my wish the world should know nothing of me till the
      cross upon my grave told 'here rests----'

      "Oh, it is beautiful to live nameless under the poisoned glance of
      the world; poisoned, whether it praise or blame; beautiful, not to
      be polluted by its observation, but more beautiful to be
      intimately known to one--to possess one gentle and honest friend,
      and that one a wife! Beautiful to be able to look into her pure
      soul as in a mirror, and to be aware there of every blot on one's
      own soul, and to be able thus to purify it against the day of the
      great trial.

      "But I speak only of myself and my own happiness. Ah, the
      egotist--the cursed egotist! Can I make you happy also, Eva? Is it
      not audacity in me to desire--ah, Eva, I love you inexpressibly!

      "I leave the egotist in your hand: do with him what you will, he
      will still remain

                              "Yours."

This letter made Eva very anxious and uneasy. She would so willingly
have said yes, and made so good a man happy, but then so many voices
within her said no!

She spoke with her parents, with her brother and sisters. "He is so
good, so excellent!" said she. "Ah, if I could but properly love him!
But I cannot--and then he is so old; and I have no desire to marry; I am
so happy in my own home."

"And do not leave it!" was the unanimous chorus of all the family. The
father, indeed, was actually desperate with all this courtship; and the
mother thought it quite absurd that her blooming Eva and Jeremias Munter
should go together. No one voice spoke for the Assessor but the little
Petrea's, and a silent sigh in Eva's own bosom. The result of all this
consideration was, that Eva wrote with tearful eyes the following answer
to her lover:

      "My best, my truly good Friend!

      "Ah! do not be angry with me that I cannot become for you that
      which you wish. I shall certainly not marry. I am too happy in my
      own home for that. Ah! this to be sure is egotistical, but I
      cannot do otherwise. Forgive me! I am so very much, so heartily
      attached to you; and I should never be happy again if you love not
      hitherto as formerly

      "Your little            "Eva."

In the evening Eva received a beautiful and costly work-box, with the
following lines:

      "Yes, yes, I can very well believe that the rough rock would be
      appalling. You will not venture to lay your delicate white hand
      upon it, little Miss Eva; will not trouble yourself to breathe
      warmth upon my poor roses! Let them then remain in their grave!

      "I shall now make a journey, nor see you again for a year and a
      day. But, good heavens! as you have given me a basket,[13] you
      shall receive in return a little box. I bought it for my--bride,
      Eva! Yet now, after all, Eva shall have it; shall keep it for my
      sake. She may return it when I cease to be

                              "Her true and devoted Friend."

"Do you think she is sorry for what she has done?" asked the Judge
anxiously from his wife, as he saw Eva's hot tears falling on the
work-box;--"but it cannot be helped. She marry! and that too with
Munter! She is indeed nothing but a child! But that is just the way;
when one has educated one's daughters, and taught them something of good
manners, just when one has begun to have real pleasure in them, that one
must lose them--must let them go to China if the lover chance to be a
Chinese! It is intolerable! It is abominable! I would not wish my worst
enemy the pain of having grown-up daughters. Is not Schwartz already
beginning to draw a circle about Sara? Good gracious! if we should yet
have the plague of another lover!"

FOOTNOTES:

[13] To say that "a gentleman has received a basket," is the same as
saying he is a rejected lover.--M. H.




CHAPTER XII.

MORE COURTSHIP STILL.


Judge Frank had, unknown to himself, spoken a striking word. It was true
that Schwartz had drawn ever narrower and darker circles around Sara,
and at the very time when she would appear free from his influence her
temper became more uncertain and suspicious. The mother, uneasy about
this connexion, no longer allowed her to be alone with him during the
music lesson, and this watchfulness excited Sara's pride, as well as the
grave yet gentle remonstrances which were made on account of her
behaviour were received with much impatience and disregard. The Judge
was the only person before whom Sara did not exhibit the dark side of
her character. His glance, his presence, seemed to exercise a certain
power over her; besides which, she was, perhaps, more beloved by him
than by all the other members of the family, with the exception of
Petrea.

One evening, Sara sate silent by one of the windows in the library,
supporting her beautiful head on her hand. Petrea sate at her feet on a
low stool; she also was silent, but every now and then looked up to Sara
with a tender troubled expression, whilst Sara sometimes looked down
towards her thoughtfully, and almost gloomily.

"Petrea," said she, quickly, "what would you say if I should leave you
suddenly to go into the wide world, and should never return?"

"What should I say?" answered Petrea, with a violent gush of tears: "ah,
I should say nothing at all, but should lie down and die of grief!"

"Do you really love me then so, Petrea?" asked she.

"Do I love you!" returned Petrea; "ah, Sara, if you go away, take me
with you as maid, as servant--I will do everything for you!"

"Good Petrea!" whispered Sara, laying her arm round her neck, and
kissing her weeping eyes, "continue to love Sara, but do not follow
her!"

"It seems terribly sultry to me this evening!" said Henrik, wearily: "we
cannot manage any family assembling to-night; not a bit of music; not a
bit of entertainment. The air seems as if an earthquake were at hand. I
fancy that Africa sends us something of a tempest. Petrea is weeping
like the cataract of Trollhaetten; and there go the people in
twos-and-twos and weep, and set themselves in corners and whisper and
mutter, and kiss one another, from my God-fearing parents down to my
silly little sisters! The King and Queen, they go and seat themselves
just has it happens, on living or dead things; they had nearly seated
themselves on me as I sate unoffensively on the sofa; but I made a turn
about _tout d'un coup_.--Betrothed! horribly wearisome folks! Are they
not, Gabriele? They cannot see, they cannot hear; they could not speak,
I fancy, but with one another!"

A light was burning in Sara's chamber far into the night. She was busied
for a long time with her journal; she wrote with a flying but unsteady
hand.

"So, to-morrow; to-morrow all will be said, and I----shall be bound.

"I know that is but of little importance, and yet I have such a horror
of it! Oh, the power of custom and of form.

"I know very well whom I could love; there is a purity in his glance, a
powerful purity which penetrates me. But how would he look on me if he
saw----

"I must go! I have no choice left! S. has me in his net--the money which
I have borrowed from him binds me so fast!--for I cannot bear that they
should know it, and despise me. I know that they would impoverish
themselves in order to release me, but I will not so humiliate myself.

"And why do I speak of release? I go hence to a life of freedom and
honour. I bow myself under the yoke but for a moment, only in order to
exalt myself the more proudly. Now there is no more time to tremble and
to waver--away with these tears! And thou, Volney, proud, strong
thinker, stand by me! Teach me, when all others turn away, how I may
rely on my own strength!"

Sara now exchanged the pen for the book, and the hour of midnight struck
before she closed it, and arose tranquil and cold in order to seek the
quiet of sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

The earthquake of which Henrik had spoken came the next day, the signal
of which was a letter from Schwartz to the Judge, in which he solicited
the hand of Sara. His only wealth was his profession; but with this
alone he was convinced that his wife would want nothing: he was just
about to undertake a journey through Europe, and wished to be
accompanied by Sara, of whose consent and acquiescence he was quite
sure.

A certain degree of self-appreciation in a man was not at any time
displeasing to Judge Frank, but this letter breathed a supercilious
assurance, a professional arrogance, which were extremely repugnant to
him. Besides this, he was wounded by the tone of pretension in which
Schwartz spoke of one who was as dear to him as his own daughter; and
the thought of her being united to a man of Schwartz's character was
intolerable to him. He was almost persuaded that Sara did not love him,
and burned with impatience to repel his pretensions, and to remove him
at the same time from his house.

Elise agreed perfectly in the opinion of her husband, but was less
confident than he regarding Sara's state of feeling with respect to the
affair. She was summoned to their presence. The Judge handed to her
Schwartz's letter, and awaited impatiently her remarks upon it. Her
colour paled before the grave and searching glance which was riveted
upon her, but she declared herself quite willing to accept Schwartz's
proposal.

Astonishment and vexation painted themselves on the countenance of her
adopted father.

"Ah, Sara," said the mother, after a short silence, "have you well
considered this? Do you think that Schwartz is a man who can make a wife
happy?"

"He can make me happy," returned Sara; "happy according to my own mind."

"You can never, never," said the mother, "enjoy domestic happiness with
him!"

"He loves me," returned Sara, "and he can give me a happiness which I
never enjoyed here. I lost early both father and mother, and in the home
into which I was received out of charity, all became colder and colder
towards me!"

"Ah, do not think so, Sara!" said the mother. "But even if this were
the case, may not some little of it be your own fault? Do you really do
anything to make yourself beloved? Do you strive against that which
makes you less amiable?"

"I can renounce such love," said Sara, "as will not love me with my
faults. Nature gave me strong feelings and inclinations, and I cannot
bring them into subjection."

"You will not, Sara," was the reply.

"I cannot! and it may be that I will not," said she, "submit myself to
the subjugation and taming which has been allotted as the share of the
woman. Why should I? I feel strength in myself to break up a new path
for myself. I will lead a fresh and an independent life! I will live a
bright artiste-life, free from the trammels and the Lilliputian
considerations of domestic life. I will be free! I will not, as now, be
watched and suspected, and be under a state of espionage! I will be free
from the displeasure and blame which now dog my footsteps! This
treatment it is, mother, which has determined my resolution."

"If," answered the mother, in a tremulous voice, and deeply affected by
Sara's words and tone, "I have erred towards you--and I may have done
so--I know well that it has not been from temper, or out of want of
tenderness towards you. I have spoken to and warned you from the best
conviction; I have sincerely endeavoured and desired that which is best
for you, and this you will some time or other come to see even better
than now.[14] You will perhaps come to see that it would have been good
for you if you had lent a more willing ear to my maternal counsellings;
will perhaps come to deplore that you rewarded the love I cherished for
you with reproaches and bitterness!"

"Then let me go!" said Sara, with gentler voice; "we do not accord well
together. I embitter your life, and you make--perhaps you cannot make
mine happy. Let me go with him who will love me with all my faults, who
can and will open a freer scope to my powers and talents than I have
hitherto had."

"Ah, Sara," returned Elise, "will you obtain in this freer field a
better happiness than can be afforded you by a domestic circle, by the
tenderness of true friends, and a happy domestic life?"

"Are you then so happy, my mother?" interrupted Sara with an ironical
smile, and a searching glance; "are you then so happy in this circle,
and this domestic life, which you praise so highly, that you thus repeat
what has been said on the subject from the beginning of the world. Those
perpetual cares in which you have passed your days, those trifling cares
and thoughts for every-day necessities, which are so opposite to your
own nature, are they then so pleasant, so captivating? Have you not
renounced many of your beautiful gifts--your pleasure in literature and
music--nay, in short, what is the most lovely part of life, in order to
bury yourself in concealment and oblivion, and there, like the silkworm,
to spin your own sepulchre of the threads which another will wind off?
You bow your own will continually before that of another; your innocent
pleasures you sacrifice daily either to him or to others: are you so
very happy amid all these renunciations?"

The Judge rose up passionately; went several times up and down the room,
and placed himself at last directly opposite to Sara, leaning his back
to the stove, and listening attentively for the answer of his wife.

"Yes, Sara, I am happy!" answered she, with an energy very unusual in
her; "yes, I am happy! Whenever I make any sacrifice, I receive a rich
return. And if there be moments when I feel painfully any renunciation
which I have made, there are others, and far more of them, in which I
congratulate myself on all that I have won. I am become improved through
the husband whom God has given to me; through my children, through my
duties, through the desires and the wants which I have overcome at his
side--yes, Sara, above all things, through him, his affection, his
excellence, am I improved, and feel myself happier every day. Love,
Sara, love changes sacrifice into pleasure, and makes renunciation
sweet! I thank God for my lot, and only wish that I were worthier of
it!"

"It may be!" said Sara, proudly; "every one has his own sphere. But the
tame happiness of the dove suits not the eagle!"

"Sara!" exclaimed the Judge, in a tone of severe displeasure.

The mother, unable longer to repress the outbreak of excited feeling,
left the room with her handkerchief to her eyes.

"For shame, Sara," said the Judge with severe gravity, and standing
before her with a reproving glance, "for shame! this arrogance goes too
far!"

She trembled now before his eye as she had done once before; a
remembrance from the days of her childhood awoke within her; her eyelids
sunk, and a burning crimson covered her face.

"You have forgotten yourself," continued he, calmly, but severely, "and
in your childish haughtiness have only shown how far you are below that
worth and excellence which you cannot understand, and which, in your
present state of mind, you never can emulate. Your own calm judgment
will make the sharpest reproaches on this last scene, and will, nay,
must lead you to throw yourself at the feet of your mother. All,
however, that I now ask from you is, that you think over your intentions
rationally. How is it possible, Sara, that you overlook your own
inconsistency? You argue zealously against domestic life--against the
duties of marriage, and yet, at the same time, wilfully determine to tie
those bonds with a man who will make them actual fetters for you."

"He will not fetter me," returned she; "he has promised it--he has sworn
it! I shall not subject myself to him as a wife, but I shall stand at
his side as an equal, as an artiste, and step with him into a world
beautiful and rich in honours, which he will open to me."

"Ah, mere talk!" exclaimed the Judge. "Folly, folly! How can you be so
foolish, and believe in such false show? The state gives your husband a
power over you which he will not fail to abuse--that I can promise you
from what I know of his character, and from what I now discover of
yours. No woman can withdraw from a connexion of this kind unpunished,
more especially under the circumstances in which you are placed. Sara,
you do not love the man to whom you are about to unite yourself, and it
is impossible that you can love him. No true esteem, no pure regard
binds you to him."

"He loves me," answered Sara, with trembling lips; "I admire his power
and artistical genius;--he will conduct me to independence and honour!
It is no fault of mine that the lot of woman is so contracted and
miserable--that she must bind herself in order to become free!"

"Only as a means?" asked he; "the holiest tie on earth only as a means,
and for what? For a pitiable and ephemeral chase after happiness, which
you call honour and freedom. Poor, deceived Sara! Are you so misled, so
turned aside from the right? Is it possible that the miserable book of a
writer, as full of pretension as weak and superficial, has been able
thus to misguide you?" and with these words he took Volney's Ruins out
of his pocket, and threw it upon the table.

Sara started and reddened. "Ah," said she, "this is only another
instance of espionage over me."

"Not so," replied the Judge, calmly. "I was this day in your room; you
had left the book lying on the table, and I took it, in order that I
might speak with you about it, and prevent Petrea's young steps from
treading this path of error without a guide."

"People may think what they please," said Sara, "of the influence of the
book, but I conceive that author deserves least of all the epithet
weak."

"When you have followed his counsel," returned he, "and resemble the
wreck which the waves have thrown up here, then you may judge of the
strength and skill of the steersman! My child, do not follow him. A more
mature, a more logical power of mind, will teach you how little he knows
of the ocean of life, of its breakers and its depths--how little he
understands the true compass."

"Ah!" said Sara, "these storms, these dangers, nay, even shipwreck
itself, appear to me preferable to the still, windless water which the
so-much-be-praised haven of domestic life represents. You speak, my
father, of chimeras; but tell me, is not the so-lauded happiness of
domestic life more a chimera than any other? When the saloon is set in
order, one does not see the broom and the dusting-brush that have been
at work in it, and the million grains of dust which have filled the air;
one forgets that they have ever been there. So it is with domestic and
family life; one persists wilfully in only seeing its beautiful moments,
and in passing over, in not noticing at all, what are less beautiful, or
indeed are 'repulsive.'"

"All depends upon which are the predominant," replied he, half smiling
at Sara's simile. "Thus, then, if it be more frequently disorderly than
orderly, if the air be more frequently filled with dust than it is pure
and fresh, then the devil may dwell there, but not I! I know very well
that there are homes enough on earth where there are dust-filled rooms,
but that must be the fault of the inhabitants. On them alone depends the
condition of the house; from those which may not unjustly be called
ante-rooms of hell, to those again which, spite of their earthly
imperfections, spite of many a visitation of duster and dusting-brush,
yet may deserve the names of courts of heaven. And where, Sara, where in
this world will you find an existence free from earthly dust? And is
that of which you complain so bitterly anything else than the earthly
husk which encloses every mortal existence of man as well as of
woman?--it is the soil in which the plant must grow; it is the chrysalis
in which the larva becomes ripe for its change of life! Can you actually
be blind to that higher and nobler life which never developes itself
more beautifully than in a peaceful home? Can you deny that it is in the
sphere of family and friendship where man lives most perfectly and best,
as citizen of an earthly and of a heavenly kingdom? Can you deny how
great and noble is the efficacy of woman in private life, be she married
or single, if she only endeavour----"

"Ah," said Sara, interrupting him, "the sphere of private life is too
narrow for me. I require a larger one, in order to breathe freely and
freshly."

"In pure affection," replied the Judge, "in friendship, and in the
exercise of kindness, there is large and fresh breathing space; the air
of eternity plays through it. In intellectual development--and the very
highest may be arrived at in private life--the whole world opens itself
to the eye of man, and infinite treasures are offered to his soul, more,
far more, than he can ever appropriate to himself!"

"But the artist," argued Sara--"the artist cannot form himself at
home--he must try himself on the great theatre of the world. Is his bent
only a chimera, my father? And are those distinguished persons who
present the highest pleasures to the world through their talents; to
whom the many look up with admiration and homage; around whom the great,
and the beautiful, and the agreeable collect themselves, are they
fools?--are they blind hunters after happiness? Ah, what lot can well be
more glorious than theirs! Oh, my father, I am young; I feel a power in
myself which is not a common one--my heart throbs for a freer and more
beautiful life! Desire not that I should constrain my own nature: desire
not that I should compress my beautiful talents into a sphere which has
no charms for me!"

"I do not depreciate, certainly, the profession of the artist," replied
the Judge, "nor the value of his agency: in its best meaning, his is as
noble as any; but is it this pure bent, this noble view of it, which
impels you, which animates you? Sara, examine your own heart; it is
vanity and selfish ambition which impel you. It is the arrogance of your
eighteen years, and some degree of talent, which make you overlook all
that is good in your present lot, which make you disdain to mature
yourself nobly and independently in the domestic circle. It is a deep
mistake, which will now lead you to an act blamable in the eyes of God
and man, and which blinds you to the dark side of the life which you
covet. Nevertheless, there is none darker, none in which the changes of
fortune are more dependent on miserable accidents. An accident may
deprive you of your beauty, or your voice, and with these you lose the
favour of the world in which you have placed your happiness. Besides
this, you will not always continue at eighteen, Sara: by the time you
are thirty all your glory will be past, and then--then what will you
have collected for the remaining half of life? You will have rioted for
a short time in order then to starve; since, so surely as I stand here,
with this haughty and vain disposition, and with the husband whom you
will have chosen, you will come to want; and, too late, you will look
back in your misery, full of remorse, to the virtue and to the true life
which you have renounced."

Sara was silent; she was shaken by the words and by the countenance of
her adopted father.

"And how perfectly different it might be!" continued he, with warmth;
"how beautiful, how full of blessing might not your life and your
talents be! Sara! I have loved you, and love you still, like my own
daughter--will you not listen to me as to a father? Answer me--have you
had to give up anything in this house, which, with any show of reason,
you might demand? and have we spared any possible care for your
education or your accomplishments?"

"No," replied Sara, sighing; "all have been kind, very kind to me."

"Well, then," exclaimed the Judge, with increasing warmth and
cordiality, "depend upon your mother and me, that you will have no cause
of complaint. I am not without property and connexions. I will spare no
means of cultivating your talents, and then if your turn for art is a
true one, when it has been cultivated to its utmost it shall not be
concealed from a world which can enjoy and reward it. But remain under
our protection, and do not cast yourself, inexperienced as you are, on a
world which will only lead you more astray. Do not, in order to win an
ideal liberty, give your hand to a man inferior to you in
accomplishments; to a man whom you do not love, and whom, morally
speaking, you cannot esteem. Descend into your own heart, and see its
error while there is yet time to retrieve it, before you are crushed by
your own folly. Do not fly from affectionate, careful friends--do not
fly from the paternal roof in blind impatience of disagreeables, to
remove which depends perhaps only on yourself! Sara, my child! I have
not taken you under my roof in order to let you become the victim of
ruin and misfortune! Pause, Sara, and reflect, I pray you, I conjure
you! make not yourself wretched! When I took you from the death-bed of
your father, I threw my arms around _you_ to shield you from the winds
of autumn--I clasp them once again around you, in order to shield you
from far more dangerous winds--Sara, my child, fly not from this house!"

Sara trembled; she was violently agitated, and leaned her head with
indescribable emotion against her adopted father, who clasped her
tenderly to his bosom.

It is not difficult to say whether they were good or bad angels who
triumphed in Sara, as she, after a moment of violent inward struggle,
pushed from her the paternal friend, and said, with averted countenance,
"It is in vain; my determination is taken. I shall become the wife of
Schwartz, and go where my fate leads me!"

The Judge started up, stamped on the floor, and pale with anger,
exclaimed, with flashing eyes, "Obdurate one! since neither love nor
prayers have power over you, you must listen to another mode of speech!
I have the right of a guardian over you, and I forbid this unholy
marriage! I forbid you to leave my house! You hear me, and you shall
obey!"

Sara stood up as pale as death, and with an insolent expression riveted
her large eyes upon him, whilst he, too, fixed his upon her with all the
force of his peculiar earnestness and decision. It seemed as if each
would look the other through--as if each in this contest would measure
his strength against the other.

Suddenly her arms were flung wildly round his neck, a burning kiss was
pressed upon his lips, and the next moment she was out of the room.

Elise sate in her boudoir. She still wept bitter tears. It was twilight,
and her knees were suddenly embraced, and her hands and her dress were
covered with kisses and with tears. When she put forth her hands to
raise the one who embraced her, she had vanished. "Sara, Sara! where are
you?" exclaimed she, full of anxiety.

Petrea came down from her chamber; she met some one, who embraced her,
pressed her lips to her forehead, and whispered, "Forget me!"

"Sara, Sara! where are you going?" exclaimed she, terrified, and running
after her to the house door.

"Where is Sara?" inquired the Judge, violently, above in the chambers of
his daughters. "Where is Sara?" inquired he, below in the library.

"Ah!" exclaimed Petrea, who now rushed in weeping, "she is this moment
gone out--out into the street; she almost ran. She forbade me to follow
her. Ah, she certainly never will come back again!"

"The devil!" said the Judge, hastening from the room, and taking up his
hat, went out. Far off in the street he saw a female figure, which, with
only a handkerchief thrown over her head and shoulders, was hastening
onward, and who, spite of the twilight, he recognised to be Sara. He
hastened after her; she looked round, saw him, and fled. Certain now
that he was not mistaken, he followed, and was almost near enough to
take hold of her, when she suddenly turned aside, and rushed into a
house--it was that of Schwartz. He followed with the quickness of
lightning; followed her up the steps, and was just laying his hand on
her, when she vanished through a door. The next moment he too opened it,
and saw her--in the arms of Schwartz!

The two stood together embracing, and evidently prepared to defy him. He
stood for some moments silent before them, regarding them with an
indescribable look of wrath, contempt, and sorrow. He looked upon the
pale breathless Sara, and covered his eyes with his hand; the next
moment, however, he seemed to collect himself, and with all the calm and
respect-commanding dignity of a parent, he grasped her hand, and said,
"You now follow me home. On Sunday the banns shall be proclaimed."

Sara followed. She took his arm, and with a drooping head, and without a
word, accompanied him home.

All there was disquiet and sorrow. But, notwithstanding the general
discontent with Sara and her marriage, there was not one of the family
who did not busy themselves earnestly in her outfit. Louise, who blamed
her more than all the rest, gave herself most trouble about it.

Sara behaved as if she never observed how everybody was working for her,
and passed her time either over her harp, or solitary in her own room.
Any intercourse with the members of the family seemed to have become
painful to her, whilst Petrea's tenderness and tears were received with
indifference--nay, even with sternness.

FOOTNOTES:

[14] All mothers speak thus--but not all, nay, not many with the same
right as Elise.




CHAPTER XIII.

DEPARTURE.


Sara's joyless marriage was over; and the hour was come in which she was
to leave that home and family which had so affectionately received her,
and which now with solicitude and the tenderest care provided for her
wants in her new position.

In the hour of separation, the crust of ice which had hitherto
surrounded her being broke, she sank, weeping violently, at the feet of
her foster-parents.

The Judge was deeply affected. "You have had your own will, Sara," said
he, in a firm but mournful voice, "may you be happy! Some few warnings I
have given you, do not forget them; they are the last! If you should be
deceived in the hopes which now animate you--if you should be
unfortunate--unfortunate, or criminal, then remember--then remember,
Sara, that here you have father and mother, and sisters, who will
receive you with open arms; then remember that you have here family and
home!"

He ceased: drew her a little aside, took her hand, and pressed a
bank-note in it. "Take this," said he, tenderly, "as a little help in
the hour of need. No, you must not refuse it from your foster-father.
Take it for his love's sake, you will some time need it!"

It was with difficulty that the Judge had so far preserved his calmness;
he now pressed her violently to his breast; kissed her brow and lips,
whilst his tears flowed abundantly. The mother and sisters too
surrounded her weeping. At that moment the door opened, and Schwartz
entered.

"The carriage waits," said he, with a dark glance on the mournful group.
Sara tore herself from the arms which would have held her fast, and
rushed out of the room.

A few seconds more, and the travelling carriage rolled away.

"She is lost!" exclaimed the Judge to his wife with bitter pain. "I feel
it in myself that she is lost! Her death would have been less painful to
me than this marriage."

For many days he continued silent and melancholy.




CHAPTER XIV.

LITTLE SCENES.


The past episode had gone through the house like a whirlwind. When it
was over, the heaven cleared itself anew, and they were able to confess
that a more joyful tranquillity had diffused itself over all. There was
no one who did not think of Sara with sympathy, who did not weep
sometimes at her violent separation from the family; but there was no
one, with the exception of the Judge and Petrea, who did not feel her
absence to be a secret relief; for one unquiet temper, and one full of
pretension, can disturb a whole household, and make the most exquisite
natural gifts of no account.

The Judge missed a daughter from the beloved circle; missed that
beautiful, richly-endowed girl, and could not think of her future
prospects without bitter anxiety. Petrea wept the object of her youthful
admiration and homage, but consoled herself with the romantic plans she
formed for seeing her again, in all of which she gave to herself the
province of guardian angel, either as the queen of a desert island, or
as a warrior bleeding for her, or as a disguised person who unloosed
her bonds in the depths of a dungeon in order to put them on herself: in
short, in all possible ways in the world except the possible one.

Sara wrote soon after her separation from her friends; she spoke of the
past with gratitude, and of the future with hope. The letter exhibited a
certain decision and calmness; a certain seriousness, which diffused
through the family a satisfactory ease of mind with regard to her future
fate. Elise was ever inclined to hope for the best, and young people are
always optimists: the Judge said nothing which might disturb the peace
of his family, whilst Louise alone shook her head and sighed.

After the many disturbing circumstances which had lately occurred in the
family, all seemed now to long after repose, and the ability to enjoy a
quieter domestic life. Occupations of all kinds--those simple but
cheerful daughters of well-regulated life, went on cheerfully and
comfortably under the eye of Louise. There was no want in the house of
joyful hours, sunshine of every kind, and entertainment full of
interest. The newspapers which the Judge took in, and which kept the
family _au courant_ of the questions of the day, furnished materials for
much development of mind, for much conversation and much thought,
especially among the young people. The father had great pleasure in
hearing thus their interchange of opinion, although he himself seldom
mingled in their discussions, with the exception of now and then a
guiding word.

"I fancy all is going on quite right," said he, joyfully, to his wife
one day. "The children live gaily at home, and are preparing themselves
for life. Indeed, if they only once open their eyes and ears, they will
find subjects enough on which to use them; and will be astonished at all
that life will present them with. It is well when home furnishes
nourishment for mind as well as heart and body. I rejoice too,
extremely, over our new house. Every land, every climate, has its own
advantages as well as its own difficulties, and the economy of life must
be skilfully adjusted if it is to be maintained with honour and
advantage. Our country, which compels us to live so much in the house,
seems thereby to admonish us to a more concentrated, and at the same
time more quiet and domestic life, on which account we need, above all
things, comfortable houses, which are able to advance and advantage
soul as well as body. Thank God! I fancy ours is pretty good for that
purpose, and in time may yet be better; the children too look happy;
Gabriele grows now every day, and Louise has grown over all our heads!"

The young people were very much occupied with plans for the future. Eva
and Leonore built all their castles in the air together. A great
intimacy had grown up between these two sisters since they were alone
during the absence of the others at Axelholm. One might say, that ever
since that evening, when they sate together eating grapes and reading a
novel, the seed of friendship which had long been sprouting in their
hearts, shot forth thence its young leaves. Their castles in the air
were no common castles of romance; they had for their foundation the
prosaic but beautiful thought of gaining for themselves an independent
livelihood in the future--for the parents had early taught their
daughters to direct their minds to this object--and hence beautiful
establishments were founded, partly for friendship and partly for
humanity: for young girls are always great philanthropists.

Jacobi also had many schemes for the future of himself and his wife, and
Louise many schemes how to realise them. In the mean time there were
many processes about kisses. Louise wished to establish a law that not
more than three a day should be allowed, against which Jacobi protested
both by word and deed, on which occasions Gabriele always ran away
hastily and indignantly.

Petrea read English with Louise, arranged little festivities for her and
the family; wept every evening over Sara, and beat her brains every
morning over "the Creation of the World," whilst the good parents
watched ever observantly over them all.

No one, however, enjoyed the present circumstances of the family so much
as Henrik. After he had succeeded in inducing his sisters to use more
lively exercise and exhilaration, he devoted himself more exclusively to
his favourite studies, history and philosophy. Often he took his book
and wandered with it whole days in the country, but every evening at
seven he punctually joined the family circle, and was there the merriest
of the merry.

"We live now right happily," said he one evening in confidential
discourse with his mother; "and I, for my part, never enjoyed life so
much. I feel now that my studies will really mend, and that something
can be made of me. And when I have studied for a whole day, and that not
fruitlessly either, and then come of an evening to you and my sisters,
and see all here so friendly, so bright and cheerful, life seems so
agreeable! I feel myself so happy, and almost wish it might always
remain as it is now."

"Ah, yes!" answered the mother, "if we could always keep you with us, my
Henrik! But I know that won't do; you must soon leave us again; and
then, when you have finished your studies, you must have your own
house."

"And then, mother, you shall come to me!" This had been years before,
and still was Henrik's favourite theme, and the mother listened
willingly to it.

Several poems which Henrik wrote about this time seemed to indicate the
most decided poetical talent, and gave his mother and sisters the
greatest delight, whilst they excited, at the same time, great attention
among the friends of the family. The Judge alone looked on gloomily.

"You will spoil him," exclaimed he one evening to his wife and
daughters, "if you make him fancy that he is something extraordinary,
before he is in anything out of the common way. I confess that his
poetising is very much against my wish. When one is a man, one should
have something much more important to do than to sigh, and sing about
this and that future life. If he were likely to be a Thorild,[15] or any
other of our greatest poets----but I see no signs of that! and this
poetasterism, this literary idleness, which perpetually either lifts
young people above the clouds, or places them under the earth, so that
for pure cloud and dust they are unable to see the good noble gifts of
actual life--I would the devil had it! The direction which Henrik is now
taking grieves me seriously. I had rejoiced myself so in the thought of
his being a first-rate miner; in his being instrumental in turning to
good account our mines, our woods and streams, those noblest foundations
of Sweden's wealth, and to which it was worth while devoting a good
head; and now, instead of that, he hangs his on one side; sits with a
pen in his hand, and rhymes 'face' and 'grace,' 'heart' and 'smart!' It
is quite contrary to my feelings! I wish Stjernhoek would come here soon.
Now there's a fellow! he will turn out something first-rate! I wish he
were coming soon; perhaps he might influence Henrik, and induce him to
give up this verse-making, which, perhaps, at bottom, is only vanity."

Elise and the daughters were silent. For a considerable time now, Elise
had accustomed herself to silence when her husband grumbled. But
often--whenever it was necessary--she would return to the subject of his
discontent at a time when he was calm, and then, talk it over with him;
and this line of tactics succeeded admirably. She made use of them on
the present occasion.

"Ernst," said she to him in the evening, "it grieves me that you are so
displeased with Henrik's poetical bent. Ah! it has delighted me so much,
precisely because I fancied that it is real, and that in this case it
may be as useful as any other can be. Still I never will encourage
anything in him which is opposed to your wishes."

"My dear Elise," returned he mildly, "manage this affair according to
your own convictions and conscience. It is very probable that you are
right, and that I am wrong. All that I beseech of you is, that you watch
over yourself, in order that affection to your first-born may not
mislead you to mistake for excellence that which is only mediocre, and
his little attempts for masterpieces. Henrik may be, if he can, a
distinguished poet and literary man; but he must not as yet imagine
himself anything; above all things, he must not suppose it possible to
be a distinguished man in any profession without preparing himself by
serious labour, and without first of all becoming a thinking being. If
he were this, I promise you that I should rejoice over my son, let him
be what profession he would--a worker in thought or a worker in
mountains. And for this very reason one must be careful not to value too
highly these poetical blossoms. If vanity remains in him he never will
covet serious renown in anything."

"You are right, Ernst," said his wife, with all the cordiality of inward
conviction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henrik also longed earnestly for Stjernhoek's arrival. He wished to show
him his work; he longed to measure his new historical and philosophical
knowledge against that of his friend; he longed, in one word, to be
esteemed by him; for Henrik's gentle and affectionate nature had always
felt itself powerfully attracted by the energetic and, as one may say,
metallic nature of the other, and ever since the years of their boyhood
had the esteem and friendship of Stjernhoek been the goal of Henrik's
endeavours, and of his warm, although till now unattainable, wishes.
Stjernhoek had hitherto always behaved towards Henrik with a certain
friendly indifference, never as a companion and friend.

Stjernhoek came. He was received by the whole family with the greatest
cordiality, but by no one with a warmer heart than Henrik.

There was even externally the greatest dissimilarity between these two
young men. Henrik was remarkable for extraordinary, almost feminine
beauty; his figure was noble but slender, and his glance glowing though
somewhat dreamy. Stjernhoek, some years Henrik's senior, had become early
a man. All with him was muscular, firm, and powerful; his countenance
was intelligent without being handsome, and a star as it were gleamed in
his clear, decided eye; such a star as is often prophetic of fate, and
over whose path fortunate stars keep watch.

Some days after Stjernhoek's arrival Henrik became greatly changed. He
had become quiet, and there was an air of depression on his countenance.
Stjernhoek now, as he had always done, did not appear unfriendly to
Henrik, but still paid but little attention to him. He occupied himself
very busily, partly with trying chemical experiments with Jacobi and the
ladies, and partly in the evening, and even into the night, in making
astronomical observations with his excellent telescope. One of the
beaming stars to which the observations of the young astronomer were
industriously directed was called afterwards in the family Stjernhoek's
star. All gathered themselves around the interesting and well-informed
young man. The Judge took the greatest delight in his conversation, and
asserted before his family more than once his pleasure in him, and the
hopes which the nation itself might have of him. The young student of
Mining was a favourite with the Judge also because, besides his
extraordinary knowledge, he behaved always with the greatest respect
towards older and more experienced persons.

"See, Henrik," said his father to him one day, after a conversation with
Stjernhoek, "what _I_ call poetry, real poetry; it is this--to tame the
rivers, and to compel their wild falls to produce wealth and comfort,
whilst woods are felled on their banks and corn-fields cultivated; human
dwellings spring up, and cheerful activity and joyful voices enliven the
country. Look! that may be called a beautiful creation!"

Henrik was silent.

"But," said Gabriele, with all her natural refinement, "to be happy in
these homes, they must be able to read a pleasant book or to sing a
beautiful song, else their lives, spite of all their waterfalls, would
be very dry!"

The Judge smiled, kissed his little daughter, and tears of delight
filled his eyes.

Henrik, in the mean time, had gone into another room and seated himself
at a window. His mother followed him.

"How do you feel, my Henrik?" said she affectionately, gently taking
away the hand which shaded his eyes. His hand was concealing his tears.
"My good, good youth!" exclaimed she, her eyes also overflowing with
tears, and throwing her arms around him. "Now see!" began she
consolingly, "you should not distress yourself when your father speaks
in a somewhat one-sided manner. You know perfectly well how infinitely
good and just he is, and that if he be only once convinced of the
genuineness of your poetic talent, he will be quite contented. He is
only now afraid of your stopping short in mediocrity. He would be
pleased and delighted if you obtained honour in your own peculiar way."

"Ah!" said Henrik, "if I only knew whether or not I had a peculiar
way--a peculiar vocation. But since Stjernhoek has been here, and I have
talked with him, everything, both externally and internally, seems
altered. I don't any longer understand myself. Stjernhoek has shown me
how very little I know of that which I supposed myself to know a great
deal, and what bungling my work is! I see it now perfectly, and it
distresses me. How strong-minded and powerful Stjernhoek is! I wish I
were able to resemble him! But it is impossible, I feel myself such a
mere nothing beside him! And yet, when I am alone, either with my books,
or out in the free air with the trees, the rocks, the waters, the winds
around me, and with heaven above, thoughts arise in me, feelings take
possession of me, nameless sweet feelings, and then expressions and
words speak in me which affect me deeply, and give me inexpressible
delight; then all that is great and good in humanity is so present with
me; then I have a foretaste of harmony in everything, of God in
everything; and it seems to me as if words thronged themselves to my
lips to sing forth the gloriousness of that which I perceive. In such
moments I feel something great within me, and I fancy that my songs
would find an echo in every heart. Yes, it is thus that I feel
sometimes; but when I see Stjernhoek all is vanished, and I feel so
little, so poor, I am compelled to believe that I am a dreamer and a
fool!"

"My good youth," said the mother, "you mistake yourself. Your gifts and
Stjernhoek's are so dissimilar: but if you employ your talents with
sincerity and earnestness, they will in their turn bring forth fruit. I
confess to you, Henrik, that it was, and still is, one of my most lively
wishes that one of my children might become distinguished in the fields
of literature. Literature has furnished to me my most beautiful
enjoyments; and in my younger years I myself was not without my ambition
in this way. I see in you my own powers more richly blossoming. I myself
bloom forth in them, my Henrik, and in my hopes of you. Ah! might I live
to the day in which I saw you honoured by your native land; in which I
saw your father proud of his son, and I myself able to gladden my heart
with the fruit of your genius, your work--oh, then I would gladly die!"

Enthusiastic fire flamed in Henrik's looks and on his cheeks, as whilst,
embracing his mother, he said, "No, you shall live, mother, to be
honoured on account of your son. He promises that you shall have joy in
him!"

The sunbeam which just then streamed into the room fell upon Henrik's
beautiful hair, which shone like gold. The mother saw it--saw silently a
prophesying in it, and a sun-bright smile diffused itself over her
countenance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Petrea read the "Magic King." She ought properly to have read it aloud
to the family circle in an evening, and then its dangerous magic would
have been decreased; but she read it beforehand, privately to herself
during the night, and it drew her into the bewildering magic circle. She
thought of nothing, dreamed of nothing, but wonderful adventure;
wonderfully beautiful ladies, and wonderfully brave heroes! She was
herself always one of them, worshipped or worshipping; now combating,
cross in hand, against witches and dragons; now wandering in dreamy
moonlight among lilies in the Lady Minnetrost's Castle. It seemed as if
the chaotic confusion of Petrea's brain had here taken shape and
stature, and she now took possession with redoubled force of the
phantasy world, which once before, under the guise of the Wood-god, had
carried away her childish mind and conducted her into false tracks; and
it was so even now; for while she moved night and day in a dream-world
in which she luxuriated to exultation, in magnificent and wonderful
scenes, in which she herself always played a part, she got on but
lamentably in real and every-day life. The head in which so many
splendid pictures and grand schemes were agitating, looked generally
something like a bundle of flax; she never noticed the holes and specks
in her dress, nor her ragged stockings and trodden-down shoes; she
forgot all her little, every-day business, and whatever she had in her
hand she either lost or dropped.

She had, besides, a passion for cracking almonds. "A passion," Louise
said, "as expensive as it was noisy, and which never was stronger than
when she went about under the influence of the magic ring; and that
perpetual crack! crack! which was heard wherever she went, and the
almond shells on which people trod, or which hung to the sleeve of
whoever came to the window, were anything but agreeable."

Whenever Petrea was deservedly reproved or admonished for these things,
she fell out of the clouds, or rather out of her heaven, down to the
earth, which seemed to her scarcely anything else than a heap of nettles
and brambles, and very gladly indeed would she have bought with ten
years of her life one year of the magic power of the "Magic Ring,"
together with beauty, magic charms, power, and such-like things, which
she did not possess, except in her dreams.

Petrea's life was a cleft between an ideal and a real world, of both of
which she knew nothing truly, and which, therefore, could not become
amalgamated in her soul. Rivers of tears flowed into the separating
gulf, without being able to fill it or to clear her vision, while she
now complained of circumstances, and now of her own self, as being the
cause of what she endured.

It was at this time that, partly at the wish of the parents, and partly
also out of his own kind-heartedness, Jacobi began seriously to occupy
himself with Petrea; and he occupied her mind in such a manner as
strengthened and practised her thinking powers, whereby the fermentation
in her feelings and imagination was in some measure abated. All this was
indescribably beneficial to her, and it would have been still more so
had not the teacher been too----but we will leave the secret to future
years.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Judge received one day a large letter from Stockholm, which, after
he had read, he silently laid before his wife. It came from the highest
quarter, contained most honourable and flattering praise of the services
of Judge Frank, of which the government had long been observant, and now
offered him elevation to the highest regal court of justice.

When Elise had finished the letter she looked up inquiringly to her
husband, who stood beside her. "What think you of it, Ernst?" asked she,
with a constrained and uneasy glance.

The Judge walked more quickly up and down the room, as was his custom
when anything excited him. "I cannot feel indifferent," said he; "I am
affected by this mark of confidence in my sovereign. I have long
expected this occurrence; but I feel, I see that I cannot leave my
present sphere of operation. My activity is suited to it; I know that I
am of service here, and the confidence of the Governor gives me
unrestrained power to work according to my ability and views. It is
possible that he, instead of me, may get the credit of the good which is
done in the province; but, in God's name, let it be so! I know that what
is good and beneficial is actually done, and that is enough; but there
is a great deal which is only begun which must be completed, and a great
deal, an infinite great deal, remains yet to be done. I cannot leave a
half-finished work--I cannot and I will not! One must complete one's
work, else it is good for nothing! And I know that here I am--but I am
talking only of myself. Tell me, Elise, what you wish--what you would
like."

"Let us remain here!" said Elise, giving her hand to her husband, and
seating herself beside him. "I know that you would have no pleasure in a
higher rank, in a larger income, if you on that account must leave a
sphere where you feel yourself in your place, and where you can work
according to the desire of your own heart, and where you are surrounded
by persons who esteem and love you! No; let us remain here!"

"But you, you Elise," said he; "speak of yourself, not of me."

"Yes, you!" answered she, with the smile of a happy heart, "that is not
so easy to do--for you see all that belongs to the one is so interwoven
with what belongs to the other. But I will tell you something about
myself. I looked at myself this morning in the glass--no satirical
looks, my love!--and it seemed to me as if I appeared strong and
healthy. I thought of you, thought how good and kind you were, and how,
whilst I had walked by your side, I had been strengthened both in body
and mind; how I must still love you more and more, and how we had become
happier and happier together. I thought of your activity, so rich in
blessing both for home and for the general good; thought on the
children, how healthy and good they are, and how their characters have
unfolded so happily under our hands. I thought of our new house which
you have built so comfortable and convenient for us all, and just then
the sun shone cheerfully into my little, beloved boudoir, and I felt
myself so fortunate in my lot! I thanked God both for it and for you! I
would willingly live and die in this sphere--in this house. Let us then
remain here."

"God bless you for these words, Elise!" said he. "But the children--the
children! Our decision will influence their future; we must also hear
what they have to say; we must lay the matter before them: not that I
fear their having, if they were aware of our mode of reasoning, any wish
different to ours, but at all events they must have a voice in the
business. Come, Elise! I shall have no rest till it is all talked over
and decided."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the Judge laid the affair before the family council, it occasioned
a great surprise; on which a general silence ensued, and attractive
visions began to swarm before the eyes of the young people, not exactly
of the highest Court of Judicature, but of the seat of the same--of the
Capital. Louise looked almost like a Counsellor of Justice herself. But
when her father had made known his and his wife's feelings on the
subject, he read in their tearful eyes gratitude for the confidence he
had placed in them, and the most entire acquiescence with his will.

No one spoke, however, till "the little one"--the father had not said to
her, "Go out for awhile, Gabriele dear;" "Let her stop with us," he
said, on the contrary, "she is a prudent little girl!"--no, none spoke
till Gabriele threw her arms about her mother's neck, and exclaimed,
"Ah, don't let us go away from here--here we are so happy!"

This exclamation was echoed by all.

"Well, then, here we remain, in God's name!" said the Judge, rising up
and extending his arms, with tears in his eyes, towards the beloved
circle. "Here we remain, children! But this shall not prevent your
seeing Stockholm, and enjoying its pleasures and beauties! I thank God,
my children, that you are happy here; it makes me so, too. Do you
understand that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

On this day, for the first time after a long interval, Leonore dined
with the family. Everybody rejoiced on that account; and as her
countenance had a brighter and more kindly expression than common,
everybody thought her pretty. Eva, who had directed and assisted her
toilet, rejoiced over her from the bottom of her heart.

"Don't you see, Leonore," said she, pointing up to heaven, where light
blue openings were visible between clouds, which for the greater part of
the day had poured down rain--"don't you see it is clearing up, Leonore?
and then we will go out together, and gather flowers and fruit." And as
she said this her blue eyes beamed with kindness and the enjoyment of
life.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What, in all the world, are these doing here?" asked Henrik, as he saw
his mother's shoes standing in the window in the pale sunshine; "they
ought to be warmed, I fancy, and the sun has no desire to come out and
do his duty. No, in this case, I shall undertake to be sun!"

"That you are to me, my summer-child!" said the mother, smiling
affectionately as she saw Henrik had placed her shoes under his
waistcoat, to warm them on his breast.

       *       *       *       *       *

"My sweet Louise!" exclaimed Jacobi, "you can't think what lovely
weather it is! Should we not take a little walk? You come with us? You
look most charming--but, in heaven's name, not in the Court-preacher!"

FOOTNOTES:

[15] Thomas Thorild, born 1759, died 1808, an eminent Swedish poet.




PART III.

CHAPTER I.

LEONORE TO EVA.


"And so you are coming home? Coming really home soon, sweet Eva? Ah! I
am so happy, so joyful on that account, and yet a little anxious: but
don't mind that; come, only come, and all will be right! When I can only
look into your eyes, I feel that all will be clear. Your good
eyes!--Gabriele and I call them 'our blue ones'--how long it is that I
have not seen you--two long years! I cannot conceive, dear Eva, how I
have lived so long without you; but then it is true that we have not
been in reality separated. I have accompanied you into the great world;
I have been with you to balls and concerts; I have enjoyed with you your
pleasures and the homage which has been paid to you. Ah! what joy for me
that I have learned to love you! Since then I have lived twofold, and
felt myself so rich in you! And now you are coming back; and then, shall
we be as happy as before?

"Forgive, forgive this note of interrogation! But sometimes a disquiet
comes over me. You speak so much of the great world, of joys and
enjoyments, which--it is not in home to afford you. And your grand new
acquaintance--ah, Eva! let them be ever so agreeable and interesting,
they would not love you as we do, as I do! And then this Major R----! I
am afraid of him, Eva. It appears to me the most natural thing in the
world that he should love you, but--ah, Eva! it grieves me that you
should feel such affection for him. My dear, good Eva, attach yourself
not too closely to him before--but I distress you, and that I will not.
Come, only come to us; we have so much to talk to you about, so much to
hear from you, so much to say to you!

"I fancy you will find the house yet more agreeable than formerly; we
have added many little decorations to it. You will again take breakfast
with us--that comfortable meal, and my best-beloved time; and tea with
us--your favourite hour, in which we were assembled for a merry evening,
and were often quite wild. This morning I took out your breakfast-cup,
and kissed that part of the edge on which the gold was worn off.

"We will again read books together, and think about and talk about them
together. We will again go out together and enjoy all the freshness and
quiet of the woods. And would it not be a blessed thing to wander thus
calmly through life, endeavouring to improve ourselves, and to make all
those around us happier; to admire the works of God, and humbly to thank
Him for all that he has given to us and others? Should we not then have
lived and flourished enough on earth? Truly I know that a life quiet as
this might not satisfy every one; neither can it accord with all seasons
of life. Storms will come;--even I have had my time of unrest, of
suffering, and of combat. But, thank God! that is now past, and the
sensibility which destroyed my peace is now become as a light to my
path; it has extended my world; it has made me better: and now that I no
longer covet to enjoy the greater and stronger pleasures of life, I
learn now, each passing day, to prize yet higher the treasures which
surround me in this quiet every-day life. Oh, no one can be happy on
earth till he has learned the worth of little things, and to attend to
them! When once he has learned this, he may make each day not only
happy, but find in it cause of thankfulness. But he must have
peace--peace both within himself and without himself; for peace is the
sun in which every dewdrop of life glitters!

"Would that I could but call back peace into a heart which--but I must
prepare you for a change, for a great void in the house. You will not
find Petrea here. You know the state of things which so much distressed
me for some time. It would not do to let it go on any longer either for
Louise or Jacobi's sake, or yet for her own, and therefore Petrea must
go, otherwise they all would have become unhappy. She herself saw it;
and as we had tidings of Jacobi's speedy arrival here, she opened her
heart to her parents. It was noble and right of her, and they were as
good and prudent as ever; and now our father has gone with her to his
friend Bishop B. May God preserve her, and give her peace! I shed many
tears over her; but I hope all may turn out well. Her lively heart has a
fresh-flowing fountain of health in it; and certainly her residence in
the country, which she likes so much, new circumstances, new
interests----

"I was interrupted: Jacobi is come! It is a good thing that Petrea is
now whiling away her time in the shades of Furudal; good for her poor
heart, and good too for the betrothed pair, who otherwise could not have
ventured to have been happy in her presence. But now they are entirely
so.

"Now, after six years' long waiting, sighing, and hoping, Jacobi sees
himself approaching the goal of his wishes--marriage and a parsonage!
And the person who helps him to all this, to say nothing of his own
individual deserts, is his beloved patron the excellent Excellency
O----. Through his influence two important landed-proprietors in the
parish of Great T. have been induced to give their votes to Jacobi, who,
though yet young, has been proposed; and thus he will receive one of the
largest and most beautiful livings in the bishopric, and Louise will
become a greatly honoured pastor's wife--'provost's wife' she herself
says prophetically.

"The only _but_ in this happiness is, that it will remove Jacobi and
Louise so far from us. Their highest wish had been to obtain the rural
appointment near this city; and thus we might in that case have
maintained our family unbroken, even though Louise had left her home;
but--'but,' says our good, sensible 'eldest,' with a sigh, 'all things
cannot be perfect here on earth.'

"The day of nomination falls early in the spring; and Jacobi, who must
enter upon his office immediately after his appointment, wishes to
celebrate his marriage at Whitsuntide, in order that he may conduct his
young wife into his shepherd's hut along flower-bestrewn paths, and by
the song of the lark. Mrs. Gunilla jestingly beseeches of him not to
become too nomadic: however, this is certain, that no living being has
more interest about cows and calves, sheep and poultry, than Louise.

"The future married couple are getting their whole household in order
beforehand; and Gabriele heartily amuses herself with such fragments of
their entertaining conversation as reach her ear, while they sit on the
sofa in the library talking of love and economy. But it is not talking
_alone_ that they do, for Jacobi's heart is full of warm human love; and
our father has not the less imparted to all his children somewhat of his
love for the general good, although Gabriele maintains that her portion
thereof is as yet very small.

"It gives one great pleasure to see the betrothed go out to make
purchases, and then to see them return so cordially well pleased with
all they have bought. Louise discovers something so unsurpassably
excellent in everything with which she furnishes herself, whether it be
an earthen or a silver vessel. When I look at these two, like a pair of
birds carrying together straws to their nest, and twittering over them,
I cannot help thinking that it must be a greater piece of good fortune
to come to the possession of a humbly supplied habitation which one has
furnished oneself, than to that of a great and rich one for which other
people have cared. One is, in the first place, so well acquainted with,
so on thee-and-thou terms with one's things; and certainly nobody in
this world can be more so than Louise with hers.

"We are all of us now working most actively for the wedding, but still
our father does not look with altogether friendly eyes on an occasion
which will withdraw a daughter from his beloved circle. He would so
gladly keep us all with him, for which I rejoice and am grateful.
Apropos! we have a scheme for him which will make him happy in his old
age, and our mother also. You remember the great piece of building-land
overgrown with bushes, which the people had not understanding enough
either to build upon or to give up to us, this we intend--but we will
talk about it mouth to mouth. Petrea has infected us all, even 'our
eldest,' with her desire for great undertakings; and then--truly it is a
joy to be able to labour for the happiness of those who have laboured
for us so affectionately and unweariedly.

"Now something about friends and acquaintance.

"All friends and acquaintance ask much after you. Uncle Jeremias
wrangles because you do not come, all the time he breakfasts with us
(generally on Wednesday and Saturday mornings), and while he abuses our
rusks, but notwithstanding devours a great quantity of them. For some
time he has appeared to me to have become more amiable than formerly;
his temper is milder, his heart always was mild. He is the friend and
physician of all the poor. A short time ago he bought a little villa, a
mile distant from the city; it is to be the comfort of his age, and is
to be called 'The Old Man's Rose,'--does not that sound comfortable?

"Annette P. is very unhappy with her coarse sister-in-law. She does not
complain; but look, complexion, nay, even her whole being, indicate the
deepest discontent with life; we must attract her to us, and endeavour
to make her happier.

"Here comes Gabriele, and insists upon it that I should leave some room
for her scrawl. A bold request! But then who says no to her? Not I, and
therefore I must make a short ending.

"If a certain Baron Rutger L. be introduced to you when you return, do
not imagine that he is deranged, although he sometimes seems as if he
were so. He is the son of one of my father's friends; and as he is to be
educated by my father for a civil post, he is boarded in our family. He
is a kind of '_diamant brute_,' and requires polishing in more senses
than one; in the mean time I fancy his wild temper is in a fair way of
being tamed. One word from our mother makes impression upon him; and he
is actually more regardful of the ungracious demeanour of our little
lady, than of the moral preaching of our eldest. He is just nineteen.
Old Brigitta is quite afraid of him, and will hardly trust herself to
pass him lest he should leap over her. Oh, how happy she, like everybody
else, will be to see you back again! She fears lest you should get
married, and stop in 'the hole,' as she calls Stockholm.

"Henrik will remain with us over Christmas, but you must come and help
to enliven him; he is not so joyous as formerly. I fancy that the
misunderstanding between him and Stjernhoek distresses him. Ah! why would
not these two understand one another! For the rest, many things are now
at stake for Henrik; God grant that all may go well, both on his account
and mamma's!

"We shall not see Petrea again till after Louise's marriage. When shall
we all be again all together at home? Sara! ah? it is now above four
years since we heard anything of her, and all inquiry and search after
her has been in vain. Perhaps she lives no longer! I have wept many
tears over her; oh! if she should return! I feel that we should be
happier together than formerly; there was much that was good and noble
in her, but she was misled--I hear my mother's light steps, and that
predicts that she has something good for me----

"Ah, yes! she has! she has a letter from you, my Eva! You cannot fix the
day of your return, and that is very sad--but you come soon! You love
Stockholm; so do I also; I could embrace Stockholm for that reason.

"I am now at the very edge of my paper. Gabriele has bespoken the other
side. I leave you now, in order to write to _her_ who left us with
tears, but who, as I cordially hope, will return to us with smiles."

      FROM GABRIELE.

                                                     In the Morning.

      "I could not write last evening, and am now up before the sun in
      order to tell you that nothing can console me for Petrea's
      absence, excepting your return. We are all of us terribly longing
      after 'our Rose.' I know very well who beside your own family
      longs for this same thing.

      "I must tell you that a little friendship has been got up between
      Uncle Jeremias and me. All this came about in the fields, for he
      is never particularly polite within doors; whilst in a walk, the
      beautiful side of his character always comes out. Petrea and I
      have taken such long excursions with him, and then he was mild and
      lively; then he botanised with us, told us of the natural families
      in the vegetable kingdom, and related the particular life and
      history of many plants. Do you know it is the most agreeable
      thing in the world to know something of all this; one feels
      oneself on such familiar terms with these vegetable families. Ah!
      how often when I feel thus am I made aware how indescribably rich
      and glorious life is, and I fancy that every one must live happily
      on earth who has only eyes and sense awakened to all that is
      glorious therein, and then I can sing like a bird for pure
      life-enjoyment. In the mean time, Uncle Jeremias and I cultivate
      flowers in the house quite enthusiastically, and intend at
      Christmas to make presents of both red and white lilacs; but,
      indeed, I have almost a mind to cry that the nose of my Petrea
      cannot smell them.

      "But I must come to an end, for you must know that occasionally I
      have undertaken to have a watchful eye over the breakfast-table,
      and therefore I go now to look after it. Bergstroem has fortunately
      done all this, so that I have nothing now to do; next I must go
      and look after my moss-rose, and see whether a new bud has yet
      made its appearance; then I shall go and see after mamma; one
      glance must I give through the window to the leaves in the garden,
      which nod a farewell to me before they fall from the twigs; and to
      the sun also, which now rises bright and beaming, must I send a
      glance--a beam from the sun of my eyes and out of the depth of my
      thankful heart; and therefore that I may be able, for the best
      well-being of the community, to attend to all these important
      matters, I must say to you, farewell! to you who are so dear to
      me."




CHAPTER II.

PETREA TO LEONORE.


                                              From the Inn at D----.

      "It is evening, and my father is gone out in order to make
      arrangements for our to-morrow's voyage. I am alone: the mist
      rises thick without, before the dirty inn-windows; my eyes also
      are misty; my heart is heavy and full, I must converse with you.

      "Oh, Leonore! the bitter step has thus been taken--I am separated
      from my own family, from my own home; and not soon shall I see
      again their mild glances, or hear your consoling voice! and all
      this--because I have not deserved--because I have destroyed the
      peace of my home! Yes, Leonore! in vain will you endeavour to
      excuse me, and reconcile me with myself! I know that I am
      criminal--that I have desired, that I have wished, at least, for a
      moment--oh, I would now press the hem of Louise's garment to my
      lips and exclaim 'Forgive, forgive! I have passed judgment on
      myself--I have banished myself; I fly--fly in order no more to
      disturb your happiness or his!'

      "I was a cloud in their heaven; what should the cloud do there?
      May the wind disperse it! Oh, Leonore, it is an indescribably
      bitter feeling for a heart which burns with gratitude to be able
      to do nothing more for the object of its love than to keep itself
      at a distance, to make itself into nothing! But rather
      that--rather a million-times hide myself in the bosom of the
      earth, than give sorrow either to him or to her! Truly, if thereby
      I could win anything for them; if I could moulder to dust like a
      grain of corn, and then shoot forth for them into plentiful
      blessing--that would be sweet and precious, Leonore! People extol
      all those who are able to die for love, for honour, for religion,
      for high and noble ends, and wherefore? Because it is, indeed, a
      mercy from God to be able so to die--it is life in death!

      "I know a life which is death--which, endured through long
      clinging years, would be a burden to itself, and a joy to no one.
      Oh, how bitter! Wherefore must the craving after happiness, after
      enjoyment, burn like an eternal thirst in the human soul, if the
      assuaging fountain, Tantalus like----?

      "Leonore, my eyes burn, my head aches, and my heart is wildly
      tempested! I am not good--I am not submissive--my soul is a
      chaos--a little earth on forehead and breast, that might be good
      for me.


                                            On board the Steam-boat.

      "Thanks, Leonore, thanks for your pillow; it has really been an
      ear-comfort for me.[16] Yesterday I thought that I was in the
      direct way to become ill. I shivered; I burned; my head ached
      fearfully: I felt as if torn to pieces. But when I laid my head
      upon your little pillow, when my ear rested upon the delicate
      cover which you had ornamented with such exquisite needlework,
      then it seemed to me as if your spirit whispered to me out of it;
      a repose came over me; all that was bad vanished so quickly, so
      wonderfully; I slept calmly; I was quite astonished when they woke
      me in the morning to feel that, bodily, I was quite well, and
      mentally like one cured. This has been done by your pillow,
      Leonore. I kissed it and thanked you.

      "It is related in the Acts of the Apostles that they brought the
      sick and laid them in the way on which the holy men went, that at
      least their shadows might fall upon them, and make them sound. I
      have faith in the power of such a remedy; yes, the good, the holy,
      impart somewhat of their life, of their strength, to all that
      belong to them: I have found that to-night.

      "We went on board. The 'Sea-Witch' thundered and flew over the
      sea. I know that she conveyed me away from you all, and leaning
      over the bulwarks I wept. I felt then a pair of arms tenderly and
      gently surrounding me; they were my father's! He wrapped a warm
      cloak around me, and leaning on his breast, I raised my head. The
      morning was clear; white flame-like clouds chased by the morning
      wind flew across the deep blue; the waves beat foaming against the
      vessel; green meadows, autumnally beautiful parks, extended
      themselves on either side of us; space opened itself. I stood with
      my face turned towards the wind and space, let the sea-spray wet
      my lips and my eyelids, a soft shudder passed through me, and I
      felt that life was beautiful. Yes, in the morning hour, filled
      with its beaming-light, in this pure fresh wind, I felt the evil
      demons of my soul retreat, and disperse themselves like mist and
      vapour. I drank in the morning winds; I opened my heart to life; I
      might also have opened my arms to them, and at the same time to
      all my beloved ones, that thus I might have expressed to them the
      quiet prediction of my heart, that love to them will heal me, will
      afford me strength some time or other to give them joy.


                                            The second day on board.

      "I should like to know whether a deep heart-grief would resist the
      influence of a long voyage. There is something wonderfully
      strengthening, something renovating in this life, this voyaging,
      this fresh wind. It chases the dust from the eyes of the soul;
      one sees oneself and others more accurately, and gets removed from
      one's old self. One journeys in order to stand upon a new shore,
      and amid new connexions. One begins, as it were, anew.

      "We had a storm yesterday, and with the exception of my father, I
      was the only passenger who remained well, and on this account I
      could help the sufferers. It is true it was not without its
      discomforts; it is true that I reeled about sometimes with a glass
      of water, and sometimes with a glass of drops in the hand; but I
      saw many a laughable scene; many an odd trait of human nature. I
      laughed, made my own remarks, forgot myself, and became friendly
      with all mankind. Certainly it would be a very good thing for me
      to be maid-servant on board a steam-boat.

      "Towards evening, the storm, as well within as without the vessel,
      abated itself. I sate solitary on dock till midnight. The waves
      still foamed around the agreeably rocking vessel; the wind
      whistled in the rigging; and the full moon, heralded by one bright
      little star, rose from the sea, and diffused her mild wondrous
      light over its dark expanse. It was infinitely glorious! Nameless
      thoughts and feelings arose in me, full of love and melancholy,
      and yet at the same time elevating and strengthening; a certain
      longing after that for which I knew no name. I desired I knew not
      what.

      "But I fear and know that which I do not desire. I fear the quiet
      measured life into which I am about again to
      enter--conventionalities, forms, social life, all this cramps my
      soul together, and makes it inclined to excesses. Instead of
      sitting in select society, and drinking tea in 'high life,' would
      I rather roam about the world in Viking expeditions--rather eat
      locusts with John the Baptist in the wilderness, and go hither and
      thither in a garment of camel's hair; and after all, such apparel
      as this must be very convenient in comparison with our patchwork
      toilet. Manifold are the changing scenes of life, and how shall I
      find my way, and where shall I find my place in the magic circle
      of the world. Forgive me, Leonore, that I talk so much about
      myself. Thou good one, thou hast spoiled me in this respect.

      "We reached Furudal to-day in the afternoon.


                                                            Furudal.

      "Here are we on land; I would that I were at sea! I come even now
      from the sitting-room, and in the sitting-room I always suffer
      shipwreck. An evil genius always makes me say or do something
      there unbecoming. This evening I entangled the reel of the
      Bishop's lady, and told a stupid anecdote about a relation of
      hers. I wished to be witty, and I succeeded badly, as I always do.

      "They are very neat people here. The Bishop is a small pale man,
      with something angelic in voice and expression, but--he will not
      have much time to bestow on me; he lives in his books and his
      official duties, and moreover he is almost always in the city; and
      his lady, who remains here perpetually, has very delicate health;
      but I will wait upon her, and read aloud to her, and that will
      give me pleasure. I only hope she may endure me.

      "Both husband and wife were amiable towards my father's daughter,
      but I very well believe that they did not find me very loveable.
      Intolerably hot, too, was their blessed drawing-room, and I was
      tanned with the wind, and as red as a peony. Such things as these
      are enough to make one a little desperate; all these things are
      trifles, yet they are nevertheless annoying; and then it is
      depressing, everlastingly to displease exactly where one wishes
      most to please!

             *       *       *       *       *

      "I have unpacked the trunk which you all so carefully packed for
      me; and now new and newly-repaired articles of clothing flew into
      my arms one after another. Oh, sisters! it was you who have thus
      brought my toilet in order for the whole winter! How good you are!
      I recognised Louise's hand again. Oh, I must weep, my beloved
      ones!--my home!


                                                    Some days later.

      "The pine-trees rustle fresh and still. I have been
      out;--mountains, woods, solitude with nature--glorious!

      "Oh, Leonore, I will begin a new life; I will die to my ancient
      self, to vanity, to error, to self-love. Every flattering token of
      remembrance--notes, keepsakes--be they from man or woman, I have
      destroyed. I send you herewith a little sum of money, which I
      received for ornaments and for some of my own manufactures, which
      I sold. Buy something with it which will give pleasure to Louise
      and Jacobi; but do not let them surmise, I earnestly beseech you,
      that it comes from Petrea. If I could only sell myself for a
      respectable price, and make them rich, then----

      "I shall have a deal of time for myself here, and I know how I
      shall employ it. I will go out a great deal. I will wander through
      wood and field, in storm, snow, and every kind of weather, till I
      am, at least, bodily weary. Perhaps then it may be calmer in the
      soul! I desire no longer to be happy. What does it matter if one
      is not happy, if one is only pure and good? Were the probation-day
      of life only not so long! Leonore, my good angel, pray for me!

      "May all be happy!

           "Greet all tenderly from your

                              "Petrea.

      "P. S.--My nose makes its compliments to Gabriele, and goes in the
      accompanying picture to pay her a visit. She must not imagine that
      I am cast down. I send also a little ballad or romance; the wood
      sung it to me last evening, and every harmonious sound, which life
      in my soul sings, must--go home! Oh, how I love you all!"

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, whilst our Petrea appears in rural solitude to prepare herself
for a new life, whilst the snow fell upon the earth in order to prepare
it for now springs, we turn back to our well-known home in the town, and
describe the occurrences there.

FOOTNOTES:

[16] Poor Petrea makes a little pun here. The Swedish word oerongodt
(pillow) meaning literally good for the ear.--M. H.




CHAPTER III.

A CONVERSATION.


Jacobi had left. October was come, with its storms and its long
twilight, which is so dark and heavy for all such as have it not cheered
by kindly glances and bright thoughts.

One evening, as Henrik came down to tea, he was observed to look
uncommonly pale, and in answer to the inquiry of his sisters as to the
cause, he replied that he had headache, and added, half in jest, half in
earnest, that it would be very beautiful to be only once freed from this
heavy body--it was so sadly in one's way!

"How you talk!" said Louise; "at all events, it is right to treat it
well and rationally; not to go sitting up all night and studying so that
one has headache all day!"

"Thank your majesty most submissively for the moral!" said Henrik; "but
if my body will not serve my soul, but will subject it, I have a very
great desire to contend with it, and to quarrel with it!"

"The butterfly becomes matured in the chrysalis," said Gabriele, smiling
sweetly, whilst she strewed rose-leaves upon some chrysalises which were
to sleep through the winter on her flower-stand.

"Ah, yes," replied Henrik; "but how heavily does not the shell press
down upon the wings of the butterfly! The earthly chrysalis weighs upon
me! What would not the soul accomplish? how could it not live and enjoy,
were it not for this? In certain bright moments, what do we not feel and
think? what brilliancy in conception! what godlike warmth of feeling in
the heart!--one could press the whole world to one's bosom at such a
time, seeing, with a glance, through all, and penetrating all as with
fire. Oh, there is then an abundance, a clearness! Yes, if our Lord
himself came to me at such a moment, I should reach forth my hand to him
and say, 'Good day, brother!'"

"Dear Henrik!" said Louise, somewhat startled, "now I think you do not
rightly know what you say."

"Yes," continued he, without regarding the interruption, "so can one
feel, but only for a moment; in the next, the chrysalis closes heavily
again its earthly dust-mantle around our being, and we are stupified and
sleep, and sink deep below that which we so lately were. Then one sees
in books nothing but printed words, and in one's soul one finds neither
feeling nor thought, and towards man, for whom so shortly before the
very heart seemed to burn, one feels oneself stiff and disinclined. Ah,
it were enough to make one fall into despair!"

"It would be far better," said Louise, "that such people went to sleep,
and then they would get rid of headache and heaviness."

"But," said Henrik, smiling, "that is a sorrowful remedy according to my
notions. It is horrible to require so much sleep! How can any one who is
a seven-sleeper become great? 'Les hommes puissans veillent et veulent,'
says Balzac with reason; and because my miserable heavy nature requires
so much sleep, so certainly shall I never turn out great in any way.
Besides, this entrancement, this glorification produces such wakeful
moments in the soul, that one feels poor and stripped when they are
extinguished. Ah! I can very well comprehend how so many make use of
external excitement to recal or to prolong them, and that they endeavour
through the fire of wine to wake again the fire of the soul."

"Then," said Louise, "you comprehend something which is very bad and
irrational. They are precisely such excitements as these that we have to
thank for there being so many miserable men, and so many drunkards in
Sweden, that one can scarcely venture to go out in the streets for
them!"

"I do not defend it, dear Louise," said Henrik, gently smiling at the
zeal of his sister, "but I can understand it, and in certain cases I can
excuse it. Life is often felt to be so heavy, and the moments of
inspiration give a fulness to existence; they are like lightning flashes
out of the eternal life!"

"And so they certainly are," said Leonore, who had listened attentively
to her brother, and whose mild eyes had become moist by his words; "and
life will certainly," continued she, "feel thus clear, thus full, when
we shall have become ever entirely freed from the chrysalis; not from
the bonds of the body only, but of the soul also. Perhaps these moments
are given to us here on earth to allure us up to the Father's house, and
to let us feel its air."

"A beautiful thought, Leonore," said her brother. "Thus these gleams of
light are truly revelations of our inward, actual, here-yet-enslaved
life. Good God! how glorious that--But ah! the long, long moments of
darkness, what are they?"

"Trials of patience, times of preparation," replied Leonore, tenderly
smiling. "Besides, the bright moments come again and gladden us with
their light, and that so much the more frequently the further one
advances in perfection. But one must, at the same time, learn to have
patience with oneself, Henrik, and here, in this life, to wait for
oneself."

"You have spoken a true word, sister. I must kiss your hand for it,"
said Henrik. "Ah, yes, if----"

"Be now a little less sensible and aesthetic," exclaimed "our eldest,"
"and come here and drink a cup of tea! See here, Henrik, a cup of strong
warm tea, which will do your head good. But this evening and to-morrow
morning you must take a table-spoonful of my elixir!"

"From that defend us all, ye good--_Vi ringrazia carissima sorella!_"
said Henrik. "But--but charming Gabriele! a drop of port wine in the tea
would make it more powerful, without turning me into one of those
miserable beings of whom Louise is so afraid! Thanks, sister dear!
_Fermez les yeux_, O Mahomet!" and with an obeisance before Louise,
Henrik conveyed the cup to his lips.

Later in the evening Henrik stood in one of the library windows looking
out into the moonlight. Leonore went up to him and looked into his face
with that mild, humbly questioning glance to which the heart so
willingly opened itself, and which was peculiar to her.

"You are so pale, Henrik," said she, disquieted.

"It is extraordinary," said he, half laughing at himself; "do you see,
Leonore, how the tops of the fir-trees there in the churchyard bow
themselves in the wind and beckon? I cannot conceive why, but this
nodding and beckoning distresses me wonderfully; I feel it in my very
heart."

"That comes naturally enough, Henrik," returned she, "because you are
not well. Shall we not go out a little? It is such lovely moonshine! The
fresh air will perhaps do you good."

"Will you go with me, Leonore?" said he. "Yes, that is a good idea!"

Gabriele found it, however, rather poor, and called her brother and
sister Samoyedes, Laplanders, Esquimaux, and such like, who would go
wandering about in the middle of a winter's night. Nevertheless these
two went forth jestingly and merrily arm in arm.

"Is it not too windy for you?" asked Henrik, whilst he endeavoured
carefully to shield his sister from the wind.

"The wind is not cold," replied Leonore, "and it is particularly
charming to me to walk by your side while it roars around us, and while
the snow-flakes dance about in the moonshine like little elves."

"Nay, you feel then like me!" said Henrik; "with you, sisters, I am
ever calm and happy; but I don't know how it is, but now for some time
other people often plague and irritate me----"

"Ah, Henrik," remarked Leonore, "is not that someway your own fault?"

"Are you thinking of Stjernhoek, Leonore?" asked he.

"Yes."

"So am I," continued he, "and perhaps you are right; yes, I will
willingly concede that I have often been unjust towards him, and
unreasonably violent, but he has excited me to it. Why has he made me so
often oppressively feel his superiority? so often taken away from me my
own joy in my own endeavours, and almost always treated me with coldness
and depreciation?"

Leonore made no answer, the moonlight lit a quiet tear in her eye, and
Henrik continued with increasing violence:

"I could have loved him so much! He had, through the originality of his
character, his strength, and his whole individuality, a great influence,
a great power over me; but he has misused it; he has treated me
severely, precisely in the instances in which I approached him nearest.
He has flung from him the devotion which I cherished for him. I will
tell you the whole truth, Leonore, and how this has happened between us.
You know that in the University, about three years ago, a sort of
literary society of young men gathered themselves about me. Perhaps they
esteemed my literary talents too highly, and might mislead me--I could
almost believe so myself, but I was the favourite of the day in the
circle in which my life moved; perhaps, on that account, I became
presumptuous; perhaps a tone of pretension betrayed itself in me, and a
false, one-sided direction was visible in the poems which I then
published: nevertheless, these poems made some little noise in the
world. Shortly, however, after their appearance a criticism on them came
out, which made a yet greater noise, on account of its power, its
severity, and also its satirical wit. Its acrimony spared neither my
work nor my character as a poet, and it produced almost universally a
re-action against me. It appeared to me severe and one-sided; and even
now, at this moment, it appears to me not otherwise, although I can now
see its justice much better than at the time.

"The anonymous author of the critique upon me was Stjernhoek, and he did
not in the slightest deny it. He considered it as being much less
directed against me personally, than against the increasing influence of
the party of which I was a sort of chief. Even before this I had begun
to withdraw myself from his power, which I always felt to be oppressive;
and this new blow did not, by any means, tend to reunite us. His severe
criticism had made me observant of my faults; but yet I do not know
whether it would have produced any other effect than pain, had I not at
this time returned home to you; and at home, through the beneficial
influence of my own family, a new strength and a purer direction had
been aroused in me. That was the time in which my father, with
indescribable goodness, and in complot with you all, sold the half of
his library to furnish me with the means of foreign travel. Yes, you
have called forth a new being in me; and all my poems, and all my
writings, are now designed to prove to you that I am not unworthy of
you. Ah, yes! I love you warmly and deeply--but it is all over with
Stjernhoek; the love which I cherished for him has changed itself into
bitterness."

"Ah, Henrik, Henrik, do not let it be so!" said Leonore. "Stjernhoek is
indeed a noble, a good man, even if, at the same time, too severe. But
really he loves you as well as we, but you two will not understand one
another; and Henrik, the last time you were really unjust to him--you
seemed as if you could hardly bear him."

"I hardly can, Leonore," said he. "It is a feeling stronger than myself.
I don't know what evil spirit it is which now, for some time, has set
itself firmly in my heart; but there it is steadfastly rooted; and if I
am aware only of Stjernhoek's presence, it is as if a sharp sword passed
through me; before him my heart contracts itself; and if he only touch
me, I feel as if burning lead went through my veins."

"Henrik! dearest Henrik!" exclaimed Leonore with pain, "it is really
terrible! Ah! make only the attempt with yourself; conquer your
feelings, and extend the hand of reconciliation to him."

"It is too late for that, Leonore," said Henrik. "Yes, if it were
necessary for him, it would be easy; but what does he trouble himself
about me? He never loved me, never esteemed either my efforts or my
ability. And perhaps it may be with some justice that he does not think
so very highly of my talents. What have I done? And sometimes it seems
to me, even in the future, that I never shall do any thing great; that
my powers are limited, and that my spring-time is past. Stjernhoek's, on
the contrary, is yet to come; he belongs to that class which mounts
slowly, but on that account all the more steadily. I see now, much
better than I did formerly, how far he stands beyond me, and how much
higher he will rise--and his knowledge is martyrdom to me."

"But wherefore," pleaded Leonore, "these dark thoughts and feelings,
dear Henrik, when your future appears fuller of hope than ever before?
Your beautiful poetry; your prize essay, which is certain to bring you
honour; the prospect of an advantageous post, a sphere of action which
will be dear to you--all this, which in a few months will so animate
your heart--why has it at this time so lost its power over you?"

"I cannot tell," replied he; "but for some time now I have been, and am
much changed; I have no faith in my good fortune; it seems to me as if
all my beautiful hopes will vanish like a dream."

"And even if it were so," said Leonore questioningly, with humility and
tenderness, "could you not find happiness and peace at home; in the
occupation of your beloved studies; in the life with us, who love you
solely, and for your own sake?"

Henrik pressed his sister's arm to his side, but answered nothing; and a
violent passing gust of wind compelled him to stand still for a moment.

"Horrible weather!" said he, wrapping his cloak round his sister at the
same time.

"But this is your favourite weather," remarked she jestingly.

"_Was_, you should say," returned he; "now I do not like it, perhaps
because it produces a feeling in me which distresses me." With these
words he took his sister's hand and laid it on his heart. His heart beat
wildly and strongly; its beating was almost audible.

"Heavens!" exclaimed Leonore, alarmed, "Henrik, what is this?--is it
often thus?"

"Only occasionally;--I have had it now for some time," replied he; "but
don't be uneasy on this account; and, above all things, say nothing to
my mother or Gabriele about it. I have spoken with Munter on the
subject; he has prescribed for me, and does not think it of much
consequence. To-day I have had it without intermission, and perhaps I am
from that cause somewhat hypochondriacal. Forgive me, dear Leonore, that
I have teased you about it. I am much better and livelier now; this
little walk has done me good--if you only don't get cold, Leonore, or
you would certainly be punished, or at all events be threatened, with
Louise's elixir. But does there not drive a travelling carriage towards
our door, exactly as if it would stop there? Can it be Eva? The carriage
stops--it is certainly Eva!"

"Eva! Eva!" exclaimed Leonore, with cordial delight; and both brother
and sister ran so quickly to the gate that she was received into their
arms as she dismounted from the carriage.




CHAPTER IV.

EVA.


Among the agreeable circumstances which occur in a happy home may
certainly be reckoned the return to its bosom of one of its beloved
members. So returns the bee to the safe hive with her harvest of honey,
after her flight abroad over the meadows of the earth. How much is there
not mutually to relate, to hear, to see, and to enjoy! Every cloud in
the heaven of home vanishes then; all is sunshine and joy; and it must
be bad indeed if they do not find one another lovelier and improved, for
when everything goes on right here, every advancing footstep in life
must tend in a certain manner to improvement.

Bright, indeed, did Eva's return make the hours of sunshine in the Frank
family! The mutual love which demonstrated itself in embraces, smiles,
tears, laughter, sweet words of greeting, and a thousand tokens of joy
and tenderness, made the first hours vanish in a lively intoxication,
and then, when all had become quieter and they looked nearer about them,
all looks and thoughts gathered themselves still about Eva with rapture;
her beauty seemed now in its full bloom, and a captivating life seemed
to prevail in her looks, in her behaviour, in her every motion, which
hitherto had not been seen. Her dress of the most modern fashion, a
certain development and style about her, a bewitching case of manner,
all evinced the elegant circles of the capital, and exerted their magic
over her friends, and charmed them all, but especially Gabriele, who
followed her beautiful sister with beaming looks.

Bergstroem gave way to his feelings in the kitchen, and exclaimed,
"Mamselle Eva is quite divine!" Never had the blond Ulla so entirely
agreed with him before.

Leonore was the only one who regarded Eva with a tender yet at the same
time troubled eye. She saw a something worldly in Eva's exterior and
demeanour, which was a presage to her that a great and not happy change
had taken place in her beloved sister. Nor was it long before Leonore's
foreboding proved itself to be right. Eva had not been many hours in the
house before it was plainly visible that domestic affairs had but little
interest for her, and that parents and family and friends were not to
her all that they had been before.

Eva's soul was entirely occupied by one object, which laid claim to all
her thoughts and feelings, and this was Major R----. His handsome
person, his brilliant talents; his amiability, his love; the parties in
which she had met him, the balls in which she had danced with him; the
occasions on which they had played parts together--in short, all the
romantic unfoldings of their connexion, were the pictures which now
alone lived in her heart, and danced around her fancy, now heated by
worldly happiness.

The grave expression of her father's countenance, as he heard her first
mention the Major, prevented her during this first evening from
repeating his name.

But when afterwards she was alone with her sisters, when the sweet hour
of talk came, which between dear friends, on such occasions, generally
extends itself from night till morning, Eva gave free course to all with
which her soul was filled, and related to her sisters at large her
romance of the last year, in which several rival lovers figured, but of
which Major R---- was the hero. Nor was it without self-satisfaction
that Eva represented herself as the worshipped and conquering heroine
amid a crowd of rival ladies. Her soul was so occupied by all these
circumstances, her mind was so excited, that she did not observe the
embarrassment of her sisters during her relation; she saw neither their
disquiet, their constrained smiles, nor their occasionally depressed
looks.

Nor was it till when, with eyes beaming with joy, she confided to them
that Major R---- would soon come to the city, where he had relatives;
that he would spend the Christmas with them, and then ask her hand from
her parents, that the veil fell from her eyes. Louise expressed herself
strongly against Major R----, wondered at her sister, and lamented that
she could endure such a man; it was not, she said, what she had expected
from her. Eva, very much wounded, defended the Major with warmth, and
talked of intolerance and prejudice. In consequence of this, Louise's
indignation was increased; Gabriele began to weep, and Louise bore her
company; she seemed to look upon Eva as on one lost. Leonore was calmer;
she spoke not one word which could wound her sister, but sighed deeply,
and looked with quiet grief upon the beloved but misguided sister; and
then seeing what a tragical turn the conversation was taking, said, with
all that expression of calm sincerity so peculiarly her own:

"Do not let us this evening speak further on this subject; do not let us
disturb our joy. We have now Eva with us at home, and shall have time
enough to talk and to think--and then all will be cleared up. Is it not
quite for the best that we sleep on this affair? Eva must be weary after
her journey, and our 'blue-eyed one' must not weep on this first
evening."

Leonore's advice was taken, and with a mutual "forgive," Louise, Eva,
and Gabriele embraced and separated for the night. Leonore was happy to
be alone with Eva, and listened undisturbedly through the whole night to
her relations. The good Leonore!

Major Victor R. was universally known as one of those who make sport
with female hearts, and Judge Frank regarded sport of this kind with a
severity very uncommon among his sex, especially where, as was the case
in this instance, selfishness, and not thoughtlessness, led to it. The
Major, ten years before this time, had married a young and rich girl
connected with the Judge's family; and the only fault of the young wife,
then sixteen, had been that of loving her husband too tenderly--nay,
even in adoring one who repaid her love with relentless severity and
faithlessness, under which the poor Amelia drooped, and, in the second
year of her marriage, died; but not without having bequeathed to the
unworthy husband all the property over which she had any control.

These were the very means by which R. now was enabled to pursue his
brilliant and reckless career. He always made his court to one of the
beauties of the day. He had been several times betrothed, but had broken
off the affair again without the smallest regard to the reputation or to
the feelings of the girl, upon whom by this means he had cast a
stain--nay, indeed, he secretly regarded it as an honour to himself to
make such victims, and to cause hearts to bleed for him--that cooled the
burning thirst of his self-love.

The world did justice to his agreeable and splendid talents; but the
noble of his own sex, as well as of the other, esteemed him but very
lightly, inasmuch as they considered him a person without true worth.
The thoughts of a union between this man and his beloved daughter
occasioned a storm in the bosom of the Judge.

Such was the information regarding the man whom she loved that met Eva
on her return home. Everybody was unanimously against him. What Eva
spoke in his excuse produced no effect; what she said of his true and
deep devotion to her, evidently nobody credited; and over her own love,
which had made the world so beautiful, which had produced the most
delicious feelings in her breast, and had opened to her a heaven of
happiness, people mourned and wept, and regarded it as a misfortune,
nay, even as a degradation. Wounded to the inmost of her soul, Eva drew
herself back, as it were, from her own family, and accused them to
herself of selfishness and unreasonableness. Louise, perhaps, deserved
somewhat of this reproach; but Leonore was pure, pure as the angels of
heaven; still Leonore mourned over Eva's love, and on that account Eva
closed her heart against her also.

The variance, which in consequence of all this existed between Eva and
her family, became only yet greater when Major R. arrived, shortly after
her, at the city. He was a tall handsome man, of perhaps
five-and-thirty; of a haughty, but somewhat trifling exterior; his
countenance was gay and blooming, and his look clear and bold. Great
practice in the world, and an inimitable ease and confidence, gave to
his demeanour and conversation that irresistible power which these
qualities exercise so greatly in society.

On his visit to the Franks, the Judge and he exchanged some glances, in
which both read that neither could endure the other. The Major, however,
let nothing of all this be seen; was perfectly candid and gay; and while
he directed his conversation especially to Elise, spoke scarcely one
word to Eva, though he looked much at her. After the first stiff
salutation, the Judge went again into his study, for the very appearance
of this man was painful to him. Leonore was polite, nay, almost friendly
to him, for she would willingly have loved one whom Eva loved. Assessor
Munter was present during this visit; but when he had seen, for a few
minutes, the glances which the Major cast upon Eva, and their magic
influence over her, and had observed and had read her whole heart in a
timid glance which she raised to her beloved, he withdrew silently and
hastily.

The Major came but seldom to the house, for the eye of the Judge
appeared to have the power of keeping him at a distance; on the
contrary, he managed it so that he saw Eva almost daily out of the
house. He met her when she went out, and accompanied her home from
church. Invitations came; sledging-parties and balls were arranged; and
Eva, who formerly was so well pleased with home, who had often given up
the pleasures of the world for the domestic evening circle, Eva appeared
to find nothing now pleasing at home; appeared only to be able to live
in those circles and those pleasures in which Major R. shone, and where
she could see herself distinguished by him. Precisely, therefore, on
account of these rencontres of the two, the family went as little as
possible into society. Still, notwithstanding all this, Eva's wishes
upon the whole were favoured. Leonore accompanied her faithfully
wherever she wished. The Judge was gloomy and disturbed in temper; the
mother was mild and accommodating; and as to Eva, she was in a high
degree sensitive; whilst whatever concerned her love, or seemed to
oppose her wishes in the slightest degree, brought her to tears and
hysterical sobs, and her friends became ever more and more aware how
violent and exclusive her love was to Major R. The mere glimpse of him,
the sound of his steps, the tone of his voice, shook her whole frame.
All earlier affectionate relationships had lost their power over her
heart.

It not unfrequently happens that people, whether it arises from physical
or moral causes, become wonderfully unlike themselves. Irritability,
violence, indiscretion, and unkindness, suddenly reveal themselves in a
hitherto gentle and amiable character, and, as if by a magic stroke, a
beautiful form has been transformed into a witch. It requires a great
deal, under such circumstances, to keep friends warm and unchanged. A
great demand of goodness, a great demand of clearness of vision, is made
from any one when, under these circumstances, he is required to remain
true in the same love, to persevere in the same faith, to wait patiently
for the time when the magic shall lose its power, when the changed one
shall come back again; and yet he, all the time, be able only to present
himself by quiet prayers, mild looks, and affectionate care! Probably
otherwise he never might have come back again. I say _great purity of
vision_, because the true friend never loses sight of the heavenly image
of his friend; but sees it through every veil of casualty, even when it
is concealed from all, nay, even from the faulty one's self! He has
faith in it; he loves it; he lives for it, and says, "Wait! have
patience! it will go over, and then he (or she) comes back again!" And
whoever has such a friend, comes back indeed!

So stood the quiet, affectionate Leonore on the side of her altered
sister.

All this time Henrik was beneficial to his whole family, and appeared to
have regained all his former amiable animation, in order therewith to
eradicate every disturbing sensation from the bosom of home. He
accompanied his family, more than he had ever done before, into society,
and had always a watchful eye on his sister and the Major.

Before long the Major declared himself, and asked for Eva's hand. Her
parents had prepared themselves for this event, and had decided on their
line of conduct. They intended not to make their child unhappy by a
decided negative to the wishes of her heart; but they had determined to
demand a year of trial both from her and her lover, during which time
they should have no intercourse with each other, should exchange no
letters, and should consider themselves as free from every mutual
obligation; and that then again after this interval of time, if they
two, the Major and Eva, still wished it, the question of their union
might again he brought forward. This middle path had been proposed by
Elise, who, through a progressively inward, and more perfect fulfilment
of duties, had acquired an ever-increasing power over her husband, and
thus induced him to accede to it, at the same time that she endeavoured
to infuse into him the hope which she herself cherished, namely, either
that Eva, during the time of probation, would discover the unworthiness
of the Major, and won over by the wishes and the tenderness of her
family, would conquer her love, or, on the other hand, that the Major,
ennobled by love and constant to her, would become worthy of her. It was
one of the most favourite and cherished axioms of the Judge, that every
man had the power of improving himself, and he willingly conceded that
for this end there existed no more powerful means than a virtuous love.

The Judge now talked energetically yet tenderly with his daughter;
explained clearly to her the terms of this connexion, without concealing
from her how bitter to him had been, and still was, the thought of this
union, and appealed to her own sense and reason whether too much had
been required in this prescribed time of trial.

Eva shed many tears; but deeply affected by the goodness of her parents,
consented to their wishes, and promised, though not without pain, to
fulfil them. The Judge wrote to the Major, who had made his declaration
by letter, a candid and noble, but by no means sugared, answer; wherein
he required from him, as a man of honour, that he should by no means
whatever induce Eva to swerve from the promises which she had made to
her parents, and by this means disturb her hitherto so happy connexion
with her own family. This letter, which the father allowed his daughter
to read, and which occasioned her fresh tears, whilst she in vain
endeavoured to persuade him to remove expressions which she considered
too severe, but which he, on the contrary, considered too mild, was
despatched the same day, and all was again quieter.

Probably Eva would strictly have adhered to the wishes of her parents,
which they endeavoured to make pleasant to her by much kindness, had not
a letter from the Major been conveyed to her on the next evening, which
quite excited and unhinged her again. He complained violently therein of
her father's unreasonableness, injustice, and tyranny; and spoke, in the
most passionate terms, of his love, of his unbounded sufferings, and of
his despair. The consequence of this letter was that Eva was ill--but
more so, however, in mind than body, and that she demanded to have an
interview with Assessor Munter.

The friend and physician of the house came immediately to her.

"Do you love me?" was Eva's first question when they were alone.

"Do I love you, Eva?" answered he, and looked at her with an expression
of eye which must have moved any heart to tenderness that had been
otherwise occupied than hers was.

"If you love me, if you desire that I should not be really ill,"
continued Eva, speaking with quickness and great warmth, "you must
convey this letter to Major R----, and bring his answer back into my
hands. My father is set against him, everybody is set against him;
nobody knows him as well as I do! I am in a state of mind which will
drive me to despair, if you have not compassion on me! But you must be
my friend in secret.--You will not? If you love me you must take this
letter and----"

"Desire all things from me, Eva," interrupted he, "but not this! and
precisely because you are so dear to me. This man in fact is not worthy
of you; he does not deserve----"

"Not a word about him!" interrupted Eva, with warmth: "I know him better
than you all--_I_ alone know him; but you all are his enemies, and
enemies to my happiness. Once again I pray you--pray you with tears! Is
it then so much that I desire from you? My benefactor, my friend, will
you not grant this prayer of your Eva?"

"Let me speak with your father," said he.

"On this subject? No, no! impossible!" exclaimed she.

"Then, Eva, I must refuse your prayer. It gives me more pain than I can
express to refuse you anything in this world; but I will not stain my
hand in this affair. I will not be a means of your unhappiness.
Farewell!"

"Stop, stop," cried Eva, "and hear me! What is it that you fear for me?"

"Everything from a man of R----'s character."

"You mistake him, and you mistake me," returned she.

"I know him, and I know you," said he, "and on that account I would
rather go into fire than convey letters between him and you. This is my
last word."

"You will not!" exclaimed she; "then you love me not, and I have not a
friend in this world!"

"Eva, Eva, do not say so! you sin against yourself. You know not--ask
everything from me--ask my life--ah, through you, life has already lost
its worth for me!--ask----"

"Empty words!" interrupted Eva, and turned impatiently away. "I desire
nothing more from you, Assessor Munter! Pardon me that I have given you
so much trouble!"

Munter looked at her for some moments in silence, laid his hand hastily
on his heart as if he had a violent pain there, and went out more bowed
than commonly.

Not long after this, an unexpected ray of light gladdened the painful
condition of affairs between Eva and her family. She was calmer. The
Major removed from the city into the country, to pass the Christmas with
a relation of his there; and on the same day Eva came down into the
library at the customary hour of tea, after she had passed several days
in her own room. Every one received her with joy. Her father went
towards her with open arms, called her sweet names, placed her on the
sofa by her mother, and took her tea to her himself: a lover could not
have been more tender or more attentive to her. One might see that Eva
was not indifferent to these marks of affection, and that yet she did
not receive them altogether with joy. A burning red alternated with
paleness on her cheek, and at times it seemed that a tear, a repentant
tear, filled her eyes.

From this time, however, the old state of feeling, and the old quiet,
returned in part to the bosom of the family. Nobody named the Major; and
as, when spring-time comes, the grass grows and the leaves burst forth,
although the heaven is yet dark, and many a northern blast yet lingers
in the air, so did affectionate feelings and joyful hours spring up
again in the family of the Franks, from the spontaneous vernal spirit
which reigned there.

You might have seen the mother there, like the heart of the family,
taking part in all that went forward, making every one so cheerful and
comfortable, as she moved about here and there, so rich in grace and joy
and consolation! Wherever she came, there came with her a something
pleasant or animating, either in word or deed; and yet all this time she
was very far from being herself calm. Care for her daughter was
accompanied by anxiety on account of Henrik's prospects and happiness.
She understood, better than any one else, his feelings, his wishes, and
his thoughts; and on this account glances of friendly understanding were
often exchanged between them, and from this cause also was it that on
those days on which the post came in from Stockholm, she became paler
and paler the nearer post-time came--for it perhaps might bring with it
important news for Henrik.

"My dear Elise," said the Judge, jesting affectionately, "to what
purpose is all this unquiet, this incomprehensible anxiety? I grant that
it would be a happiness to us all, and a piece of good luck, if Henrik
could obtain the solicited situation--but if he do not get it--well,
what then?--he can get another in a little while. He is yet a mere
youngster, and can very well wait for some years. And his poem--suppose
it should now and never more be regarded as a masterpiece, and should
not obtain the prize--now, in heaven's name! what does it matter? He
would perhaps, from the very circumstance of his having less fortune as
a poet, be only the more practical man, and I confess that would not
mortify me. And I shall wish both the poem and the appointment at the
place where pepper grows if you are to become pale and nervous on its
account! Promise me now next post-day to be reasonable, and not to look
like the waning moon, else I promise you that I shall be downright
angry, and will keep the whole post-bag to myself!"

To his children the father spoke thus: "Have you really neither genius
nor spirit of invention enough to divert and occupy your mother on the
unfortunate post-day? Henrik, it depends upon you whether she be calm or
not; and if you do not convince her that, let your luck in the world be
whatever it may, you can bear it like a man, I must tell you that you
have not deserved all the tenderness which she has shown you!"

Henrik coloured deeply, and the Judge continued: "And you, Gabriele! I
shall never call you my clever girl again, if you do not make a riddle
against the next post-day which shall so occupy your mother that she
shall forget all the rest!"

The following post-day was an exceedingly merry one. Never before had
more interesting topics of conversation been brought forward by Henrik;
never before had the mother been so completely seduced into the
discussions of the young people. At the very moment when the post-hour
arrived she was deeply busied in solving a riddle, which Henrik and
Gabriele endeavoured to make only the more intricate by their fun and
jokes, whilst they were pretending to assist her in the discovery.

The riddle ran as follows:

    Raging war and tumult
      Am I never nigh;
    And from rain and tempest
      To far woods I fly.
    In cold, worldly bosoms
      My deep grave is made;
    And from conflagration
      Death has me affrayed.
    No one e'er can find me
      In the dungeon glooms;
    I have no abiding,
      Save where freedom blooms.
    My morning sun ariseth,
      Light o'er mind to fling;
    O'er love's throbbing bosom
      Rests my downy wing!
    Like our Lord in heaven,
      I am ever there
    And like him of children
      Have I daily care.
    What though I may sever
      From thee now and then,
    I forget thee never----
      I come back again!
    In the morning's brightness,
      Dear one, if thou miss me,
    With the sunset's crimson
      Come I back and kiss thee!

This riddle, which it must be confessed was by no means one of
Gabriele's best, gave rise to a fund of amusement, and occasioned the
maddest propositions on Henrik's part. The mother, however, did not
allow herself to be misled; but exclaimed, whilst she laughingly
endeavoured to overpower the voices of her joking children,

"The riddle is----"

What the riddle was, the reader may see by the title of our next
chapter.




CHAPTER V.

HAPPINESS.


"Happiness!" repeated the Judge, as he entered the room at the same
moment, with letters and newspapers in his hand.

"I fancy you have been busying yourselves here with prophesyings," said
he: "Gabriele, my child, you shall have your reward for it--read this
aloud to your mother!" laying a newspaper before her.

Gabriele began to read--but threw the paper hastily down, gave a spring
for joy, clapped her hands, and exclaimed,

"Henrik's poetry has won the highest prize!"

"And here, Henrik," said the father, "are letters--you are nominated
to----" The voice of the Judge was drowned in the general outbreak of
joy. Henrik lay in the arms of his mother, surrounded by his sisters,
who, amid all their jubilation, had tearful eyes.

The Judge walked up and down the room with long strides; at length he
paused before the happy group, and exclaimed,

"Nay, only see! let me also have a little bit! Elise--my thanks to thee
that thou hast given him to me--and thou boy, come here--I must tell
thee----" but not one word could he tell him.

The father, speechless from inward emotion, embraced his son, and
returned in the same manner the affectionate demonstrations of his
daughters.

Many private letters from Stockholm contained flattering words and
joyful congratulations to the young poet. All Henrik's friends seemed to
accord in one song of triumph.

There was almost too much happiness for one time.

During the first moments of this news the joy was calm and mingled with
emotion; afterwards, however, it was lively, and shot forth like rockets
in a thousand directions. Every thing was in motion to celebrate the day
and its hero; and while the father of the family set about to mix a
bowl--for he would that the whole house should drink Henrik's
health--the others laid plans for a journey to Stockholm. The whole
family must be witnesses of Henrik's receiving the great gold
medal--they must be present on the day of his triumph. Eva recovered
almost her entire liveliness as she described a similar festival which
she had witnessed in the Swedish Academy.

Henrik talked a deal about Stockholm; he longed to be able to show his
mother and sisters the beautiful capital. How they would be delighted
with the gallery of mineralogy--how they would be charmed with the
theatres! how they would see and hear the lovely Demoiselle Hoegquist and
the captivating Jenny Lind![17]--and then the castle!--the
promenades--the prospects--the churches--the beautiful statues in the
public places--Henrik would have been almost ready to have overthrown
some of them. Oh, there was so much that was beautiful and delightful to
see in Stockholm!

The mother smiled in joy over----the occasion of the journey to
Stockholm; the father said "yes" to that and every thing; the
countenances of the young people beamed forth happiness; the bowl was
fragrant with good luck.

The young Baron L., who liked Henrik extremely, and who liked still more
every lively excitement to every uproar, was possessed by a regular
frenzy to celebrate the day. He waltzed with everybody; Louise might not
sit still; "the little lady" must allow herself to be twirled about; but
the truth was that in her joy she was about as wild for dancing as he
was himself--the very Judge himself must waltz with him; and at last he
waltzed with chairs and tables, whilst the fire of the punch was not
very much calculated to abate his vivacious spirits.

It was very hard for the Judge that he was compelled on this very day to
leave home, but pressing business obliged him to do so. He must make a
journey that same evening, which would detain him from home for three or
four days, and although he left his family in the full bloom of their
joy and prosperity, the short separation appeared to him more painful
than common.

After he had taken his leave he returned--a circumstance very unusual
with him--to the room again; embraced his wife yet a second time,
flourished about with his daughters in his wolf's-skin cloak as if out
of liveliness, and then went out hastily, giving to the young Baron,
who, in his wild joy, had fallen upon his wolf's-skin like a dog, a
tolerably heavy cuff. A few minutes afterwards, as he cast from his
sledge a glance and a hand-greeting to his wife and daughters at the
library window, they saw with astonishment that his eyes were full of
tears.

But the joy of the present, and the promises of the future, filled the
hearts of those who remained behind to overflowing, and the evening
passed amid gaiety and pleasure.

Baron L. drank punch with the domestics till both he and they were quite
wrong in the head, and all Louise's good moral preaching was like so
many water-drops on the fire. Henrik was nobly gay, and the beaming
expression of his animated, beautiful head, reminded the beholder of an
Apollo.

"Where now are all your gloomy forebodings?" whispered Leonore, tenderly
joyful; "you look to me as if you could even embrace Stjernhoek."

"The whole world!" returned Henrik, clasping his sister to his breast,
"I am so happy!"

And yet there was one person in the house who was happier than Henrik,
and that was his mother. When she looked on the beautiful, glorified
countenance of her son, and thought of that which he was and on what he
would become; when she thought on the laurels which would engarland his
beloved head, on the future which awaited her favourite, her summer
child--Oh! then bloomed the high summer of maternal joy in her breast,
and she revelled in a nameless happiness--a happiness so great that she
was almost anxious, because it appeared to her too great to be borne on
earth!

And yet for all that--and we say it with grateful joy--the earth can
bear a great degree of happiness; can bear it for long without its
either bringing with it a curse or a disappointment. It is in stillness
and in retirement where this good fortune blooms the best, and on that
account the world knows little of it, and has little faith in it. But,
thank God! it may be abundantly found in all times and in all countries;
and it is--we whisper this to the blessed ones in order that we may
rejoice with them--it is of extremely rare occurrence when it happens in
actual life, as, for the sake of effect, it happens in books, that a
strong current of happiness carries along with it unhappiness as in a
drag-rope.

FOOTNOTES:

[17] Emilie Hoegquist and Jenny Lind are two great ornaments of the
Stockholm theatre; the first an actress, the second a singer.




CHAPTER VI.

UNHAPPINESS.


Night succeeded the joyful evening, and the members of the Frank family
lay deep in the arms of sleep, when suddenly, at the hour of midnight,
they were awoke by the fearful cry of "Fire! fire!"

The house was on fire, and smoke and flames met them at every turn; for
the conflagration spread with incredible speed. An inconceivable
confusion succeeded: one sought for another; one called on another;
mother and children, inmates and domestics!

Only half-dressed, and without having saved the least thing, the
inhabitants of the house assembled themselves in the market-place, where
an innumerable crowd of people streamed together, and began to work the
fire-engines; whilst church bells tolled violently, and the alarm-drums
were beaten wildly and dully up and down the streets. Henrik dragged
with him the young Baron L----, who was speechless, and much injured by
the fire.

The mother cast a wild searching look around among her children, and
suddenly exclaiming "Gabriele!" threw herself with a thrilling cry of
anguish into the burning house. A circle of people hastily surrounded
the daughters, in order to prevent their following her, and at the same
moment two men broke forth from them, and hastened with the speed of
lightning after her. The one was her beautiful, now more than ever
beautiful, son. The other resembled one of the Cyclops, as art has
represented them at work in their subterranean smithies, excepting that
he had two eyes, which in this moment flashed forth flames, as if
bidding defiance to those with which he was about to combat. Both
vanished amid the conflagration.

A moment's silence ensued: the alarm-drum ceased to beat; the people
scarcely breathed; the daughters wrung their hands silently, and the
fire-bell called anxiously to the ineffectual engine-showers, for the
flames rose higher and higher.

All at once a shout was sent from the mass of the people; all hearts
beat joyfully, for the mother was borne in the arms of her son from amid
the flames, which stretched forth their hissing tongues towards
her!--and--now another shout of exultation! The modern Cyclop, in one
word the Assessor, stood in a window of the second story, and, amid the
whirlwind of smoke, was seen a white form, which he pressed to his
bosom. A ladder was quickly raised, and Jeremias Munter, blackened and
singed, but nevertheless happy, laid the fainting but unhurt Gabriele in
the arms of her mother and sisters.

After this, he and Henrik returned to the burning house, from which they
were fortunate enough to save the desk containing the Judge's most
valuable papers. A few trifles, but of no great importance, were also
saved. But this was all. The house was of wood, and spite of every
effort to save it, was burned, burned, burned to the ground, but, as it
stood detached, without communicating the fire to any other.

When Henrik, enfeebled with his exertions, returned to his family, he
found them all quartered in the small dwelling of the Assessor, which
also lay in the market-place; while Jeremias seemed suddenly to have
multiplied himself into ten persons, in order to provide his guests with
whatever they required. His old housekeeper, what with the fire, and
what with so many guests who were to be provided for in that
simply-supplied establishment, was almost crazed. But he had help at
hand for everybody: he prepared coffee, he made beds, and seemed
altogether to forget his own somewhat severe personal injuries by the
fire. He joked about himself and his affairs at the same time that he
wiped tears from his eyes, which he could not but shed over the
misfortunes of his friends. Affectionate and determined, he provided for
everything and for every one; whilst Louise and Leonore assisted him
with quiet resolution.

"Wilt thou be reasonable, coffee-pot, and not boil over like a
simpleton, since thou hast to provide coffee for ladies!" said the
Assessor in jesting anger. "Here, Miss Leonore, are drops for the mother
and Eva. Sister Louise, be so good as to take my whole storeroom in
hand; and you, young sir," said he to Henrik, as he seized him suddenly
by the arm, and gazed sharply into his face, "come you with me, for I
must take you rather particularly in hand."

There was indeed not a moment to lose; a violent effusion of blood from
the chest, placed the young man's life in momentary danger. Munter tore
off his coat, and opened a vein at the very moment in which he lost all
consciousness.

"What a silly fellow!" said the Assessor, as Henrik breathed again, "how
can anybody be so silly when he is such--a clever fellow! Nay, now all
danger for the time is over. Death has been playing his jokes with us
to-night! Now, like polite knights, let us be again in attendance on the
ladies. Wait, I must just have a little water for my face, that I need
not look, any more than is necessary, like 'the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance!'"




CHAPTER VII.

THE CONSEQUENCES.


The sun of the next morning shone brightly on the glistening
snow-covered roofs round the market-place, and dyed the smoke-clouds,
which rose slowly from the ruins of the burnt-down house, with the most
gorgeous tints of purple, gold, and sulphur-blue, whilst hundreds of
little sparrows raked and picked about in the ashy flakes which were
scattered over the snow in the market-place and churchyard, with
exulting twitterings.

Mother and daughters looked with tearful eyes towards the smoking place
where had so lately stood their dearly beloved home; but yet no one gave
themselves up to sorrow. Eva alone wept much, but that from a cause of
grief concealed in her own heart. She knew that Major R. had passed the
night in the city, and yet for all that--she had not seen him!

With the morning came much bustle, and a crowd of people into the
dwelling of the Assessor. Families came who offered to the roofless
household both shelter and entertainment; young girls came with their
clothes; servants came with theirs for the servants of the family;
elegant services and furniture were sent in; the baker left great
baskets full of bread; the brewer, beer; another sent wine, and so on.
It was a scene in social life of the most beautiful description, and
which showed how greatly esteemed and beloved the Franks were.

Mrs. Gunilla came so good and zealous, ready to contend with anybody who
would contend with her, to convey her old friends in her carriage to the
dwelling which she had prepared for them in all haste. The Assessor did
not strive with her now, but saw in silence his guests depart, and with
a tear in his eye looked after the carriage which conveyed Eva away from
his house. It seemed now so dark and desolate to him.

On the evening of this same day the father returned into his family
circle, and pressed them all to his breast with tears of joy. Yes, with
tears of joy, for all were left to him!

A few days after this, he wrote thus to one of his friends:

"Till now, till after this unfortunate occurrence, I knew not how much I
possessed in my wife and children; knew not that I had so many good
friends and neighbours. I thank God, who has given me such a wife, such
children, and such friends! These last have supplied, nay, over-supplied
all the necessities of my family. I shall begin in spring to rebuild my
house on the old foundation.

"How the fire was occasioned I know not, and do not trouble myself to
discover. The misfortune has happened, and may serve as a warning for
the future, and that is enough. My house has not become impoverished in
love, even though it may be so in worldly goods, and that sustains and
heals all. The Lord hath given and the Lord hath taken away: blessed be
the name of the Lord!"

Probably the Judge would listen to no conjectures respecting the origin
of the fire. We will venture, however, not the less on that account to
give our conjectures;--thus, it is very probable that the fire had its
origin in the chamber of the young Baron L., and that also he, in his
scarcely half sober state, might have been the occasion of it. Probably
he himself regarded the affair in this light; but this however is
certain, that this event, in connexion with the behaviour of the Franks
towards him, occasioned a great change in the temper and character of
this young man. His father came for him shortly after this, and took him
to consult a celebrated oculist in Copenhagen, in consequence of his
eyes having suffered severely in the fire.

Our eyes will see him again, only at a much later period of our history.

The daughters of the house busied themselves earnestly with the
already-spoken-of plans for discovering a means of independent
subsistence for themselves, that they might lighten the anxieties of
their parents in their present adverse circumstances, and that without
being burdensome to anybody else. Eva wished at first to accept an
invitation to a country-seat in the neighbourhood, not far from that
where Major R. was at present. Axelholm opened itself, heart, arms,
main-building and wings, for the members of the Frank family. There were
wanting no opportunities for colonisation; but the Judge besought his
children so earnestly to decline all these, and for the present to
remain altogether.

"In a few months," said he, "perhaps in spring, you can do what you
like; but now--let us remain together. It is needful to me to have you
now all around me, in order to feel that I really possess you all. I
cannot bear the thoughts of losing any one of you at present."

The thought of parting appeared likewise soon to weigh heavily upon him.
Henrik, since the night of the conflagration, had scarcely had a moment
free from suffering; a violent, incessant beating of the heart had
remained since then, and the pain of this was accompanied by dangerous
attacks of spasms, which, notwithstanding all remedies, appeared rather
to increase than otherwise. This disturbed the Judge so much the more,
as now, more than ever, he loved and valued his son. Since the night of
the fire it might be said that, for the first time, affection was warm
between father and son.

The Mahomedan says beautifully, that when the angel of death approaches
man, the shadow of his wings falls upon him from a distance. From the
beginning of his illness Henrik's soul appeared to be darkened by
unfriendly shadows, and the first serious outbreak of disease revealed
itself in depression and gloom. Oh! it was not easy for the young man,
richly gifted as he was with whatever could beautify life on earth,
standing as he did at the commencement of a path where fresh laurels and
the roses of love beckoned to him, it was not easy to turn his glance
from a future like this, to listen to the words which night and day his
beating heart whispered to him--"Thou wilt descend to thy grave! nor
will I cease knocking till the door of the tomb opens to thee!"

But to a mind like Henrik's the step from darkness to light was not
wide. There was that something in his soul which enables man to say to
the Lord of life and death--

    The dreaded judgment-doom in thine own hand is writ,--
    We kiss it; bow our heads, and silently submit.

Henrik had one day a long conversation with his skilful and anxious
physician Munter, who when he left him had tears in his eyes; but over
Henrik's countenance, on the contrary, when he returned to his family,
although he was paler than usual, was a peculiarly mild and solemn
repose, which seemed to diffuse itself through his whole being. From
this moment his temper of mind was changed. He was now mild and calm,
yet at the same time more joyous and amiable than ever. His eyes had an
indescribable clearness and beauty; the shadow had passed away from his
soul altogether.

But deeper and deeper lay the shadow over one person, who from the
beginning of Henrik's illness was no longer like herself--and that was
Henrik's mother. It is true that she worked and spoke as formerly, but a
gnawing anguish lived in her; she appeared absent from the passing
business of life; and every occupation which had not reference, in some
way or other, to her son, was indifferent or painful to her. The
daughters kept carefully from her any thing which might be disturbing to
her. She devoted herself almost exclusively to her son; and many hours
full of rich enjoyment were spent by these two, who soon, perhaps--must
separate for so long!

Every strong mental excitement was interdicted to Henrik; his very
illness would not admit of it. He must renounce his beloved studies: but
his living spirit, which could not sleep, refreshed itself at the
youthful fountains of art. He occupied himself much with the works of a
poet who, during his short life, had suffered much and sung much also,
and from amid whose crown of thorns the loveliest "Lilies of Sharon" had
blossomed. The works of Stagnelius[18] were his favourite reading. He
himself composed many songs, and his mother sang them to him during the
long winter evenings. According to his opinion, his mother sang better
than his sisters; and he rejoiced himself in the pure strength which
triumphantly exalted him in this poet above the anguish and fever of
life.

It was observed that about this time he often turned the conversation,
in the presence of his mother, to the brighter side of death. It seemed
as if he wished to prepare her gradually for the possibly near
separation, and to deprive it beforehand of its bitterness. Elise had
formerly loved conversations of this kind; had loved whatever tended to
diffuse light over the darker scenes of life: but now she always grew
pale when the subject was introduced; uneasiness expressed itself in her
eyes, and she endeavoured, with a kind of terror, to put an end to it.

One evening as the family, together with the Assessor, were assembled in
the confidential hour of twilight, they began to speak about dreams, and
about the nature of sleep. Henrik mentioned the ancient comparison of
sleep and death, which he said he considered less striking as regarded
its unconsciousness than in its resemblance in the awaking.

"And in what do you especially consider this resemblance to consist?"
asked Leonore.

"In the perfect retention and re-animation of consciousness, of memory,
of the whole condition of the soul," replied he, "which is experienced
in the morning after the dark night."

"Good," said the Assessor, "and possible; but what can we _know_ about
it?"

"All that revelation has made known to us," replied Henrik, with an
animated look: "do we really need any stronger light on this subject
than that afforded us by one of our own race, who was dead, and yet rose
again from the grave, and who exhibited himself after his sleep in the
dark dwelling with precisely the same dispositions, the same
friendships, and with the most perfect remembrance of the least as well
as the greatest events of his earthly existence? What a clear, what a
friendly light has not this circumstance diffused around the dark gates
of the tomb! It has united the two worlds! it has thrown a bridge over
the gloomy deep; it enables the drooping wanderer to approach it without
horror; it enables him to say to his friends on the evening of life,
'Good night!' with the same calmness with which he can speak those words
to them on the evening of the day."

An arm was thrown convulsively round Henrik, and the voice of his mother
whispered, in a tone of despair, to him, "You must not leave us, Henrik!
you must not!" and with these words she sunk unconscious on his breast.

From this evening Henrik never again introduced in the presence of his
mother a subject which was so painful to her. He sought rather to calm
and cheer her, and his sisters helped him truly in the same work. They
now had less desire than ever to leave home and to mingle in society
generally; yet notwithstanding they did so occasionally, because their
brother wished it, and it enabled them to have something to tell at
home, which could entertain and enliven both him and his mother. These
reports were generally made in Henrik's room, and how heartily did they
not laugh there! Ah! in a cordially united family, care can hardly take
firm footing there: if it come in for one moment, in the very next it
will be chased away! Eva appeared during this time to forget her own
trouble, that she also might be a flower in the garland of comfort and
tenderness which was bound around the favourite of the family; the Judge
too, tore himself more frequently than hitherto from his occupations,
and united himself to the family circle.

A more attractive sick chamber than Henrik's can hardly be imagined.
That he himself felt. Enfeebled by the influence of disease, his
beautiful eyes often became filled with tears from slight causes, and he
would exclaim "I am happy--too happy! What a blessedness to be able to
live! That is happiness! that is the summer of the soul! Even now, amid
my sufferings, I feel myself made through you so rich, so happy!" and
then he would stretch forth his hand to those of his mother or his
sisters, and press them to his lips or his bosom.

An interval of amendment occurred in Henrik's illness, and he suffered
much less. A sentiment of joy diffused itself through the house, and
Henrik himself appeared at times to entertain hopes of life. He could
now go out again and inhale the fresh winter air--his favourite air. The
Judge often accompanied him; it was then beautiful to see the powerful
vigorous father supporting with his arm the pale but handsome son,
whenever his steps became weary; to see him curbing his own peculiarly
hasty movements, and conducting him slowly homewards; it was beautiful
to see the expression in the countenance of each.

People talk a great deal about the beauty of maternal love--paternal
love has perhaps something yet more beautiful and affecting in it; and
it is my opinion that he who has had the happiness of experiencing the
careful culture of a loving, yet at the same time upright father, can,
with fuller feeling and with more inward understanding than any other,
lift his heart to heaven in that universal prayer of the human race,
"Our Father which art in heaven!"

Several weeks passed on. A lady, an intimate friend of the family, was
about this time undertaking a journey with her daughter to the city
where Petrea was visiting, and desired greatly to take Gabriele with
her, who was the dearest friend of the young Amalie. Gabriele would very
gladly have embraced this opportunity of visiting her beloved sister,
and of seeing at the same time something of the world, but now when
Henrik was ill, she could not think of it; she was quite resolved not to
separate herself from him. But Henrik was zealously bent upon Gabriele
making this journey, which would be so extremely agreeable to her.

"Don't you see," said he, "that Gabriele sits here and makes herself
pale with looking at me? and that is so utterly unnecessary, especially
now I am so much better, and when I certainly in a little time shall be
quite well again. Journey, journey away, sweet Gabriele, I beseech you!
You shall cheer us in the mean time with your letters; and when at
Easter you return with Petrea, then--then you will no longer have an
ailing suffering brother; I will manage it so that I will be quite well
by that time!"

She was talked to also on other sides, especially by the young, lively
Amalie, and at length Gabriele permitted herself to be persuaded.
Convinced that for the present all danger for her brother was over, she
commenced the journey with a jest on her lips, but with tears in her
eyes.

It was the first flight of "our little lady" from home.

Not a word was heard from Major R.; and although Eva continued reserved
towards her own family, she appeared to be so much calmer than formerly
that they all began to be easy on her account. The Judge, who, in
consequence of her behaviour evinced towards her a grateful tenderness,
endeavoured to gratify her slightest wishes, and gave his consent that
in the early commencement of spring she should go to M----s. He hoped
that by that time the Major would be far removed from the country; but
it was not long before a painful discovery was made.

       *       *       *       *       *

On a dark evening at the beginning of March, two persons stood in deep
but low discourse under a tree in St. Mary's churchyard.

"How childish you are, Eva!" said the one, "with your fears and your
doubts! and how pusillanimous is your love. If you would learn, lovely
angel! how true love speaks, listen to me:--

    "Pourquoi fit on l'amour, si son pouvoir n'affronte,
    Et la vie et la mort, et la haine et la honte!
    Je ne demande, je ne veux pas savoir
    Si rien a de ton coeur terni le pur miroir:
    Je t'aime! tu le sais! Que l'importe tout le reste?"

"Oh Victor," answered the trembling voice of Eva, "my fault is not the
having too little love for you. Ah, I feel indeed, and I evince it by my
conduct, that my love to you is greater than my love for father and
mother and sisters, more than for all the world! And yet I know that it
is wrong! my heart raises itself against me--but I cannot resist your
power."

"On that account am I called Victor, my angel," said he; "heaven itself
has sanctioned my power. And _your_ Victor am I also, my sweet Eva; is
it not so?"

"Ah! only too much so," sighed Eva. "But now, Victor, spare my weakness;
do not desire to see me again till I go in spring in a month's time to
M----s. Do not demand----"

"Demand no such promises from Victor, Eva," said he; "he will not bind
himself so! but you--you must do what your Victor wills, else he cannot
believe that you love him. What--you will refuse to take a few steps in
order to gladden his eyes and his heart--in order to see and to hear
him--in truth you do not love him!"

"Ah, I love you, I adore you," returned Eva; "I could endure anything on
your account--even the pangs of my own conscience; but my parents, my
brother and sisters! ah, you know not what it costs me to deceive them!
they are so good, so excellent; and I! Yet sometimes the love which I
have for them contends with the love which I have for you. Do not string
the bow too tightly, Victor! And now--farewell, beloved, farewell! In a
month's time you will see me, your Eva, again, in M----s."

"Stop!" said he, "do you think you are to leave me in that way? Where is
my ring?"

"On my heart," returned she, "day and night it rests there--farewell!
ah, let me go!"

"Say once more that you love me above every thing in this world!" said
he, "that you belong only to me!"

"Only to you! farewell!" and with these words Eva tore herself away from
him, and hastened with flying feet, like one terrified, across the
churchyard. The Major followed her slowly. A dark form stepped at that
moment hastily forward, as if it had arisen from one of the graves, and
met the Major face to face. It seemed to him as if a cold wind passed
through his heart, for the form tall and silent, and at that dark hour,
and in the churchyard, had something in it ominous and spectre-like, and
as it had evidently advanced to him with design, he paused suddenly, and
asked, sharply, "Who are you?"

"Eva's father!" replied a suppressed but powerful voice, and by the
up-flaring light of a lamp which the wind drove towards them, the Major
saw the eyes of the Judge riveted upon him with a wrathful and
threatening expression. His heart sank for a moment; but in the next he
said, with all his accustomed haughty levity:

"Now there is no necessity for me to watch longer after her;" and so
saying he turned hastily aside, and vanished in the darkness.

The Judge followed his daughter without nearing her. When he came home,
such a deep and painful grief lay on his brow as had never been observed
there before.

For the first time in his life the powerful head of the Judge seemed
actually bowed.

       *       *       *       *       *

At this time Stjernhoek came to the city quite unexpectedly. He had heard
of the misfortune which had befallen the Franks, as well as of the part
which Henrik acted on this occasion, and of the illness which was the
consequence of it, and he came now in order to see him before he
travelled abroad. This visit, which had occasioned Stjernhoek to diverge
as much as sixty English miles out of his way, surprised and deeply
affected Henrik, who as he entered the room met him with the most candid
expression of cordial devotion. Stjernhoek seized his outstretched hand,
and a sudden paleness overspread his manly countenance as he remarked
the change which a few weeks' illness had made in Henrik's appearance.

"It is very kind of you to come to me--my thanks for it, Stjernhoek!"
said Henrik from his heart; "otherwise," continued he, "you would
probably have seen me no more in this world; and I have wished so much
to say one word to you before we separated thus."

Both were silent for some minutes.

"What would you say to me, Henrik?" at length asked Stjernhoek, whilst an
extraordinary emotion was depicted in his countenance.

"I would thank you," returned Henrik, cordially, "thank you for your
severity towards me, and tell you how sincerely I now acknowledge it to
have been just, and wholesome for me also. I would thank you, because by
that means you have been a more real friend, and I am now perfectly
convinced how honestly and well you have acted towards me. This
impression, this remembrance of our acquaintance, is the only one which
I will take away with me when I leave this world. You have not been able
to love me, but that was my own fault. I have sorrowed over the
knowledge of that, but now I have submitted to it. In the mean time it
would be very pleasant to me to know that my faults--that my late
behaviour towards you, had not left behind it too repulsive an
impression; it would be very pleasant for me to believe that you were
able to think kindly of me when I am no more!"

A deep crimson flamed on Stjernhoek's countenance, and his eyes glistened
as he replied, "Henrik, I feel more than ever in this moment that I have
not shown justice towards you. Several later circumstances have opened
my eyes, and now--Henrik, can you give me your friendship! mine you have
for ever!"

"Oh, this is a happy moment!" said Henrik, with increasing emotion;
"through my whole life I have longed for it, and now for the first time
it is given me--now when--but God be praised even for this!"

"But why," said Stjernhoek, warmly, "why speak so positively about your
death? I will hope and believe that your condition is not so dangerous.
Let me consult a celebrated foreign physician on your case--or better
still, make the journey with me, and put yourself under the care of Dr.
K----. He is celebrated for his treatment of diseases of the heart; let
me conduct you to him; certainly you can and will recover!"

Henrik shook his head mournfully. "There lies his work," said he,
pointing to an open book in the window, "and from it I know all
concerning my own condition. Do you see, Nils Gabriel," continued he,
with a beautiful smile, as he placed his arm on the shoulder of his
friend, and pointed with his other towards heaven, gazing on him the
while with eyes which seemed larger than ever--for towards death the
eyes increase in size and brilliancy--"do you see," said he, "there
wanders your star. It ascends! for certain a bright path lies before
you; but when it beams upon your renown it will look down upon my grave!
I have no doubt whatever on this point. Some time ago this thought was
bitter to me; it is so now no more! When the knowledge depresses me that
I have accomplished so very little on earth, I will endeavour to console
myself with the conviction that you will be able to do so much more, and
that either in this world or the next I shall rejoice over your
usefulness and your happiness!"

Stjernhoek answered not a word; large tears rolled down his cheeks, and
he pressed Henrik warmly to his breast.

On Henrik's account he endeavoured to give the conversation a calmer
turn, but the heart of his poor friend swelled high, and it was now too
full of life and feeling to find rest in anything but the communication
of these.

The connexion between the two young men seemed now different to what it
had ever been before. It was Henrik who now led the conversation, and
Stjernhoek who followed him, and listened to him with attention and the
most unequivocal sympathy, whilst the young man gave such free scope to
his thoughts and presentiments as he had never ventured to do before in
the presence of the severe critic. But the truth is, there belongs to a
dweller on the borders of the kingdom of death a peculiar rank, a
peculiar dignity, and man believes that the whispering of spirits from
the mysterious land reaches the ear which bows itself to them; on this
account the wise and the strong of earth listen silently like disciples,
and piously like little children, to the precepts which are breathed
forth from dying lips.

The entrance of the Judge gave another turn to the conversation, which
Stjernhoek soon led to Henrik's last works. He directed his discourse
principally to the Judge, and spoke of them with all the ability of a
real connoisseur, and with such entire and cordial praise as surprised
Henrik as much as it cheered him.

It is a very great pleasure to hear oneself praised, and well praised
too, by a person whom one highly esteems, and particularly when, at the
same time, this person is commonly niggardly of his praise. Henrik
experienced at that moment this feeling in its highest degree; and this
pleasure was accompanied by the yet greater pleasure of seeing himself
understood, and in such a manner by Stjernhoek as made himself more clear
to himself. In this moment he seemed, now for the first time, to
comprehend in a perfectly intelligible manner his own talents, and what
he wished to do, and what he was able to do. The fountain of life
swelled forth strongly in his breast.

"You make me well again, Nils Gabriel!" exclaimed he; "you give me new
life. I will recover; recover in order again to live, in order to work
better and more confidently than I have hitherto done. As yet I have
done nothing; but now, now I could--I feel new life in me--I have never
yet felt myself so well as now! Certainly I shall now recover, or
indeed--is the best wine reserved for me till the last?"

The evening sped on agreeably, and with animation in the family circle.
The blessed angels of heaven were not more beautiful or more joyous than
Henrik. He joked with his mother and sisters, nay, even with Stjernhoek,
in the gayest manner, and was one of the liveliest who partook of the
citron-souffle which Louise served up for supper, and which she herself
had helped to prepare, and of which she was not a little proud. Yes,
indeed, she was almost ready to believe that it was this which had given
new life to Henrik, and the power of which she considered to be
wonderfully operative. But ah!----

At the very moment when Henrik jested with Louise on this very subject,
he was seized by the most violent suffering.

This suffering continued interruptedly for three days, and deprived the
sick young man of consciousness; whilst it seemed to be leading him
quickly to that bound which mercy has set to human sufferings. On the
second day after this paroxysm Henrik was seized with that desire for
change of resting-place which may be commonly regarded as the sign that
the soul is preparing for its great change of abode. The Judge himself
bore his son in his arms from room to room, and from bed to bed. No
sleep visited the eyes of his family during these terrible days; whilst
his mother, with eyes tearless and full of anguish riveted upon her son,
followed him from room to room, and from bed to bed; now hanging over
his pillow, now seated at the foot of his bed, and smiling tenderly upon
him when he appeared to know her, and articulating his name in a low and
almost inaudible voice.

On the evening of the third day the poor youth regained his
consciousness. He recognised his family again, and spoke kindly to them.
He saw that they were pale and weary, and besought them incessantly to
go to rest. The Assessor, who was present, united earnestly in this
request, and assured them that, according to all appearances, Henrik
would now enjoy an easy sleep, and that he himself would watch by him
through the night. The father and daughters retired to rest; but when
they endeavoured to persuade the mother, she only waved with her hand,
whilst a mournful smile seemed to say, "It is of no use whatever to talk
to me about it."

"I may remain with you, Henrik?" said she, beseechingly.

He smiled, took her hand, and laid it on his breast; and in the same
moment closing his eyes, a calm refreshing sleep stole over him. The
Assessor sate silently beside them, and observed them both: it was not
long, however, before he was obliged to leave them, being summoned
suddenly to some one who was dangerously ill. He left them with the
promise to return in the course of the night. Munter was called in the
city the night-physician, because there was no one like him who appeared
earnestly willing to give his help by night as by day.

The mother breathed deeply when she saw herself alone with her son. She
folded her hands, and raised her eyes to heaven with an expression which
through the whole of the foregoing days had been foreign to them. It was
no longer restless, almost murmuring anxiety; it was a mournful, yet at
the same time, deep, perfect, nay, almost loving resignation. She bent
over her son, and spoke in a low voice out of the depths of her
affectionate heart.

"Go, my sweet boy, go! I will no longer hold thee back, since it is
painful to thee! May the deliverer come! Thy mother will no longer
contend with him to retain thee! May he come as a friendly angel and
make an end of thy sufferings! I--will then be satisfied! Go then, my
first-born, my summer-child; go, and if there may never more come a
summer to the heart of thy mother--still go! that thou mayst have rest!
Did I make thy cradle sweet, my child! so would I not embitter by my
lamentations thy death-bed! Blessed be thou! Blessed be He also who gave
thee to me, and who now takes thee from me to a better home! Some time,
my son, I shall come home to thee; go thou beforehand, my child! Thou
art weary, so weary! Thy last wandering was heavy to thee; now thou wilt
rest. Come thou good deliverer, come thou beloved death, and give rest
to his heart; but easily, easily. Let him not suffer more--let him not
endure more. Never did he give care to his parents----"

At this moment Henrik opened his eyes, and fixed them calmly and full of
expression on his mother.

"Thank God!" said he, "I feel no more pain."

"Thanks and praise be given to God, my child!" said she.

Mother and son looked on each other with deep and cheerful love! they
understood each other perfectly.

"When I am no more," said he, with a faint and broken voice, "then--tell
it to Gabriele, prudently; she has such tender feelings--and she is not
strong. Do not tell it to her on a day--when it is cold and
dull--but--on a day--when the sun shines warm--when all things look
bright and kindly--then, then tell her--that I am gone away--and greet
her--and tell her from me--that it is not difficult--to die!--that there
is a sun on the other side----"

He ceased, but with a loving smile on his lips, and his eyes closed
their lids as if from very weariness.

Presently afterwards he spoke again, but in a very low voice. "Sing me
something, mother," said he, "I shall then sleep more calmly, 'They
knock! I come!'"

These words were the beginning of a song which Henrik had himself
written, and set to music some time before, during a night of suffering.

The genius of poetry seemed to have deserted him during the latter part
of his illness; this was painful to him; but his mind remained the same,
and the spirit of poetry lived still in the hymn which his mother now,
at his request, sang in a trembling voice:

    They knock! I come! yet ere on the way
    To the night of the grave I am pressing,
    Thou Angel of Death, give me yet one lay--
    One hymn of thanksgiving and blessing.

    Have thanks, O Father! in heaven high,
    For thy gift, all gifts exceeding;
    For life! and that grieved or glad I could fly
    To thee, nor find thee unheeding.

    Oh thanks for life, and thanks too for death,
    The bound of all trouble and sighing;
    How bitter! yet sweet 't is to yield our breath
    When thine is the heart of the dying!

    By our path of trial thou plantest still
    Thy lilies of consolation;
    But the loveliest of all--to do thy will--
    Be it done in resignation!

    Farewell, lovely earth, on whose bosom I lay;
    Farewell, all ye dear ones, mourning;
    Farewell, and forgive all the faults of my day:
    My heart now in death is burning!

"It is burning!" repeated Henrik in a voice of suffering. "It is
terrible! Mother! Mother!" said he, looking for her with a restless
glance.

"Your mother is here!" said she, bending over him.

"Ah! then all is right!" said he again, calmly. "Sing, my mother," added
he, again closing his eyes--"I am weary."

She sang--

    We part! but in parting our steps we bend
    Alone towards that glorious morrow,
    Where friend no more shall part from friend,
    Where none knoweth heart-ache or sorrow!

    Farewell! all is dark to my failing sight,
    Your loved forms from my faint gaze rending,
    'T is dark, but oh!--far beyond the night
    I see light o'er the darkness ascending!

"Oh! if you only knew how serene it is! It is divine!" said the dying
one, as he stretched forth his arms, and then dropped them again.

A change passed over the countenance of the young man; death had touched
his heart gently, and its pulsations ceased. At the same moment a
wonderful inspiration animated the mother; her eyes beamed brightly, and
never before had her voice had so beautiful, so clear a tone as whilst
she sang

    Thou callest, O Father! with glad accord
    I come!--Ye dear ones we sever!--
    Now the pang is past!--now behold I the Lord--
    Praise be thine, O Eternal, for ever!

Judge Frank was awoke out of his uneasy sleep by the song, whose tone
seemed to have a something supernatural in it. A few moments passed
before he could convince himself that the voice which he heard was
really that of his wife.

He hastened with indescribable anxiety to the sick room; Elise yet sang
the last verse as he entered, and casting his eyes on her countenance,
he exclaimed "My God!" and clasped his hands together.

The song ceased: a dreadful consciousness thrust itself like a sword
through the heart of the mother. She saw before her the corpse of her
son, and with a faint cry of horror she sank, as if lifeless, upon the
bed of death.

FOOTNOTES:

[18] Eric Stagnelius, who was born in 1793, and died in 1823, would have
been, it is probable, had a longer life been granted to him, one of the
most distinguished poets of the age. His poems, epic, dramatic, and
lyric, fill three volumes. "Liljor i Saron"--Lilies of Sharon, is the
general title of his lyrics.




CHAPTER VIII.

ELISE TO CECILIA.


    _Two months later._

"When I last wrote to you, my Cecilia, it was winter. Winter, severe icy
winter, had also gathered itself about my heart--my life's joy was
wrapped in his winding-sheet, and it seemed to me as if no more spring
could bloom, no more life could exist; and that I should never again
have the heart to write a cheerful or hopeful word. And now--now it is
spring! The lark sings again the ascension-song of the earth; the May
sun diffuses his warming beams through my chamber, and the grass becomes
already green upon the grave of my first-born, my favourite! And I----Oh
Lord! thou who smitest, thou also healest, and I will praise thee! for
every affliction which thou sendest becomes good if it be only received
with patience. And if thou concealest thyself for a season--as it
appears to our weak vision--thou revealest thyself yet soon again,
kinder and more glorious than before! For a little while and we see thee
not, and again for a little while and we see thee, and our hearts
rejoice and drink strength and enjoyment out of the cup which thou,
Almighty One! fillest eternally. Yes, every thing in life becomes good,
if that life be only spent in God!

"But in those dark wintry hours it was often gloomy and tumultuous
within me. Ah, Cecilia, I would not that he should die! He was my only
son, my first-born child. I suffered most at his birth; I sang most
beside his cradle; my heart leapt up first and highest with maternal joy
at his childish play. He was my summer child, born in the midsummer of
nature and of my life and my strength, and then--he was so full of life,
so beautiful and good! No, I would not that he should die, or that my
beautiful son should be laid in the black earth! And as the time drew
nearer and nearer, and I saw that it must be--then it was dark in me.
But the last night--Oh, it was a most wonderful night!--then it was
otherwise. Do you know, Cecilia, that I sung gaily, triumphantly, by the
death-bed of my first-born! Now I cannot comprehend it. But this
night--he had during the foregoing day suffered much, and his
sufferings had reconciled me to his death. They abated as death
approached, and he besought of me, as he had often done in the years of
his childhood, to sing him to sleep. I sang--I was able to sing. He
received pleasure from the song, which increased in power, and with a
heavenly smile, whilst heavenly pictures seemed to float before his
eyes, he said, 'Ah, it is divine!' and I sang better and ever clearer. I
saw his eyes change themselves, his breath become suspended, and I knew
that then was the moment of separation between soul and body--between me
and him! but I did not then feel it, and I sang on. It seemed to me as
if the song sustained the spirit and raised it to heaven. In that moment
I was happy; for even I, as well as he, was exalted above every earthly
pain.

"The exclamation of my name awoke me from my blessed dream, and I saw
the dead body of my son--after this I saw nothing more.

"There was a long, deep stupor. When I recovered consciousness, I felt a
heart beating against my temples. I raised my eyes and saw my husband;
my head was resting on his breast, and with the tenderest words he was
calling me back to life. My daughters stood around me weeping, and
kissing my hands and my clothes. I also wept, and then I felt better. It
was then morning, and the dawn came into my chamber. I threw my arms
around my husband's neck, and said, 'Ernst, love me! I will
endeavour----'

"I could say no more, but he understood me, thanked me warmly, and
pressed me close to his bosom.

"I did endeavour to be calm, and with God's help I succeeded. For
several hours of the day I lay still on my bed. Eva, whose voice is
remarkably sweet, read aloud to me. I arose for tea, and endeavoured to
be as usual; my husband and my daughters supported me, and all was peace
and love.

"But when the day was ended, and Ernst and I were alone in our chamber,
a fear of the night, of bed, and a sleepless pillow, seized hold of me;
I, therefore, seated myself on the sofa, and prayed Ernst to read to me,
for I longed for the consolations of the Gospel. He seated himself by me
and read; but the words, although spoken by his manly, firm voice,
passed at this time impressionless over my inward sense. I understood
nothing, and all within me was dark and vacant. All at once some one
knocked softly at the door, and Ernst, not a little astonished, said,
'Come in;' the door was opened, and Eva entered. She was very pale, and
appeared excited; but yet at the same time firm and determined. She
approached us softly, and sinking down on her knees between us, took our
hands between hers. I would have raised her, but Ernst held me back, and
said, mildly but gravely, 'Let her alone!'

"'My father, my mother!' said Eva, with tremulous voice, 'I have given
you uneasiness--pardon me! I have grieved you--I will not do it again.
Ah! I will not now lay a stone on your burden. See, how disobedient I
have been--this ring, and these letters, I have received against your
will and against my promises from Major R. I will now send them back.
See here! read what I have written to him. Our acquaintance is for ever
broken! Pardon me, that I have chosen these hours to busy you with my
affairs, but I feared my own weakness when the force of this hour shall
have passed. Oh, my parents! I feel, I know, that he is not worthy to be
your son! But I have been as it were bewitched--I have loved him beyond
measure;--ah, I love him still--nay, do not weep, mother! You shall
never again shed a tear of grief over me--you have wept already enough
on my account. Since Henrik's death every thing in me is changed. Fear
nothing more for me; I will conquer this, and will become your obedient,
your happy child. Only require not from me that I should give my hand to
another--never will I marry, never belong to another! But for you, my
parents, will I live; I will love you, and with you be happy! Here, my
father, take this, and send it back to him whom I will no more see!
And--Oh, love me! Love me!'

"Tears bedewed the face which she bowed down to her father's knee. Never
had she looked so lovely, so attractive! Ernst was greatly affected; he
laid his hand as if in blessing upon her head, which he raised, and
said:

"'When you were born, Eva, you lay long as if dead; in my arms you first
opened your eyes to the light, and I thanked God. But I thank him
manifold more for you in this moment, in which I see in you the joy and
blessing of our age--in which you have been able to combat with your own
heart, and to do that which is right! God bless you! God reward you!'

"He held her for a long time to his bosom, and his tears wetted her
forehead. I also clasped her in my arms, and let her feel my love and my
gratitude, and then, with a look which beamed through tears, she left
us.

"We called her 'our blessed child' at that time, for she had blessed us
with a great consolation. She had raised again our sunken hearts.

"Ernst went to the window and looked silently into the star-lighted
night; I followed him, and my glance accompanied his, which in this
moment was so beautiful and bright, and laying his arm around me he
spoke thus, as if to himself:

"'It is good! It is so intended--and that is the essential thing! He is
gone! What more? We must all go; all, sooner or later. He might not
perfect his work; but he stood ready, ready in will and ability when he
was called to the higher work-place! Lord and Master, thou hast taken
the disciple to thyself. Well for him that he was ready! That is the
most important for us all!'

"Ernst's words and state of mind produced great effect upon me. Peace
returned to my spirit. In the stillness of the night I did not sleep,
but I rested on his bosom. It was calm around me and in me. And in the
secret of my soul I wished that it might ever remain so, that no more
day might dawn upon me, and no more sun shine upon my weary, painful
eyes.

"How the days creep on! On occasions of great grief it always appears as
if time stood still. All things appear to stand still, or slowly and
painfully to roll on, in dark circles; but it is not so! Hours and days
go on in an interminable chain; they rise and sink like the waves of the
sea; and carry along with them the vessel of our life: carry it from the
islands of joy it is true, but carry it also away from the rocky shores
of grief. Hours came for me in which no consolation would appease my
heart, in which I in vain combated with myself, and said--'Now I will
read, and then pray, and then sleep!' But yet anguish would not leave
me, but followed me still, when I read; prevented me from prayer, and
chased away sleep; yes, many such hours have been, but they too are
gone; some such may perhaps come yet, but I know also that they too will
go. The tenderness of my husband and of my children--the peace of
home--the many pleasures within it--the relief of tears--the eternal
consolation of the Eternal Word--all these have refreshed and
strengthened my soul. It is now much, much better. And then--he died
pure and spotless, the youth with the clear glance and the warm heart!
He stood, as his father said, ready to go into the higher world. Oh!
more than ever have I acknowledged, in the midst of my deep pain, that
there is pain more bitter than this; for many a living son is a greater
grief to his mother than mine--the good one there, under the green
mound!

"We have planted fir-trees and poplars around the grave, and often will
it be decorated with fresh flowers. No dark grief abides by the grave of
the friendly youth.--Henrik's sisters mourn for him deep and
still--perhaps Gabriele mourns him most of all. One sees it not by day,
for she is generally gay as formerly; a little song, a gay jest, a
little adornment of the house, all goes on just as before to enliven the
spirits of her parents. But in the night, when all rest in their beds,
she is heard weeping, often so painfully--it is a dew of love on the
grave of her brother; but then every morning is the eye again bright and
smiling.

"On the first tidings of our loss Jacobi hastened to us. He took from
Ernst and me, in this time of heavy grief, all care upon himself, and
was to us as the tenderest of sons. Alas! he was obliged very soon to
leave us, but the occasion for this was the most joyful. He is about to
be nominated to the living of T----; and his promotion, which puts him
in the condition soon to marry, affords him also a respectable income,
and a sphere of action agreeable to his wishes and accordant with his
abilities, and altogether makes him unspeakably happy. Louise also looks
forward towards this union and establishment for life with quiet
satisfaction, and that, I believe, as much on account of her family as
for herself.

"The family affection appears, through the late misfortune, to have
received a new accession: my daughters are more amiable than ever in
their quiet care to sweeten the lives of their parents. Mrs. Gunilla has
been like a mother to me and mine during this time; and many dear
evidences of sympathy, from several of the best and noblest in Sweden,
have been given to Henrik's parents;--the young poet's pure glory has
brightened their house of mourning. 'It is beautiful to have died as he
has died,' says our good Assessor, who does not very readily find any
thing beautiful in this world.

"And I, Cecilia, should I shut my heart against so many occasions for
joy and gratitude, and sit with my sorrow in darkness? Oh no! I will
gladden the human circle in which I live; I will open my heart to the
gospel of life and of nature; I will seize hold on the moments, and the
good which they bring. No friendly glance, no spring-breeze, shall pass
over me unenjoyed or unacknowledged; out of every flower will I suck a
drop of honey, and out of every passing hour a drop of eternal life.

"And then--I know it truly--be my life's day longer or shorter, bear it
a joyful or a gloomy colour,

    The day will never endure so long
    But at length the evening cometh.

The evening in which I may go home--home to my son, my summer-child! And
then--Oh then shall I perhaps acknowledge the truth of that prophetic
word which has so often animated my soul: 'For behold I create new
heavens and a new earth; and the former shall not be remembered nor come
into mind. But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create.'

"I have wept much whilst I have written this, but my heart has peace. It
is now late. I will creep in to my Ernst, and I feel that I shall sleep
calmly by his side.

"Good-night, my Cecilia."




CHAPTER IX.

NEW ADVERSITIES.


It was afternoon. The sisters were busily quilting Louise's bridal
bed-cover; because at the end of May, as was determined in the family
council, that she was to be married. The coverlet was of green silk, and
a broad wreath of leafy oak branches formed its border. This pattern had
occasioned a great deal of care and deliberation; but now, also, what
joy did it not give rise to, and what ever-enduring admiration of the
tasteful, the distinguished, the indescribably good effect which it
produced, especially when seen from one side! Gabriele, to be sure,
would have made sundry little objections relative to the connexion of
the leaves, but Louise would not allow that there was any weight in
them: "The border," said she, "is altogether charming!"

Gabriele had placed a full-blown monthly rose in the light locks of the
bride, and had arranged with peculiar grace, around the plaited hair at
the back of her head, the green rose-leaves like a garland. The effect
was lovely, as at this time the sun-light fell upon her head, and her
countenance had more than ordinary charm; the cheeks a high colour; the
eyes a clearer blue, as they were often raised from the green
rose-wreath and directed towards the window. Jacobi, the new pastor, was
expected that evening.

Gabriele went up to her mother, and besought her to notice how well
Louise looked, and the rose, how becoming it was to her! The mother
kissed her, but forgot to notice Louise in looking at the lovely face of
"the little lady."

The industrious up-and-down picking of the needles accompanied the
joyful conversation of the sisters.

Now they talked about the management of the living; now about the
school; now about milk, and now about cheese. They settled about
household matters; about mealtimes; the arrangement of the table, and
such like. In many things Louise intended to follow the example of home;
in others, she should do differently. "People must advance with the
age." She intended that there should be great hospitality in the
parsonage-house--that was Jacobi's pleasure. Some one of her own family
she hoped to have always with her;--an especial wing should be built for
beloved guests. She would go every Sunday to church, to hear her husband
preach or sing the service. If the old wives came to the parsonage with
eggs, or other little presents, they should always be well entertained,
and encouraged to come again. All sick people should be regaled with
Louise's elixir, and all misdoers should be more or less reproved by
her. She would encourage all, to the very best of her power, to read, to
be industrious, to go to church, and to plant trees. Every Sunday
several worthy peasants should be invited with their wives to dine at
the parsonage. If the ladies of the Captain and the Steward came to
visit her, the coffee-pot should be immediately set on, and the
card-table prepared. Every young peasant girl should live in service a
whole year at the parsonage before she was married, in order to learn
how to work, and how to behave herself.--N. B. This would be wages
enough for her. At all marriages the Pastor and his wife would always be
present, the same at christenings; they would extend their hand in
sponsorship over the youth, that all might grow up in good-breeding and
the fear of God. At Midsummer and in harvest-time there should be a
dance, and great merry-making at the parsonage for the people--but
without brandy;--for the rest, nothing should be wanting:

    None she forgets, the mistress of the feast,
    The beer flows free, the bunch of keys it jingles,
    And, without pause, goes on the stormy dance!

Work should be found for all beggars at the parsonage, and then food;
for lazy vagabonds a passing lecture, and then--march! And thus, by
degrees, would preparation be made for the Golden Age.

Ah! Ruin to the golden plans and to the golden age which they planned!
Two letters which were delivered to Louise put a sudden end to them all!
One of the letters was from Jacobi, was very short, and said only that
the parsonage was quite gone from him; but that Louise would not blame
him on that account, as soon as she understood the whole affair.

      "I long for you inexpressibly," continued Jacobi, "but I must
      postpone my arrival in X. in order to pay my respects to his
      Excellency O----, who is detained in P. from an attack of gout,
      which seized him on his journey from Copenhagen to Stockholm. But
      by the 6th of May I hope certainly to be with you. I have new
      plans, and I long to lay down all my feelings and all my thoughts
      on your true breast. My Louise! I will no longer wait and seek.
      Since fortune perpetually runs out of my way, I will now take a
      leap and catch it, and in so doing trust in heaven, in you, and
      lastly also--in myself. But you must give me your hand. If you
      will do that, beloved, I shall soon be much happier than now, and
      eternally,

      "Your tenderly devoted,           "J. Jacobi."

The other letter was from an unknown hand--evidently a woman's hand, and
was as follows:

"Do not hate me, although I have stood in the way of your happiness. Do
not hate me--for I bless you and the noble man with whom you have united
your fate. He is my benefactor, and the benefactor of my husband and my
children. Oh, these children whose future he has made sure, they will
now call on heaven to give a double measure of happiness to him and you
for that which he has so nobly renounced. The object of my writing is to
obtain your forgiveness, and to pour forth the feelings of a grateful
heart to those who can best reward my benefactor. Will you be pleased on
this account to listen to the short, but uninteresting relation of a
condition, which, at the same time, is as common as it is mournful?

"Perhaps Mr. Jacobi may at some time or other have mentioned my husband
to you. He was for several years Jacobi's teacher, and each was much
attached to the other. My husband held the office of schoolmaster in W.,
with honour, for twenty years. His small income, misfortunes which befel
us, a quick succession of children, made our condition more oppressive
from year to year, and increased the debt which from the very time when
we settled down first we were obliged to incur. My husband sought after
a pastoral cure, but he could have recourse to none of those arts which
are now so almost universally helpful, and which often conduct the
hunter after fortune, and the mean-spirited, rather than the deserving,
to the gaol of their wishes; he was too simple for that, too modest, and
perhaps also too proud.

"During the long course of years he had seen his just hopes deceived,
and from year to year the condition of his family become more and more
melancholy. Sickness had diminished his ability to work, and the fear of
not being able to pay his debts gnawed into his health, which was not
strong, and the prospect--of his nine unprovided-for children! I know I
should deeply affect your heart, if I were to paint to you the picture
of this family contending with want; but my tears would blot my writing.
Jacobi can do it--he has seen it, he has understood it; for this picture
which I have so carefully concealed from every other eye--this pale,
family misery I revealed to him, for I was in despair!

"The name of my husband stood on the list of candidates for the living
of T----. He had three-fold the legally-demanded requisites of Jacobi,
and was, over and above, known and beloved by the parish; all the
peasants capable of voting, openly declared their intention of choosing
him. Two great landed proprietors, however, had the ultimate decision:
Count D., and Mr. B. the proprietor of the mines, could, if they two
were agreed, they two alone, elect the pastor. They also acknowledged
the esteem in which they held my husband, and declared themselves
willing to unite in the general choice.

"For the first time in many years did we venture to look up to a
brighter future. Presently, however, we learnt that a powerful patron of
Mr. Jacobi had turned the whole scale in his favour, and that it would
be soon decided; the two great proprietors had promised their votes to
him, and our condition was more hopeless than ever.

"The day of nomination approached. I did not venture to speak with my
strictly conscientious husband of the design which I cherished. I had
heard much said of Jacobi's excellent character; I was a distracted wife
and mother. I sought out Jacobi, and spoke to him out of the depths of
my heart, spoke to his sense of right--to his sense of honour; I showed
him how the affair stood for us before he disturbed it, by means which
could not be justly called honourable. I feared that my words were
bitter, but all the more angel-like was it in Jacobi to hear me with
calmness. I pictured to him our present condition; told him how he might
save us from misery, and besought him to do it.

"My prayer at first was almost wild, and in the beginning Jacobi seemed
almost to think it so, but he heard me out; he let me conduct him to the
house of his former teacher, saw the consuming anxiety depicted on his
pale emaciated countenance; saw that I had exaggerated nothing; he wept,
pressed my hand with a word of consolation, and went out hastily.

"The day of nomination came. Jacobi renounced all claims. My husband was
elected to the living in T----. Good God! how it sounded in our ears and
in our hearts! For a long time we could not believe it. After fifteen
years of deceived hopes we hardly dared to believe in such happiness. I
longed to embrace the knees of my benefactor, but he was already far
distant from us. A few friendly lines came from him, which reconciled my
husband to his happiness, and Jacobi's renunciation, and which made the
measure of his noble behaviour full. I have not yet been able to thank
him; but you, his amiable bride, say to him----"

We omit the outpourings which closed this letter; they proceeded from a
warm, noble heart, overflowing with happiness and gratitude.

The needles fell from the fingers of the sisters as the mother, at
Louise's request, read this letter aloud, and astonishment, sympathy,
and a kind of admiring pleasure might be read in their looks. They all
gazed one on the other with silent and tearful eyes.

Gabriele was the first who broke silence: "So, then, we shall keep our
Louise with us yet longer," said she gaily, while she embraced her; and
all united cordially in the idea.

"But," sighed Leonore, "it is rather a pity, on account of our wedding
and our parsonage; we had got all so beautifully arranged."

Louise shed a few quiet tears, but evidently not merely over the
disappointed expectation. Later in the evening the mother talked with
her, and endeavoured to discover what were her feelings under these
adverse circumstances.

Louise replied, with all her customary candour, that at first it had
fallen very heavily upon her. "I had now," continued she, "fixed my
thoughts so much on an early union with Jacobi; I saw so much in my new
condition which would be good and joyful for us all. But though this is
now--and perhaps for ever, at an end, yet I do not exactly know if I
wish it otherwise; Jacobi has behaved so right, so nobly right, I feel
that I now prize him higher, and love him more than ever!"

It was difficult to the Judge not to be more cheerful than common this
evening. He was inexpressibly affectionate towards his eldest daughter;
he was charmed with the way in which she bore her fate, and it seemed to
him as if she had grown considerably.

On the following day they quietly went on again with the quilting of the
bed-cover, whilst Gabriele read aloud; and thus "the childhood of Eric
Menved" diverted with its refreshing magic power all thoughts from the
parsonage and its lost paradise to the rich middle age of Denmark, and
to its young king Eric.




CHAPTER X.

NEW VIEWS AND NEW SCHEMES.


Jacobi was come: Gabriele complained jestingly to her mother, "that the
brother-in-law-elect had almost overturned her, the little
sister-in-law-elect, in order to fly to his Louise."

Louise received Jacobi with more than customary cordiality; so did the
whole family. That which Jacobi had lost in worldly wealth he seemed to
have won in the esteem and love of his friends; and it was the secret
desire of all to indemnify him, as it were, for the loss of the
parsonage. Jacobi on this subject had also his own peculiar views; and
after he had refreshed himself both with the earthly and the "angels'
food," which Louise served up to him in abundance, and after he had had
a conference of probably three hours' length with her, the result of the
same was laid before the parents, who looked on the new views thus
opened to them not without surprise and disquiet.

It was Jacobi's wish and intention now immediately to celebrate his
marriage with Louise, and afterwards to go to Stockholm, where he
thought of commencing a school for boys. To those who knew that all
Jacobi's savings amounted to a very inconsiderable capital; that his
yearly income was only fifty crowns; that he had displeased his only
influential patron; that his bride brought him no dowry; and thus, that
he had nothing on which to calculate excepting his own ability to
work--to all those then who knew thus much, this sudden establishment
had some resemblance to one of those romances with their "_diner de man
coeur, et souper de mon ame_," which is considered in our days to be
so infinitely insipid.

But Jacobi, who had already arranged and well considered his plans, laid
them with decision and candour before the parents, and besought their
consent that he might as soon as possible be able to call Louise his
wife. Elise gasped for breath; the Judge made sundry objections, but for
every one of these Jacobi had a reasonable and well-devised refutation.

"Are Jacobi's plans yours also, Louise?" asked the Judge, after a
momentary silence; "are you both agreed?"

Louise and Jacobi extended a hand to each other; looked on each other,
and then on the father, with tearful, yet with calm and assured eyes.

"You are no longer children," continued the father; "you know what you
are undertaking. But have you well considered?"

Both assented that they had. Already, before there had been any
expectation of the living, they had thought on this plan.

"It is a fatiguing life that you are stepping into," continued the
Judge, seriously, "and not the least so for you, Louise. The result of
your husband's undertaking will depend for the greatest part on you.
Will you joyfully, and without complaint, endure that which it will
bring with it; will you, from your heart, take part in his day's work?"

"Yes, that I will!" replied Louise, with entire and hearty confidence.

"And you, Jacobi," continued he, with unsteady voice, "will you be
father and mother and sisters to her? Will you promise me that she
neither now, nor in the future, so far as in you lies, shall miss the
paternal home?"

"God help me! so certainly as I will exert myself to effect it, she
shall not!" answered Jacobi with emotion, and gave his hand to the
Judge.

"Go then, children," exclaimed he, "and ask the blessing of your
mother--mine you shall have," and with tearful eyes he clasped them in
his arms.

Elise followed the example of her husband. She felt now that Louise and
Jacobi's firm devotion to each other; their willingness to work; and
their characters, so excellent, and beyond this, so well suited to each
other, were more secure pledges of happiness than the greatest worldly
treasure. With respect to the time of the marriage, however, she made
serious objections. All that the parents could give to their daughter
was a tolerably handsome outfit; and this could not, by any possibility,
be so speedily prepared. Louise took her mother's view of the question,
and Jacobi saw himself, although reluctantly, compelled to agree that it
should remain as at first arranged, namely, for the second day in
Whitsuntide, which, in this year, fell at the end of May.

After this the betrothed hastened to the sisters to communicate to them
the new views and schemes. There was many an "Oh!" and "Ah!" of
astonishment; many a cordial embrace; and then, of course, what industry
in the oak-leaf garland!

But as the mother at the usual time came in, she saw plainly that "the
little lady" was somewhat impatient towards the brother-in-law-elect,
and but little edified by his plans.

From that kind of sympathy which exists between minds, even when not a
single word is spoken, especially between persons who are dear to each
other, the dissatisfaction of Gabriele took possession also of the
mother, who began to discover that Jacobi's plans were more and more
idle and dangerous. Thus when Jacobi, not long afterwards, sought to
have a _tete-a-tete_ with her, in order to talk about his and Louise's
plans, she could not help saying that the more she thought about the
undertaking the more foolish did it appear to be.

To which Jacobi answered gaily, "Heaven is the guardian of all fools!"

Elise recollected at that moment how it had fared with a person with
whom she was acquainted, who hoped for this guardianship in an
undertaking that in most respects resembled Jacobi's, yet nothing had
prevented all his affairs from going wrong altogether, and at length
ending in bankruptcy and misery. Elise related this to Jacobi.

"Have you not read, mother," replied he, "a wise observation which
stands at the end of a certain medical work?"

"No," said she; "what observation is it?"

"That what cured the shoemaker killed the tailor," said Jacobi.

Elise could not help laughing, and called him a conceited shoemaker.
Jacobi laughed too, kissed Elise's hand, and then hastened to mingle in
the group of young people, who assembled themselves round the tea-table
to see and to pass judgment on an extraordinary kind of tea-bread
wherewith Louise would welcome her bridegroom, and which, according to
her opinion, besides the freshest freshness, was possessed of many
wonderful qualities.

Whilst at tea, the mother whispered slyly into Louise's ear as Jacobi
put sugar into his tea, "My dear child, there will be a deal of sugar
used in your house--your husband will not be frugal."

Louise whispered back again, "But he will not grumble because too much
sugar is used in the house. So let him take it then, let him take it!"

Both laughed.

Later in the evening, as the mother saw Jacobi dance the gallopade with
Louise and Gabriele, whilst he made all happy with his joy, and his eyes
beamed with life and goodness, she thought to herself--even virtue has
her carelessness; and she was well satisfied with his plans.

One day Jacobi related the particulars of his audience with his
Excellency O----, at P., to Louise and her mother; his relation was as
follows:

"When I came up into the saloon the Bishop N. was coming backwards, with
low bows, out of the chamber of his Excellency. Within, a powerful voice
was heard speaking polite and jocular words, and immediately afterwards
his Excellency himself, with his foot wrapped in a woollen sock,
accompanied the Bishop out. The lofty figure, clothed now in a
dark-green morning coat, seemed to me more imposing than ever. He swung
a stick in his hand, upon which a grey parrot was sitting, which, while
it strove to maintain its balance, screamed with all its might after the
Bishop, 'Adieu to thee! adieu to thee!'

"The sunshine which was diffused over the expressive countenance of his
Excellency as he came out of his room, vanished the moment he saw me (I
had already informed him by letter of the use I had made of his
goodness), and a severe repulsive glance was the only greeting which I
received. When the Bishop at length, accompanied by the parting
salutations of the parrot, had left, his Excellency motioned the
servants out, and riveted upon me his strong, bright, grey eyes, and
with an actually oppressive look inquired short and sharp, 'What want
you, Sir?'

"I had never seen him behave thus to me before, and whilst I endeavoured
to overcome a really choking sensation, I answered, 'I would thank your
Excellency for the goodness which--'

"'Which you have thrown away as if it were a very trifle,' interrupted
his Excellency. 'You must have a confounded many livings at command, I
think. You can, perhaps, throw such away on all sides.'

"He spoke these words in a hard, ironical tone. I conjured him to hear
me, and laid before him shortly, but with the utmost clearness, the
reasons which had compelled me to give up the good fortune which his
favour had procured for me. I concluded by saying, that the only
consolation which I had for my loss, and the danger of having displeased
my benefactor, was the feeling that I had done my duty, and acted
according to my conscience, and the persuasion that I had acted right.

"'You have acted like a fool!' interrupted his Excellency, with
violence, 'like a regular bedlamite have you behaved yourself! Things
like this, Sir, may do in novels, but in actual life they serve to no
other purpose than to make their actors and all that belong to them
beggars. But you have unpardonably compromised me! The thousand! you
should have thought over all these things and these feelings before you
had obtained my recommendation! Can I know of all supplicants with
poverty, merits, and nine children? On your account in this business I
have written letters, given dinners, made fine speeches, paid
compliments, in order to silence other claimants. I obtained for you
that living, one of the best in the whole bishoprick, and now you have
given it away as if it were a----It is really too bad! Don't come any
more to me, and don't mix me up again in your concerns, that I say to
you! I shall for the future meddle in nothing of the kind. Don't you ask
me ever again for anything!'

"I was wounded, but still more distressed than wounded, and said, 'The
only thing which I shall ask from you, and shall ask for till I obtain
it, is the forgiveness of your Excellency! My error in this affair was
great; but after I had seen it, there was nothing for me to do but to
retrieve it as well as lay in my power, and then to bear the
consequences, even though they be as bitter as I now find them. Never
again shall I make any claim to your goodness--you have already done
more than enough for me. My intention is now to try if I cannot maintain
myself by my own powers as teacher. I intend to establish a school for
boys in Stockholm, whither I shall travel as soon as----'

"'Attempt, and travel, and do whatever you like!' interrupted his
Excellency, 'I don't trouble myself about it. I have occupied myself in
your affairs for the last time! If I were to get for you ten livings,
you would give all away the next moment to the first, best poor devil
that prayed you for them, with his full complement of wife and ten
children!

"'Lundholm, wash me the glass! I never drink out of a glass from which a
Bishop has drunk!'

"His Excellency had already turned his back upon me, and went again into
his chamber cursing his gout, without the slightest parting word to me.
The parrot, however, on the contrary, turned itself about on the stick,
and cried out with all its might, 'Adieu to thee! adieu to thee!'

"With this greeting, perhaps the last in the house of his Excellency, I
retired; but not without, I must confess, stopping a few moments on the
steps, and wetting the stones with my tears. It was not the loss of a
powerful patron which gave me so much pain, but--I had so admired this
man, I had loved him with such an actual devotion; I looked up to him as
to one of the noblest and most distinguished of men. He also seemed
really to like me--at least I thought so; and now all at once he was so
changed, so stern towards me, and as it seemed to me so unreasonable. It
actually gave me pain to find so little that was noble in him, so little
that was just! These were my feelings in those first bitter moments.
When I came to think over the whole event more calmly, I could almost
believe that he had received beforehand an unjust representation of the
whole affair, and that I encountered him while under its influence. Over
and above, he had reason to be dissatisfied with the whole thing, and
then just at that moment a fit of the gout seized him! I have written to
him from this place, and I feel it impossible to give up the hope of
seeing his sentiments mollified towards me."

Louise, however, did not think so favourably of his sentiments; thought
Jacobi quite too indulgent, and was altogether irritated against his
Excellency.

"It is quite the best not to trouble oneself about him," said she.

Jacobi smiled. "His poor Excellency!" said he.




CHAPTER XI.

A RELAPSE.


Whilst May wrote its romance in leaves and life; whilst Jacobi and
Louise wrote many sweet chapters of theirs in kisses; whilst all the
house was in motion on account of the marriage, and joy and mirth sprang
up to life like butterflies in the spring sun, one glance was ever
darker, one cheek ever paler, and that was Eva's.

People say commonly that love is a game for the man, and a
life's-business for the woman. If there be truth in this, it may arise
from this cause, that practical life makes commonly too great a demand
on the thoughts and activity of the man for him to have much time to
spend on love, whilst on the contrary the woman is too much occupied
with herself to have the power of withdrawing herself from the pangs of
love (may the Chamberlain's lady forgive us talking so much about man
and woman! It has not been our lot here in the world to scour either a
room or a kettle, though, to speak the truth, we do not consider
ourselves incapable of so doing). Eva found nothing in her peaceful home
which was powerful enough to abstract her from the thoughts and feelings
which for so long had been the dearest to her heart. The warm breezes of
spring, so full of love, fanned up that glimmering fire; so did also
that innocent life of the betrothed, so full of cordiality and
happiness; so did also a yet more poisonous wind. One piece of news
which this spring brought was the betrothal of Major R. with one of the
beauties of the capital, a former rival of Eva--news which caused a deep
wound to her heart. She wished to conceal, she wished to veil what was
yet remaining of a love which no one had favoured, and over which she
could not now do other than blush; she had determined never again to
burden and grieve her family with her weakness, her sorrows; she would
not disturb the peace, the cheerfulness, which now again began to reign
in the family after the misfortunes which had shaken it; but under the
endeavour to bear her burden alone, her not strong spirit gave way. She
withdrew more and more from the family circle; became ever more silent
and reserved; sought for solitude, and was unwilling to have her
solitude disturbed by any one. She even was reserved before Leonore;
although she, like a good angel, stood by her side, resting her soft
eyes upon her with a tender disquiet, endeavouring to remove from her
every annoyance, taking upon herself every painful occupation, and
evincing towards her all that anxious care which a mother shows to a
sick child. Eva permitted all this, and was daily more and more consumed
by her untold mental sufferings. The engrossing cares which at this time
occupied the family, prevented almost every one from paying attention to
Eva's state of mind, and thus she was often left to herself.

For several of the last evenings Eva had gone down into her own chamber
directly after tea--for in their present dwelling some of the daughters
occupied the ground-floor--and on the plea of headache had excused
herself from again returning to her family during the evening. It was a
principle of the parents never to make use of any other means of
compulsion with their children, now that they were grown up, than love,
be it in great things or in small. But then love had a great power in
this family; and as the daughters knew that it was the highest delight
of their father to see them all round him in an evening, it became a
principle with them neither to let temper nor any other unnecessary
cause keep them away. As now, however, this was the third evening on
which Eva had been absent, the father became uneasy, and the mother went
down to her, whilst the rest of the family and some friends who were
with them were performing a little concert together. But Eva was not to
be found in her chamber, and the mother was hastening back again, full
of disquiet, when she met Ulla, who was going to make the beds.

"Where is Eva?" asked she, with apparent indifference.

Ulla started, was red and then pale, and answered hesitatingly, "She
is--gone out--I fancy."

"Where is she gone?" asked Elise, suddenly uneasy.

"I fancy--to the grave of the young master," returned Ulla.

"To the grave?--so late! Has she gone there for several evenings?"
inquired the mother.

"This is now the third evening," said Ulla: "ah, best gracious lady, it
goes really to my heart--it is not justly right there!"

"What is not justly right, Ulla?"

"That Mamselle Eva goes out to the grave so late, and does not come back
again till it has struck ten, and that she will be so much alone,"
returned Ulla. "Yesterday Mamselle Leonore even cried, and begged of her
not to go, or to allow her to go with her. But Mamselle Eva would not
let her, but said she would not go, and that Mamselle Leonore should go
up-stairs, and leave her alone; but as soon as Mamselle Leonore had left
her she went out for all that, with only a thin kerchief over her head.
And this evening she is gone out also. Ah! it must be a great grief
which consumes her, for she gets paler every day!"

Greatly disturbed by what she had heard, Elise hastened to seek her
husband. She found him deeply engaged over his books and papers, but he
left all the moment he saw the troubled countenance of his wife. She
related to him what she had heard from Ulla, and informed him that it
was her intention to go now immediately to the churchyard.

"I will go with you," said the Judge, "only tell Louise to defer supper
for us till we come back; I fancy nobody will miss us, they are so
occupied by their music."

No sooner said than done. The husband and wife went out together; it was
half-past nine in the middle of May, but the air was cold, and a damp
mist fell.

"Good heavens!" said the Judge softly, "she'll get her death of cold if
she stops in the churchyard so late, and in air like this!"

As they approached the churchyard, they saw that a female form passed
hastily through the gate. It was not Eva, for she sat on the grave of
her brother! she sat there immovably upon the earth, and resembled a
ghost. The churchyard was, with this exception, deserted. The figure
which had entered before them, softly approached the grave, and remained
standing at the distance of a few paces.

"Eva!" said a beseeching mournful voice; it was Leonore. The parents
remained standing behind some thick-leaved fir-trees. On precisely the
same spot had the father stood once before, and listened to a
conversation of a very different kind.

"Eva!" repeated Leonore, with an expression of the most heartfelt
tenderness.

"What do you want with me, Leonore?" asked Eva impatiently, but without
moving. "I have already prayed you to let me alone."

"Ah! I cannot leave you, dear Eva," replied her sister, "why do you sit
here on the ground, on this cold, wet evening? Oh, come home, come home
with me!"

"Do you go home, Leonore! this air is not proper for you! Go home to the
happy, and be merry, with them," returned Eva.

"Do you not remember," tenderly pleaded Leonore, "how I once, many years
ago, was sick both in body and mind? Do you know who it was then that
left the gay in order to comfort me? I prayed her to leave me--but she
went not from me--neither will I now go away from you."

"Ah, go! leave me alone!" repeated Eva, "I stand now alone in the
world!"

"Eva, you distress me!" said her sister, "you know that there is no one
in this world that I love like you: I mourned so much when you left us;
the house without you seemed empty, but I consoled myself with the
thought that Eva will soon come back again. You came, and I was so
joyful, for I believed that we should be so happy together. But I have
seen since then of how little consequence I am to you! still I love you
as much as ever, and if you think that I have not sympathised in your
sorrows, that I have not wept with you and for you, you do me certainly
injustice! Ah, Eva, many a night when you have believed perhaps that I
lay in sweet sleep, have I sat at your door, and listened how you wept,
and have wept for you, and prayed for you, but I did not dare to come in
to you because I imagined your heart to be closed to me!" And so saying,
Leonore wept bitterly.

"You are right, Leonore," answered Eva, "much has become closed in me
which once was opened. This feeling, this love for him--oh, it has
swallowed up my whole soul! For some time I believed I should be able to
conquer it--but now I believe so no longer----"

"Do you repent of your renunciation?" asked Leonore;--"it was so noble
of you! Would you yet be united to him!"

"No! no! the time for that is gone by," said Eva. "I would rather die
than that; but you see, Leonore, I loved him so--I have tasted love, and
have felt how rapturous, how divine life might be!--Oh, Leonore, the
bright sun-warm summer-day is not more unlike this misty evening hour,
than the life which I lived for a season is unlike the future which now
lies before me!"

"It seems so to you now, Eva--you think so now," answered her sister;
"but let a little time pass over, and you will see that it will be quite
otherwise; that the painful feelings will subside, and life will clear
up itself before you. Think only how it has already afforded you
pleasure to look up to heaven when the clouds separated themselves, and
you said, 'see how bright it will be! how beautiful the heaven is!' and
your blue eyes beamed with joy and peace, because it was so. Believe me,
Eva, the good time will come again, in which you will thus look up to
heaven, and feel thus joyful, and thus gay!"

"Never!" exclaimed Eva, weeping; "oh, never will that time return! Then
I was innocent, and from that cause I saw heaven above me clear;--now so
much that is bad, so much that is impure has stained my soul--stains it
yet!--Oh, Leonore, if you only knew all that I have felt for some time
you would never love me again! Would you believe it that Louise's
innocent happiness has infused bitterness into my soul; that the gaiety
which has again began to exist in the family has made me feel
bitterness--bitterness towards my own family--my own beloved ones! Oh, I
could detest myself! I have chastised myself with the severest words--I
have prayed with bitter tears, and yet----"

"Dear Eva, you must have patience with yourself," said Leonore, "you
will not----"

"Ah! I am already weary of myself--of my life!" hastily interrupted Eva;
"I am like some one who has already travelled far, who is already spent,
but who must still go on, and can never come to his journey's end. It
seems to me as if I should be a burden to all who belong to me; and when
I have seen you all so happy, so gay one with another, I have felt my
heart and my head burn with bitterness; then have I been obliged to go
out--out into the cold evening dew, and I have longed to repose in the
earth upon which it fell--I have longed to be able to hide myself from
every one--deep, deep in the grave below!"

"But from me," said Leonore, "you will not be able to hide yourself--nor
to go from me, since where you go there will I follow. Oh, what were
life to me if you were to leave it in despair! You would not go alone to
the grave, Eva! I would follow you there--and if you will not allow that
I sit by your side, I will seat myself on the churchyard wall, that the
same evening damps which penetrate you may penetrate me also; that the
same night wind which chills your bosom may chill mine; that I may be
laid by your side and in the same grave with you! And willingly would I
die for you, if--you will not live for me, and for the many who love you
so much! We will try all things to make you happier! God will help us;
and the day will come in which all the bitter things of this time will
seem like a dream, and when all the great and beautiful feelings, and
all the agreeable impressions of life will again revive in you. You will
again become innocent--nay, become more, because virtue is a higher, a
glorified innocence! Oh, Eva! if he whose dust reposes beneath us, if
his spirit invisibly float around us--if he who was better and purer
than all of us, could make his voice audible to us at this moment, he
would certainly join with me in the prayer--'Oh, Eva! live--live for
those who love thee! Mortal life, with all its anguish and its joy, is
soon past--and then it is so beautiful that our life should have caused
joy to one another on earth--it causes joy in heaven! The great
Comforter of all affliction will not turn from thee--only do not thou
turn from _Him!_ Have patience! tarry out thy time! Peace comes, comes
certainly----'"

The words ceased; both sisters had clasped their arms around each other,
and mingled their tears. Eva's head rested on Leonore's shoulder as she,
after a long pause, spoke in a feeble voice:

"Say no more, Leonore; I will do what you wish. Take me--make of me what
you will--I am too weak to sustain myself at this moment--support me--I
will go with you--you are my good angel!"

Other guardian angels approached just then, and clasped the sisters in a
tender embrace. Conducted by them, Eva returned home. She was
altogether submissive and affectionate, and besought earnestly for
forgiveness from all. She was very much excited by the scenes which had
just occurred, drank a composing draught which her mother administered,
and then listened to Leonore, who read to her, as she lay in bed, till
she fell asleep.

The Judge paced up and down his chamber uneasily that night, and spoke
thus to his wife, who lay in bed:

"A journey to the baths, and that in company with you, would be quite
the best thing for her. But I don't know how I can now do without you;
and more than that, where the money is to come from! We have had great
losses, and see still great expenses before us: in the first place
Louise's marriage--and then, without a little money in hand, we cannot
let our girls go from home; and the rebuilding of our house. But we must
borrow more money--I see no other way. Eva must be saved; her mind must
be enlivened and her body strengthened, let it cost what it may. I must
see and borrow----"

"It is not necessary, Ernst," said Elise; and the Judge, making a sudden
pause, gazed at her with astonishment; whilst she, half raising herself
in bed, looked at him with a countenance beaming with joy. "Come,"
continued she, "and I will recall something to your memory which
occurred fifteen years ago."

"What sort of a history can that be?" said he, smiling gaily, whilst he
seated himself on the bed, and took the hand which Elise extended to
him.

"Five-and-twenty years ago," began she.

"Five-and-twenty years!" interrupted he, "Heaven help me! you promised
to go no farther back than fifteen."

"Patience, my love!--this is part the first of my story. Do you not
remember, then," said she, "how, five-and-twenty years ago, at the
commencement of our married life, you made plans for a journey into the
beautiful native land of your mother? I see now, Ernst, that you
remember it. And how we should wander there you planned, and enjoy our
freedom and God's lovely nature. You were so joyful in the prospect of
this; but then came adversity, and cares, and children, and never-ending
labour for you, so that our Norwegian journey retreated year by year
more into the background. Nevertheless, it remained like a point of
light to you in the future; but now, for some time, you seem to have
forgotten it; yes, for you have given up all your own pleasures in
labouring for your family; have forsaken all your own enjoyments, your
own plans, for your own sphere of activity and your home. But I have not
forgotten the Norwegian journey, and in fifteen years have obtained the
means of its accomplishment."

"In fifteen years!--what do you mean?" asked he.

"Now I am arrived," she answered, "at part the second of my history. Do
you still remember, Ernst, that fifteen years ago we were not so happy
as we are now? You have forgotten? Well, so much the better; I scarcely
remember it myself any more, for the expansive rind of love has grown
over the black scar. What I, however, know is, that at that time I was
not so properly at home in actual life, and did not rightly understand
all the good that it offered me, and that to console myself on that
account I wrote a romance. But now it happened that by reason of my
novel I neglected my duties to my lord and husband--for the gentlemen
are decidedly unskilled in serving themselves----"

"Very polite!" interposed the Judge, smiling.

"Be content!" continued she: "now it happened that one evening his tea
and my novel came into collision--a horrible history followed. But I
made a vow in my heart that one of these days the two rivals should
become reconciled. Now you see my manuscript--you had the goodness to
call it rubbish--I sent to a very enlightened man, to a man of
distinguished taste and judgment, and thus it befel, he found taste in
the rubbish; and, what say you to it? paid me a pretty little sum for
permission to bring it before the world. Do not look so grave, Ernst; I
have never again taken up the pen to write novels; my own family has
found me enough to do; and besides, I never again could wish to do
anything which was not pleasant to you. You have displaced all rivals,
do you see! But this one I decided should be the means of your taking
the Norwegian journey. The little sum of two hundred crowns banco which
it produced me have I placed in the savings' bank for this purpose; and
in fifteen years it has so much augmented itself, that it will perfectly
accomplish that object; and if ever the time for its employment will
come, it is now. The desire for travelling is gone from me--I covet now
only rest. But you and----"

"And do you think," said the Judge, "that I shall take your----"

"Oh, Ernst! why should you not?" exclaimed she; "if you could but know
what joy the thought of this has prepared for me! The money, which from
year to year increased, in order to give you pleasure, has been to me
like a treasure of hidden delight, which has many a time strengthened
and animated my soul! Make me only perfectly happy by allowing yourself
to have enjoyment from it. Take it, my Ernst, and make yourself pleasure
with it, this summer; I pray you to do so, on account of our children.
Take Eva with you, and if possible Leonore also. Nothing would refresh
Eva's soul more than such a journey with you and Leonore in a
magnificent and beautiful country. The money can be obtained in a
month's time, and a few months' leave of absence cannot possibly be
denied to one who has spent more than thirty years in incessant service
for the state; and when Louise and her husband have left us, and spring
and nature are in their very loveliest, then you shall set out: you
shall be refreshed after so many years of painful labour, and the
wounded heart of our sick child shall be healed."




CHAPTER XII.

PLANS AND COUNTER PLANS.


Eva entered her father's study the next morning. He immediately left his
work, received her with the greatest tenderness, drew her to his side on
the sofa, and placing one arm round her waist, took her hand in his, and
inquired, with a searching glance, "Do you want anything from me, my
child? Can I do anything for you? Tell me!"

Encouraged by his kindness, Eva described the state of her mind to her
father, and explained how she wished to commence a more active life in
order to overcome her weakness, and to regain strength and quiet. The
situation of teacher in a girl's school in the city was vacant, and she
wished immediately to take it, but only for the summer, during which
time she and Leonore would prepare themselves to open a school in
autumn. It was a plan of which they had long thought, and which would
afford them a useful and independent life. Eva besought the acquiescence
of her father to this proposition.

"Leonore and I," continued she, "have this morning talked a deal on the
subject; we hope that with the counsel and countenance upon which we may
reckon, to be able to make it succeed. Ah, father! I am become quite
anxious about it on account of my own weakness. I must speedily resort
to external means, that I may overcome it. I will become active; I will
work; and whilst thus employed I shall forget the past and myself, and
only live for the happiness of those who love me, and to whom I have
caused so much trouble."

"My child! my dear child, you are right; you do rightly!" said the
father, deeply affected, and clasping his daughter in his arms; "your
wish shall be granted, and whatever is in my power will I do to forward
your plans. What a many institutions for education will there not
proceed from our house! But there is no harm at all in that--there are
no more useful institutions on the face of the earth! One reservation,
however, I must make from your and Leonore's determination. You may
dedicate the autumn and the winter to your school--but the summer you
must devote to your father!--and Madame B. may find a teacher where she
can, only not from my family--for I am not now in a condition to furnish
her one."

"Ah, father," said she, "every unemployed hour is a burden to me!"

"We will bear the burden together, my child! Leonore, I, and you, in our
wanderings towards the west. In a few weeks I am thinking of undertaking
a journey, after which I have longed for these many years; I will visit
the beautiful native land of my mother. Will you, Eva, breathe this
fresh mountain air with me? I should have very little pleasure in the
journey alone, but in company with you and Leonore it will make me young
again! Our heads are become bowed, my child, but in God's beautiful
nature we will lift them up again! You will go with me--is it not so?
Good! Come then with me to your mother, for it is she alone who has
managed this journey!"

With an arm round the waist of his daughter the Judge now went to his
wife; they found Leonore with her; nor was ever a quartet of Mozart's
more harmonious than that which was now performed among them.

Eva was uncommonly animated all day, but in the evening she was in a
burning fever. A feeling of anxiety went through the whole family; they
feared that a new grave was about to be opened, and disquiet was painted
on all countenances. Eva demanded, with a fervour which was not without
its feverish excitement, that the Assessor should be fetched. He came
immediately.

"Forgive me!" exclaimed Eva, extending her hand to him, "I have been so
ungrateful to you! But my heart was so disordered that it was quite
changed; but it will recover itself again. Leonore has given it health.
I am very ill now; my hands burn, my head aches! Give me my little
work-box--that I may hold it between my hands--that I may lean my head
upon it--else I shall be no better! You, my friend, will cure me that I
may again make my family happy!"

The Assessor dried his tears. As Eva leaned her head on the work-box,
she talked earnestly, but not quite coherently of the plans for the
future.

"Very good, very good," said the physician, interrupting her; "I too
will be of the establishment; I will give instruction in botany to the
whole swarm of girls, and between us we will drive them out into the
woods and into the fields, that we may see them learn all that is
beautiful in the world. But now, Eva, you must not talk any more--but
you must empty this glass."

Eva took the composing draught willingly, and was soon calmer. She was
the most obedient and amiable of patients, and showed a confidence in
her old friend which penetrated his heart. He would have sate night and
day by her bed.

Eva's sickness was a violent fever, which confined her to her bed for
nearly three weeks, and occasioned her family great uneasiness. This
sickness was, however, very beneficial for herself and for the health of
her mind; but still more beneficial was the infinite love with which she
saw herself encompassed on all sides.

One day in the beginning of her convalescence, as she sate up and saw
herself surrounded by all the comforts which love and home could gather
about a beloved sufferer, she said to Leonore as she leaned upon her,
"Ah, who would not be willing to live when they see themselves so
beloved!"

In the meantime Louise's wedding-day was approaching nearer.




CHAPTER XIII.

A SURPRISE.


Three days before the wedding a grand travelling-carriage drawn by four
horses rolled through the streets of the town of X----, and from the
prodigious clatter which it made drew all the inquisitive among the
inhabitants to their windows.

"Did you see, dear sister," cried the general shopkeeper Madame Suur to
Madame Bask, the wife of the postmaster, "the grand travelling-carriage
that has just gone by? Did you see the sweet youth that sate on the left
and looked so genteel, with his snow-white neck and open shirt-collar?
Lawk! how he looked at me--so sweet as he was! How like a real prince he
looked!"

"Dear sister!" answered the postmistress, "then you did not see the
gentleman who sate on the right? He was a grand gentleman, that I can
positively assert! He sate so stately leaning back in the carriage, and
so wrapped up in grand furs that one could not see the least bit of his
face. Positively he is a great somebody!"

"I got a shimmer of the youth," said the grey-brown handed and
complexioned Annette P----, as she glanced up from her coarse sewing,
with such a look as probably a captive casts who has glanced out of his
prison into a freer and more beautiful state of existence; "he looked so
calm, with large blue eyes, out of the plate-glass windows of the
carriage! as pure and grave he looked as one of God's angels!"

"Ay, we know to be sure how the angels look!" said the postmistress,
snubbingly, and with a severe glance at Annette; "but that's absolutely
all one! Yet I should like to know what grandees they are. I should not
be a bit surprised if it were his royal highness or gracious
crown-prince, who with his eldest son is travelling _incondito_ through
the country."

"Dear sister says what is true," returned Madame Suur. "Yes, it must be
so! for he looked like a regular prince, the sweet youth, as he sate
there and glanced at me through the window; really, he smiled at me!"

"Nay, my ladies, we've got some genteel strangers in the city!"
exclaimed Mr. Alderman Nyberg as he came into the room.

"Have they stopped here?" cried both ladies at once.

"My wife saw the carriage draw up and----"

"Nay, heaven defend us! Mr. Alderman what are you thinking about that
you don't make a stir in the city and send a deputation to wait upon
them? For goodness sake let the city-council come together!"

"How? What? Who?" asked the Alderman, opening wide his grey eyes like
some one just awoke out of sleep; "can it indeed----"

"Yes, very likely his royal highness himself in his own proper
person--possibly his majesty!"

"Gracious heavens!" said the Alderman, and looked as if the town-house
had fallen.

"But speed off in all the world's name, and run and look about you, and
don't stand here staring like a dead figure!" exclaimed the
postmistress, quite hoarse, while she shook up and down her great mass
of humanity on the creaking sofa. "Dear sister, cannot you also get on
your legs a little, and Annette too, instead of sitting there
hum-drumming with her sewing, out of which nothing comes. Annette run
quick, and see what it is all about--but come back in an instant-minute
and tell me, poor soul, whom our Lord has smitten with calamity and
sickness--nay, nay, march pancake!"

The Alderman ran; dear Sister Suur ran; Mamselle Annette ran; we ran
also, dear reader, in order to see a large-made gentleman somewhat in
years, and a youth of eleven, of slender figure and noble appearance,
dismount from the travelling carriage. It was his Excellency O---- and
his youngest son.

They alighted and went into the house of the Franks. His Excellency
entered the drawing-room without suffering himself to be announced, and
introduced himself to Elise, who though surprised by the visit of the
unexpected stranger, received him with all her accustomed graceful
self-possession; lamenting the absence of her husband, and thinking to
herself that Jacobi had not in the least exceeded the truth in his
description of the person of his Excellency.

His Excellency was now in the most brilliant of humours, and discovered,
as by sudden revelation, that he and Elise were related; called her "my
cousin" all the time, and said the handsomest things to her of her
family, of whom he had heard so much, but more especially of a certain
young man on whom he set the highest value. Further he said, that
however much he must rejoice in having made the personal acquaintance of
his cousin, still he must confess that his visit at this time had
particular reference to the young man of whom he had spoken; and with
this he inquired after Jacobi.

Jacobi was sent for, and came quickly, but not without evident emotion
in his countenance. His Excellency O----approached him, extended his
hand cheerfully, and said, "I rejoice to see you; my cursed gout has not
quite left me; but I could not pass so near the city without going a
little out of my way in order to wish you happiness on your approaching
marriage, and also to mention an affair--but you must introduce me to
your bride."

Jacobi did it with glowing eyes. His Excellency took Louise's hand, and
said, "I congratulate you on your happiness, on being about to have one
of the best and the most estimable of men for your husband!" And with
these words he riveted a friendly penetrating glance upon her, and then
kissed her hand. Louise blushed deeply, and looked happier than when she
agreed to her own proposition of not troubling herself about his
Excellency.

Upon the other daughters also who were present, his keen eyes were fixed
with a look which seemed rather to search into soul than body, and
rested with evident satisfaction on the beautifully blushing Gabriele.

"I also have had a daughter," said he, slowly, "an only one--but she was
taken from me!"

A melancholy feeling seemed to have gained possession of him, but he
shook it quickly from him, stood up, and went to Jacobi, to whom he
talked in a loud and friendly voice.

"My best Jacobi," said he, "you told me the last time we were together
that you thought of opening a school for boys in Stockholm. I am pleased
with it, for I have proved that your ability as teacher and guide of
youth is of no ordinary kind. I wish to introduce to you a pupil, my
little boy. You will confer upon me a real pleasure if you will be able
to receive him in two months, at which time I must undertake a journey
abroad, which perhaps may detain me long, and would wish to know that
during this my absence my son was in good hands. I wish that he should
remain under your care at least two or three years. You will easily feel
that I should not place in your hands him who is dearest to me in the
world, if I had not the most perfect confidence in you, and therefore I
give you no prescribed directions concerning him. And if prayers can
obtain motherly regard," continued he, turning to Louise, "I would
direct myself with them to you. Take good care of my boy--he has no
longer a mother!"

Louise drew the boy hastily to her, embraced him, and kissed him with
warmth. A smile as of sunshine diffused itself over the countenance of
the father, and certainly no words which Louise could have spoken would
have satisfied him more than this silent but intelligent answer of the
heart. Jacobi stood there with tears in his eyes; he could not bring
forth many words, but his Excellency understood him, and shook him
cordially by the hand.

"May we not have the horses taken out? Will not your Excellency have the
goodness to stay to dine with us?" were the beseeching questions which
were repeated around him.

But however willing his Excellency would have been to do it, it was
impossible. He had promised to dine at Stroe with Count Y----, eighteen
miles distant from the town.

"But breakfast? a little breakfast at least? It should be served in a
moment. The young Count Axel would certainly be glad of a little
breakfast!" asserted Louise, with friendly confidence, who seemed
already to have taken under her protection the future pupil of her
husband.

The young Count Axel did not say no; and the father, whose behaviour
became every moment more cordial and gay, said that a little breakfast
in such company would eat excellently.

Bergstroem prepared with rapture and burning zeal the table for the lofty
guest, who in the mean time chatted with evident satisfaction with Elise
and Jacobi, directing often also his conversation to Louise as if
insensibly to test her; and from their inmost hearts did both mother and
bridegroom rejoice that with her calm understanding she could stand the
test so well.

Gabriele entertained the young Count Axel in one of the windows by
listening to the repeater of his new gold watch, which set the grave and
naturally silent boy at liberty to lead the entertainment in another
way; and Gabriele, who entered into all his ideas, wondered very much
over the wonderful properties of the watch; and let it repeat over and
over again, whilst her lovely and lively smiles and her merry words
called forth more and more the confidence of the young Axel.

Breakfast was ready; was brought in by the happy Bergstroem; was eaten
and praised by his Excellency, who was a connoisseur; a description of
the capitally preserved anchovies was particularly desired from Louise;
and then her health and that of her bridegroom was drunk in Madeira.

Towards the conclusion of the breakfast the Judge came home. The trait
of independence, bordering on pride, which sometimes revealed itself in
Judge Frank's demeanour, and which perhaps was visible at the very time
of his respectful but simple greeting of his Excellency, called forth in
him also a momentary appearance of height. But this pride soon vanished
from both sides. These two men knew and valued each other mutually; and
it was not long before they were so deeply engrossed by conversation,
that his Excellency forgot his journey, not for one only, but for two
hours.

"I lament over Stroe and its dinner," said his Excellency, preparing to
take his departure; "how they must have waited there! But we could not
possibly help it."

After his Excellency had departed, he left behind him a bright
impression on all the family of Franks, not one of whom did not feel
animated in a beneficial manner by his behaviour and his words. Jacobi
in his joy made a high _entre-chat_, and embracing Louise, said, "Now,
Louise, what say you to the man? And we have got a pupil that will draw
at least twenty after him!"

Louise was perfectly reconciled to his Excellency.

From this day forth Bergstroem began a new era; whatever happened in the
family was either before or after the visit of his Excellency.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Ah, then, my goodness! that it should be Excellency O----!" said the
dear sister Bask to the dear sister Suur.

"Yes, just think! That he should come solely, and for no other purpose,
than to visit the Franks, and breakfast there, and stop several hours
there! He is a cousin, of the Judge's lady."

"Her cousin! Bah! no more her cousin than I am the king's cousin;
positively not!"

"Yes, yes! or why else should he have called her 'my gracious cousin?'
And one must confess that there is something refined and genteel about
her--and such hands as she has have I never seen!"

"Hum! There's no art in looking genteel and having beautiful hands, when
one goes about the house like a foolish thing, washing one's hands in
rose-water, and all the livelong day doing not one sensible act. That I
know well enough!"

"Yes, yes! they who will be of any use in their house cannot keep such
hands, and sit the whole day and read romances! I should like to know
how it would have gone with the blessed Suur's baking business--to which
at last he added the grocery--if I had been a genteel lady! Not at all,
because I should not have done it. Sweet sister, know that I once had my
whims--yes, and a turn for scribbling and writing. Yes, so help me
heaven! if it had not been for my little bit of sound sense, which
showed me my folly in time, I might have become a regular learned lady,
another--what do you call her?--Madame de Stael! But when I married the
late Suur I determined to give up all that foolishness, and do honour to
the baking; and now I have quite let my little talent slip away from me,
so that it is as good as buried. But on that account I am, to be sure,
no fitting company for the Franks--think only!--and shall be only less
and less so, if they are always climbing higher and higher."

"Let them climb as high as they will, I don't intend to make obeisances
before them, that I can promise them! that I absolutely will not! It
vexes me enough that Annette is so mad after them. Before one is aware
of it, they will be taking her away from me, skin and hair; and that's
my thanks for all I have lavished upon her! But I'll tell the gentry
that I'm positively determined to make no compliments to them or to
their Excellencies, and that one person is just as good as another!
Positively I'll tell them that!"




CHAPTER XIV.

THE EVENING BEFORE THE WEDDING.


"God bless the little ones! But when one considers how little of a
rarity children are in this world, one has only to open one's mouth to
say so, and people are all up in arms and make such a stir and such an
ado about their little ones! Heart's-dearest! People may call them
angels as much as ever they will, but I would willingly have my knees
free from them! But worst of all is it with the first child in a family!
Oh, it is a happiness and a miracle, and cannot be enough overloaded
with caresses and presents from father and mother, and aunts and
cousins, and all the world. Does it scream and roar--then it is a
budding genius; is it silent--then it is a philosopher in its cradle;
and scarcely is it eight days old but it understands Swedish and almost
German also! And--it bites, the sweet angel!--it has got a tooth! It
bites properly. Ah, it is divine! Then comes the second child:--it is by
far less wonderful already; its cry and its teeth are not half so
extraordinary. The third comes;--it is all over with miracles now! the
aunts begin to shake their heads, and say, 'no lack of heirs in the
house! Nay, nay, may there be only enough to feed them all.' After this
comes a fourth, and a fifth, and a sixth--yes, then people's wits are
set in full play! The parents resign themselves, but the friends defend
themselves! Heart's-dearest, what is to become of it? The house full of
children, there's soon a dozen of them! Poor Mrs. This and This--it
makes one quite weak both in body and mind only to think of it! Yes,
yes, my friends, people don't put these things down in romances, but it
goes on in this way in real life! Yes!"

It was the Chamberlain's lady who preached this little sermon, in the
zeal of her spirit, to the young couple who the next day were to be man
and wife. She ate on this evening Whitsuntide-porridge[19] with the
Franks, and all the while gave sundry lessons for the future. Jacobi
laughed heartily over the history of the children, and endeavoured to
catch Louise's eye; but this was fixed upon the Postillion, which she
was arranging with a very important and grave aspect. The Judge and
Elise looked smilingly on each other, and extended to each other their
hands.

The state of feeling in the family, for the rest of the evening, was
quite rose-coloured. Letters had been received from Petrea which gave
contentment to all her friends, and Eva sate in the family circle with
returning, although as yet pale roses on her cheeks. The Judge sate
between Eva and Leonore, laying out on the map the plan of the summer
tour. They would visit Thistedal, Ringerig, and Tellemark, and would go
through Trondhiem to Norland, where people go to salute the midnight
sun.

Gabriele looked after her flowers, and watered the myrtle tree from
which next morning she would break off sprays wherewith to weave a crown
and garland for Louise. Jacobi sate near the mother, and seemed to have
much to say to her; what it was, however, nobody heard, but he often
conveyed her hand to his lips, and seemed as if he were thanking her for
his life's happiness. He looked gentle and happy. Every thing was
prepared for the morrow, so that this evening would be spent in quiet.

According to Jacobi's wish the marriage was to take place in the church,
and after this they were all to dine _en famille_. In the evening,
however, a large company was to be assembled in the S. saloon, which
with its adjoining garden had been hired for the purpose. This was
according to the wish of the father, who desired that for the last time,
perhaps for many years, his daughter should collect around her all her
acquaintance and friends, and thus should show to them, at the same
time, welcome politeness. He himself, with the help of Jacobi and
Leonore, who was everybody's assistant, had taken upon himself the
arrangement of this evening's festival, that his wife might not be
fatigued and disturbed by it.

At supper the betrothed sat side by side, and Jacobi behaved sometimes
as if he would purposely seize upon his bride's plate as well as his
own, which gave rise to many dignified looks, to settings-to-rights
again, and a deal of merriment besides.

Later in the evening, when they all went to rest, Louise found her
toilet-table covered with presents from bridegroom, parents, sisters,
and friends. A great deal of work was from Petrea. These gifts awakened
in Louise mingled feelings of joy and pain, and as she hastened yet once
again to embrace the beloved ones from whom she was about so soon to
separate, many mutual tears were shed. But evening dew is prophetic of a
bright morrow--that was the case here.

FOOTNOTES:

[19] There is some new kind of porridge for almost every week in the
year in Sweden, with which the table is most religiously served.--M. H.




CHAPTER XV.

THE WEDDING-DAY.


The sun shone bright and warm on that morning of Whit-Monday. Flowers
and leaves glistened in the morning dew; the birds sang; the bells of
the city rang festively and gaily; the myrtle-crown was ready woven
early, and the mother and Leonore were present at the toilet of the
bride. They expected that Jacobi would make his appearance in the
highest state of elegance, and hoped that his appearance would not dim
that of the bride. Louise's sisters made her appearance on this occasion
of more importance than she herself did. Gabriele dressed her hair--she
possessed an actual talent for this art--half-blown rose-buds were
placed in the myrtle wreath; and what with one, and what with another
little innocent art of the toilet, a most happy effect was produced.
Louise looked particularly well in her simple, tasteful, bridal
dress--for the greatest part of the work of her own skilful hands--and
the content, and the beautiful repose which diffused itself over her
countenance, spread a glorification over all.

"You look so pale to-day in your white dress, my little Eva," said
Leonore, as she helped her to dress--"you must have something pink on
your neck to brighten you up, else our bride will be anxious when she
sees you."

"As you will, Leonore! I can put this handkerchief on, that it may give
a little reflected colour to my cheek. I will not distress any one."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the festally-arrayed family assembled for breakfast they presented
a beautiful appearance. The family-father, however, looked more gloomy
than gay; and as Jacobi entered they saw, with astonishment, that his
toilet was considerably negligent. He had been out; his hair was in
disorder, and he evidently was in an excited state of mind; but he was
handsome for all that. He kissed his bride tenderly on hand and lips,
and gave her a nosegay of beautiful wild-flowers, and several splendidly
bound books,--the sermons of Franzen and Wallin, which gift was very
valuable, and was received by "our sensible" and sermon-loving Louise
with the greatest pleasure.

After breakfast Jacobi hastened to arrange his toilet, and then they all
went to church. The weather was uncommonly beautiful, and crowds of
festally-dressed people thronged about, in part to hear the Provost, who
was to preach that day, but principally to see the bridal pair.

It was an agreeable surprise to the family when at the entrance of the
churchyard many young girls began to strew flowers before the bridal
couple the whole way to the church-door. The church also was decorated
with flowers and foliage.

When the Judge took the hand of his daughter in the church, she
perceived that his was cold, and that it trembled. She looked at him,
and read in his countenance the disquiet with which his soul laboured.

"My father," said she to him, "I feel so calm, so happy!"

"Then I am so too, my child," said he, pressing her hand; and after this
moment his demeanour was calm and decided as usual.

Jacobi, both before and after the ceremony, was excited in the highest
degree; he wept much. Louise, on the contrary, was externally quite
calm. She looked rather pale, but her eyes were bright and almost
joyous; an altogether unusual contrast in a bridal pair.

On their return from the church a little circumstance occurred which
gave pleasure to all, but more especially to the Judge. As they went
past the remains of the burnt-down house, they saw a great swarm of bees
suddenly mount up from the trees of the garden; it flew several times
round the market-place as if seeking for a habitation, and at last
turning back, struck directly down among the ruins of the former kitchen
fireplace; it seemed as if it had selected the hearth for its abiding
home. This was regarded as the happiest omen, and no sooner had the
Judge conducted his daughter home, than he returned in order to remove
his bees to a convenient resting-place; Gabriele following him with
Baron L----'s treatise on the management of bees in her hand.

When Louise was again locked in the arms of her mother--the mother and
Eva had remained at home--she was seized by a slight trembling fit which
lasted several hours, but which was unobserved by all excepting her
mother; and through the whole of the day she continued graver than
common. Jacobi, on the contrary, after his fit of weeping was over, and
he had embraced everybody, and kissed his bride on lips, hair, hand, and
foot, was seized with a real desire of dancing with the whole world. He
was so wildly joyous and happy, and at the same time so amiable, that he
imparted his state of mind to everybody else.

At half-past four in the afternoon they assembled themselves in the
S---- garden, where the time was passed in the most agreeable manner,
with music, walking about, entertainment, and eating of ices and fruit,
to which also the Almighty added the brightest heaven and the calmest
air. Later in the evening they danced in the great saloon; no lady could
sit still, and scarcely a gentleman stand; all must dance! We have
nothing more to say of the ball, but we must not pass over in silence
that which occurred afterwards. When the company wished to go across the
garden to the eating-room, they perceived that it had rained
considerably, and that it still dropped; this occasioned a great
commotion among the ladies, because all the wrapping shawls and cloaks
were on the other side; they had quite forgotten to bring them over in
the fine weather. But it was, according to popular belief in Sweden,
fortunate, and quite according to the order of things, that rain-drops
should fall on the crown of the bride; but at the same time it was also
against all sense of prudence and propriety that she should wet her
silken shoes. And then all the other ladies! They must have the wrapping
things fetched to this side!

"I will provide for it!" exclaimed Jacobi, and with these words seized
his astonished bride in his arms and carried her across the garden. What
he whispered in her ear during this journey we know not, but thus far we
can say, that this action set Jacobi very high in the favour of the
ladies.

       *       *       *       *       *

The new-married pair spent several days after the wedding under the
paternal roof, and joyful days they were, only rather too much given up
to dissipation, for all friends and acquaintance would see and entertain
the two young people. Mrs. Gunilla gave them a dinner, in which she
communicated to them that she should, at the same time with them,
journey to Stockholm, where important affairs would oblige her to stay a
considerable time. However much it grieved Elise to lose so excellent
and almost motherly a friend, she rejoiced very much over what Louise
and Jacobi would win thereby. Louise and Mrs. Gunilla, it is true, had
not perfectly harmonised together, because each would instruct the
other; but Jacobi and she agreed all the better, and she had already
invited the young people to dine with her as often as they would in
Stockholm.

In the hour of parting she spoke thus to Elise and her husband with
tears in her eyes: "Who knows when we may meet again? The old woman is
in years--is not of much more use in the world--na, na! Our Lord will
care for her as he has hitherto done! And listen," continued she with an
arch, roguish air, "don't be uneasy on account of the young folks;--I
shall see that it all goes on right there. I invite myself as sponsor to
the first child. Perhaps we shall meet then! Yes, yes, I have a
presentiment that we shall see one another again in Stockholm! Nay! now
farewell, dear Elise! God bless you, my kind friends, and make all go
well with you! Think of the old woman sometimes! Adieu!"

       *       *       *       *       *

After the trouble of the packing was over--we mean packing Louise's
things, of course--and the still sorrow of parting, quiet returned back
into the house, and was only agreeably interrupted by preparations for
the journey to the West. The Judge seemed at this time to be young
again, and an increased union of heart showed itself between him and his
wife. So wear away, sometimes, the most beautiful summer days, even
after the autumn has made advances into the year. From what cause is
this? God knows.

The invisible genius of our history leads us at this moment far from the
home of peace to a distant shore, in order to give us a glimpse
into--the subject of our next chapter.




CHAPTER XVI.

A SICK CHAMBER.


If the sun shine on the head of the crucified, if a bird lift up its
joyous song in presence of a broken heart, it seems to us cruel. But
beautiful is the unconscious irony of nature in comparison with that
which exists in human circumstances. We have here an example of this
before us. See these sparkling false diamonds, this red gauze finery,
these ruins of theatrical ornament. They seem to mock the misery of the
room about which they are strewn. In that wretched room is want of
light; want, not only of all the comforts of life, but also of its most
necessary things. And yet--where could they be more useful than here?

Forlorn, upon a miserable bed lay a woman, who appeared to have seen
better days; still is she handsome, although passion and suffering seem
early to have wasted her yet young countenance. Fever burned on the
sunken cheek and in the dark eye, and her lips moved themselves wildly;
but no one was there to refresh with friendly hand the dry lips and the
hot brow; no cooling fever-draught stood near her bed. Two new-born
babes lay weeping near the mother. Uneasy phantoms seemed to agitate the
unhappy one: sometimes she raised herself in the bed with wild gestures,
but sunk back again powerless; whilst her pale, convulsed, and wandering
lips spoke from the depths of her torn heart the following incoherent
words:

"It is a bitter, bitter path! but I must, must fly for help! My strength
is broken--I can do nothing--the children cry to be heard, hungry,
half-naked! Parents! sisters! help!

       *       *       *       *       *

"It is night--the wind is cold--I freeze! The waves swell and
swell--they drive a wreck ashore--they strike on the rocks--ah!
wherefore did it not go down in the storm on the open sea? How dreadful
in full consciousness to be dashed to pieces! And thou, thou who art the
cause of all, thou sittest by and lookest coldly on me! Miserable
egotist! Dost thou bear a heart in thy breast? The temple is dashed to
pieces, and thou that has ruined it treadest upon its ruins! I knew not
how misfortune looked--I knew not what it really is! Misery! But thou
miserable one who----

"Hush! is it she? Is it my foster-mother who comes here so lightly, so
gently, so softly? It becomes bright! She will lay her warm hands on my
little children, and wrap them in the warm coverlet which she made for
me--

    There sits a dove so fair and white
    All on the lily spray.

Is it she? No! it is the moon, which rises palely out of black clouds.
How coldly she looks on my misery! Away, away!

"Sisters, I thirst! Will no one give me a drop of water? Have you all,
all left me? I thought I saw you again. It is so strange in my head.
Perhaps I shall become mad if I thirst much longer. It is dark--I am
afraid! I am afraid of the dark bird! If it come again it will begin to
rend my heart; but if I am ever again strong, fresh and strong, I will
kill it--with my own hands will I murder it! Day and night a wick burns
in my heart; its name is Hate, and the oil that supplies it is
bitterness!

"When shall I be strong again? Do you see how he has misused me; has
fettered me to the sick-bed? Do you hear the children cry? the children
which, through the abuse of the father, have come into the world before
their time, and now will die? Give nourishment to the children, for the
mercy of God, sisters! Let me die, but help the children! Now they are
quiet! Thanks! thanks! Shall I die this morning? No, no, not yet!

       *       *       *       *       *

"The gulf is so dark! Ah, what an abyss!

"Again comes the black bird; I had fled from him, but he followed me,
tore off my wings, so that I can fly no longer!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Help me up, I must dress myself! Here, with my handsome attire! haste!
To-night I must appear anew before the public, and be admired; must hear
the clapping of hands and bravos; must see garlands showered before my
feet! See you, sisters; it is so glorious! It is an hour of life! It is
a real burst of joy! See how I glitter--how I beam forth! Listen to the
tempest of applause! How it thunders! But wherefore is it now again so
still?--still and dark as the grave? It was a short joy! Cursed be he
who made it so short!

"Do not look so sternly upon me, foster-father! Am I not already
sufficiently cast down! Your stern look penetrates me. Give me your
hand, that I may lay it on my burning brow. You turn from me! You go!
Oh!

       *       *       *       *       *

"It is so desolate! The strand has such sharp stones! It is so dreadful
to be wounded against them!

"I will not die! I am so young, have so much strength of life in my
soul! I will not yet go down into eternity! No!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Who saves me? There come foaming waves!--or are they your white arms,
sisters, which you stretch out towards me? Is it you whom I see like
grey misty ghosts wandering on the corpse coast! Are you then dead? Do
you hear the noise? It is death--it is the black bird which comes!--now
I must fly--fly--fly--or die!"

       *       *       *       *       *

With a violent effort the delirious woman rose from the bed--took a few
steps, and then fell down as if lifeless. Her head struck against the
bedstead, and a stream of blood gushed forth from her temples.

At this moment a tall man habited in black entered the room softly;
light locks surrounded the noble but somewhat aged head; the mild,
serious expression of the countenance, and the affectionate look of the
blue eyes showed, still more than the dress, whose servant he was. A
lady, who was not handsome, but whose countenance bore the stamp of
beauty of the soul, like her husband's, followed him. With a look of the
deepest compassion this couple surveyed the room, and then drew near the
sick-bed.

"Merciful heaven!" whispered they, "we are come too late! The children
are dead--and so is the mother!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us now turn our eyes away from this dark picture that they may rest
upon a brighter one.




CHAPTER XVII.

A LANDSCAPE.


On one of the heights of the Dofrine Mountains we see three
travellers--an elderly man and two young ladies. He seems neither afraid
of trouble for himself nor for them; he seems as if he were accustomed
to it and could play with it. But he does all so affectionately; he goes
before them so friendly and kind, reaches out his hand and encourages
them to yet another effort, and they would then enjoy the magnificent
view; they would then be able to rest, and obtain refreshment at the
"saeter-hut"[20] above them! The daughters follow him smiling, and
overcome weakness and weariness for his sake! Now they are above on the
heights--and well are they rewarded for all the labour of climbing up
there! The earth lies below so rich, with its hills and valleys, dark
woods, fruitful plains--and there, in the far distance, sea and heaven
unite themselves in majestic repose!

With an exclamation of rapture the father extended his arms towards the
magnificent prospect; and the mountain wind--not keen here, but mild
from the breath of spring, agreeably cooled the cheeks of the wanderers.

The father went to the hut to obtain milk for himself and his daughters,
and in the mean time one of the daughters rested upon a moss-covered
stone and supported herself against a rock. Almond-scented linnea formed
a garland around her feet, and the joyous singing-birds ascended from
the valley. The sister, who stood near her and against whom she leaned
her lovely head whilst the wind played in her brown tresses, looked on
the comfortable dwellings which gleamed forth below from amid green
trees and beside clear waters, and her affectionate but unimpassioned
heart rejoiced itself over the scene, which seemed to say to her, "Here
may one live calmly and happily!" At that moment she heard her name
spoken by a loving voice; it was Eva's, who, while she pointed with hand
and eye towards heaven, where the clouds began to divide themselves, and
stripes of blue light gleamed forth like friendly eyes, "Seest thou,
Leonore," said she, gently smiling, "it will be bright!"

"Will it be bright? Ah, thank God!" whispered Leonore in reply, with
eyes full of joyful tears, as she laid her cheek against the brow of her
sister.

FOOTNOTES:

[20] Saeter-huette among the mountains of Norway answer to the Senne of
the Swiss mountains. During the summer the inhabitants of many parts of
Norway withdraw from their villages to others, especially when situated
higher on the mountains, where they can fell wood and find better
pasturage for their cattle. They dwell with their herds in these saeters,
which are generally abandoned in winter.--M. H.




CHAPTER XVIII.

UPS AND DOWNS.


When a new swarm is ready in a hive to attempt its own flight, warning
voices may be heard on still evenings in the little state, calling
forth, "Out! out!"

People have interpreted it to be the old queen bee, which thus warns the
young ones forth into the world to fashion their own kingdom. I should
rather imagine it to be the young ones who in this manner sing forth
their longing. But let it be with them as it may, certain it is that in
the human hive, Home, a similar cry sometimes makes itself heard. Then
also there, when the young swarm is become strong with the honey and wax
of home, it finds the house too narrow and longs to get abroad. This is
common to all homes; but it is peculiar to the good and happy home, that
the same voice which exclaims, "Out! out!" exclaims afterwards yet more
animatedly, "In! in!"

So was it in the home of the Franks.

The period to which we must now cast our eyes conducts us several years
beyond the time when we saw father and daughters on the heights of the
Dofrine Mountains, and shows us our Petrea returned home after a long
absence.

The mother, Petrea, and Gabriele, are deep in a conversation which
appears to interest them all three in a very lively manner, and the mild
voice of the mother is heard saying--

"You may freely decide for yourself, my good child, that you know
perfectly well; but as you describe Mr. M., and with the feelings, or
more properly speaking, the want of feeling you have for him, I can
never believe that you will be happy with him, and I cannot therefore
advise this marriage. See, here are some almonds in the shell, my dear
girl! We have not forgotten so soon your love for them--I set the basket
before you."

"And the Countess Solenstrale," said the lively Gabriele, archly, "has
herself spoken for her nephew, and invited you to her house. Very polite
and handsome of her! And you, Petrea, no longer covet this exaltation?"

"Ah, no, Gabriele!" answered Petrea, "this childish desire is long past;
it is another kind of exaltation than this, that I pine for."

"And this is called?" asked Gabriele, with a light in her lovely eyes,
which showed her that she very well knew that, which however she had not
pronounced in words.

"I do not know what I should call it; but there lives and moves here a
longing difficult to describe," said Petrea, laying her hand upon her
breast, and with eyes full of tears; "oh, if I could only rise upwards
to light--to a higher, freer life!"

"You do not wish to die!" said Gabriele, warmly; "not that I now fear
death. Since Henrik has trod this path, I feel so entirely different to
what I used to do. Heaven is come quite near to the grave. To die is to
me to go to him, and to his home. But I am yet so happy to be living
here with my family, and you, my Petrea, must feel so too. Ah! life on
earth, with those that we love, may indeed be so beautiful!"

"So I think, and so I feel, Gabriele," replied Petrea, "and more so than
ever when I am at home, and with my own family. On that account I will
gladly live on the earth, at least till I am more perfect. But I must
have a sense of this life having in it a certain activity, by which I
may arrive at the consciousness of that which lives within me--there
moves in me a fettered spirit, which longs after freedom!"

"Extraordinary!" said Gabriele, half displeased, "how unlike people are
one to another. I, for my part, feel, not the least desire for activity.
I, unworthy mortal, would much rather do nothing." And so saying she
leaned her pretty head with half-shut eyes against her mother, who
looked on her with an expression that seemed to say, "live only; that is
enough for thee!"

Petrea continued: "When I have read or heard of people who have lived
and laboured for some great object, for some development of human
nature, who have dedicated all their thoughts and powers to this
purpose, and have been able to suffer and to die for it; oh! then I have
wept for burning desire that it also might be granted to me to spend and
to sacrifice my life. I have looked around me, have listened after such
an occasion, have waited and called upon it; but ah! the world goes past
me on its own way--nobody and nothing has need of me."

Petrea both wept and laughed as she spoke, and with smiles and tears
also did both Gabriele and the mother listen to her, and she continued--

"As there was now an opportunity for my marrying, I thought that here
was a sphere in which I might be active--But, ah! I feel clearly that it
is not the right one for me, neither is it the one for which I am
suitable--especially with a husband whose tastes and feelings are so
different to mine."

"But, my good girl," said the mother, disconcerted, "how came it then,
that he could imagine you sympathised so well together; it seems from
his letter that he makes himself quite sure of your consent, and that
you are very well suited to each other."

"Ah!" replied Petrea, blushing, and not without embarrassment, "there
are probably two causes for that, and it was partly his fault and partly
mine. In the country, where I met him, he was quite left to himself;
nobody troubled themselves about him; he had _ennui_, and for that
reason I began to find pleasure for him."

"Very noble," said Gabriele, smiling.

"Not quite so much so as you think," replied Petrea, again blushing,
"because--at first I wished really to find pleasure for _him_, and then
also a little for myself. Yes, the truth is this--that--I--had nothing
to do, and while I busied myself about Mr. M., I did not think it so
very much amiss to busy him a little about me; and for this reason I
entered into his amusements, which turned upon all sorts of petty
social tittle-tattle; for this reason I preserved apricots for him, I
told stories to him, and sang to him in an evening in the
twilight--'Welcome, O Moon!' and let him think if he would, that he was
the moon. Mother, Gabriele, forgive me, I know how little edification
there is in all this, it is quite too----but you cannot believe how
dangerous it is to be idle, when one has an active spirit within one,
and an object before one that----You laugh! God bless you for it! the
affair is not worth anything more, for it is anything but tragic--yet it
might become so, if on account of my sins I were to punish myself by
marrying Mr. M. I should be of no worth to him, excepting as housekeeper
and plaything, and this would not succeed in the long run; for the rest
he does not love me, cannot love me seriously, and would certainly
easily console himself for my refusal."

"Then let him console himself, and do not think any further on the
affair," cried Gabriele, with animation.

"I am of Gabriele's opinion," said the mother; "for to marry merely to
be married; merely to obtain a settlement, an establishment, and all
that, is wrong; and, moreover, with your family relationships, the most
unnecessary thing in the world. You know, my dear child, that we have
enough for ourselves and for you, and a sphere of action suitable for
you will present itself in time. Your father will soon return home, and
then we can talk with him on the subject. He will assist us directly in
the best way."

"I had, indeed, presentiments," said Petrea, with a sigh, "and hopes,
and dreams, perhaps--of a way, of an activity, which would have made me
useful and happy according to my own abilities. I make now much humbler
demands on life than formerly; I have a much less opinion of myself than
I had--but, oh! if I might only ally myself, as the least atom of light,
to the beams which penetrate humanity at the same time that they animate
the soul of man, I would thank God and esteem myself happy! I have made
an attempt--you know, mother, and Gabriele--to express in a book
somewhat of that which has lived in me and which still lives; you know
that I have sent the manuscript to an enlightened printer for his
judgment, and also--if his judgment be favourable--that he should
publish it. If this should succeed, if a sphere of action should open
itself to me in this way, oh! then some time or other I might become a
more useful and happy being; should give pleasure to my connexions,
and----"

Petrea was here interrupted by the arrival of a large packet directed to
herself. A shuddering apprehension went through her; her heart beat
violently as she broke the seal, and--recognised her own manuscripts.
The enlightened, intelligent printer sent them back to her, accompanied
by a little note, containing the pleasant tidings that he would not
offer the merest trifle for the book, neither could he undertake the
printing of it at his own cost.

"Then this path is also closed against me!" said Petrea, bowing her head
to her hand that nobody might see how deeply she felt this. Thus then
she had deceived herself regarding her talents and her ability. But now
that this way also was closed against her--what should she undertake?
Marriage with Mr. M. began again to haunt her brain. She stumbled about
in the dark.

Gabriele would not allow, however, that the path of literature was
closed against her; she was extremely excited against the printer. "He
was certainly," she said, "a man without any taste."

"Ah!" said Petrea, readily smiling, "I also will gladly flatter myself
with that belief, and that if the book could only be printed, then we
soon--but that is not to be thought of!"

Gabriele thought it was quite worth while to think about it, and did not
doubt but that means might be found, some time or other, to make the
gentleman printer make a long face about it.

The mother agreed; spoke of the return of her husband, who, she said,
would set all right. "Keep only quietly with us, Petrea, calmly, and
don't be uneasy about the means for bringing out your book; they will be
found without difficulty, if we only give ourselves time."

"And here," added Gabriele, "you shall have as much quiet as you desire.
If you would like to spend the whole day in reading and writing, I will
take care that nobody disturbs you. I will attend to all your friends
and acquaintance, if it be needful, to insure your quiet. I will only
come in to you to tell you when breakfast is ready and when dinner; and
on the post-day, I'll only come at the post-hour and knock at your
door, and take your letters and send them off. And in the evening,
then--then we may see you amongst us--you cannot believe how welcome you
will be! Ah! certainly you will feel yourself happy among those who love
you so much! And your book! we will send it out into the world, and it
too shall succeed one of these days!"

Loving voices! domestic voices in happy families, what adversity, what
suffering is there which cannot be comforted by you!

Petrea felt their healing balsam. She wept tears of love and gratitude.
An hour afterwards, much calmer in mind, she stood at the window, and
noticed the scene without. Christmas was at hand, and every thing was in
lively motion, in order to celebrate the beautiful festival joyously.
The shops were ornamented, and people made purchases. A little bird came
and sate on the window, looked up to Petrea, twittered joyfully, and
flew away. A lively sentiment passed through Petrea's heart.

"Thou art happy, little bird," thought she; "so many beings are happy.
My mishap grieves no one, hurts no one. Wherefore, then, should it
depress me? The world is large, and its Creator rich and good. If this
path will not succeed for me, what then? I will find out another."

In the evening she was cheerful with her family. But when night came,
and she was alone; when the external world presented no longer its
changing pictures; when loving, sweet voices no more allured her out of
herself,--then anguish and disquiet returned to her breast. In no
condition to sleep, and urged by irresistible curiosity, she sate
herself down sighingly to go through her unlucky manuscripts. She found
many pencil-marks, notes of interrogation, and traces of the thumb on
the margin, which plainly proved that the reader had gone through the
manuscript with a censorious hand, and had had satisfaction in passing
his judgment of "good for nothing!"

Ah! Petrea had built so many plans for herself and her family upon this,
which was now good for nothing; had founded upon it so many hopes for
her ascent upwards. Was nothing now to come out of them all?

Petrea read; she acknowledged the justice of many marginal remarks, but
she found, more and more, that the greater part of them had reference
to single expressions, and other trifles. Petrea read and read, and was
involuntarily captivated by that which she read. Her heart swelled, her
eyes glowed, and suddenly animated by that feeling which (we say it
_sans comparaison_) gave courage to Correggio, and which comforted
Galileo, she raised herself, and struck her hand upon the manuscript
with the exclamation, "It is good for something after all!"

Animated to the depths of her heart, she ran to Gabriele, and laughing,
embraced her with the words, "You shall see that some fine day I'll
ascend upwards yet."




PART IV.

CHAPTER I.

PETREA TO IDA.


From my Hermitage in the Garret.

"'Illusions! Illusions!' you cry over all joys, all faith, all love in
life. I shout back with all my might over your own words, 'Illusions!
Illusions!' All depends upon what we fix our faith and our affections.
Must the beauty of love and worth of life be at an end to woman when her
first spring, her bloom of love, her moments of romance are past? No, do
not believe that, Ida. Nothing in this world is such an illusion as this
belief. Life is rich; its tree blossoms eternally, because it is
nourished by immortal fountains. It bears dissimilar fruits, varies in
colour and glory, but all beautiful; let us undervalue none of them, for
all of them are capable of producing plants of eternal life.

"Youthful love--the beaming passion-flower of earth! Who will belie its
captivating beauty, who will not thank the Creator that he gave it to
the children of earth? But ah! I will exclaim to all those who drink of
its nectar, and to those who must do without it--'There are flowers
which are as noble as this, and which are less in danger than it of
being paled by the frosts of the earth--flowers from whose chalices
also you may suck life from the life of the Eternal!'

"Ah! if we only understood how near to us Providence has placed the
fountains of our happiness--if we had only understood this from the days
of our childhood upwards, acted upon it, and profited by it, our lives
would then seldom lead through dry wildernesses! Happy are those
children whose eyes are early opened by parents and home to the rich
activity of life. They will then experience what sweetness and joy and
peace can flow out of family relationships, out of the heartfelt union
between brothers and sisters, between parents and children: and they
will experience how these relations, carefully cherished in youth, will
become blessings for our maturer years.

"You pray me to speak of my home and my family. But when I begin with
this subject, who can say, Ida, whether I shall know how to leave off!
This subject is so rich to me, so dear--and yet how weak will not my
description be, how lifeless in comparison with the reality!

"The dwelling-house--which may be said to have the same relation to home
as the body has to the soul--arisen, now out of its ashes, stands on the
same place on which, twelve years ago, it was burnt down. I wish you had
been with me yesterday in the library at breakfast. It was Leonore's
birthday, and the family had occasioned her a surprise by a little gift
which was exactly according to her taste--ornament combined with
convenience. It was an insignificant gift--wherefore then did it give us
all so much pleasure? wherefore were there sweet tears in her pious
eyes, and in ours also? We were all so still, and yet we felt that we
were very happy--happy because we mutually loved one another, and
mutually pleased one another so much. The sun shone at that time into
the room--and see, Ida! this sunbeam which shines day by day into the
house is the best image of its state; it is that which chases hence all
darkness, and turns all shadows into the glorification of its light!

"I will now, lively Ida, talk to you some little about the daughters of
the house, and in order that you may not find my picture too
sentimental, I will introduce first to you--'Honour to whom honour is
due!'--

    'OUR ELDEST,'

well known for industry, morality, moral lecturing, cathedral airs, and
many good properties. She married eleven years ago upon a much smaller
than common capital of worldly wealth; but both she and her husband knew
how to turn their pound to account, and so, by degrees, their house,
under her careful hands, came to be what people call a well-to-do house.

"Eight wild Jacobis during this time sprung up in the house without
bringing about any revolution in it, so good were the morals which they
drew in with the mother's milk. I call them the 'Berserkers,' because
when I last saw them they were perfect little monsters of strength and
swiftness, and because we shall rely upon their prowess to overturn
certain planks--of which more anon; on which account I will inspire them
and their mother beforehand with a certain old-gothic ambition.

"So now! After the married couple had kept school eleven years--he
instructing the boys in history, Latin, and such like; and she washing,
combing, and moralising the same, and in fact, becoming a mother to many
a motherless boy, it pleased the mercy of the Almighty to call them--not
directly to heaven, but through his angel the Consistorium to the
pastoral care of the rural parish adjoining this town--the highest goal
of their wishes ever since they began to have wishes one with another.
Their approaching journey here has given rise to great pleasure--it is
hard to say in which of the two families the greatest. Thus, then,
Louise will become a pastor's wife--perhaps soon also an archdeacon's,
and then she arrives at the desired situation in which she can impart
moral lectures with power--of which sister Petrea might have the benefit
of a good part, and pay it back with interest.

"But the moral lectures of our eldest have a much milder spirit than
formerly, which is owing to the influence of Jacobi; for it has occurred
in their case, as in the case of many another happily-married couple,
they have ennobled one another; and it is a common saying in our family,
that she without him would not have become what she now is, neither
would he have been without her what he now is.

"The Rose of the Family, the daughter Eva, had once in her life a great
sorrow--a bitter conflict; but she came forth victorious. True it is
that an angel stood by her side and assisted her. Since then she has
lived for the joy of her family and her friends, beautiful, and amiable,
and happy, and has from time to time rejected lovers; but she may soon
be put out of the position to continue this course. I said that an angel
stood beside her in the bitter conflict. There was a time when this
angel was an ugly, uncomfortable girl, a trouble to herself, and
properly beloved by none. But there is no one in the family now who is
more beloved or more in favour than she is. Never, through the power of
God, did there take place a greater change than in her. Now it gives one
pleasure to look at her and to be near her. Her features, it is true,
have not improved themselves, nor has her complexion become particularly
red-and-white; but she has become lovely, lovely from the heartfelt
expression of affection and intelligence; beautiful from the quiet,
unpretending grace of her whole being. Her only pretension is that she
will serve all and help all; and thus has she attached every one, by
degrees, to her, and she is become the heart, the peace of the house;
and, for herself, she has struck deep root down into the family, and is
become happy through all these charms. She has attached herself, in the
closest manner, to her sister Eva, and these two could not live
separated from each other.

"You know the undertaking which these two sisters, while yet young,
commenced together. You know also how well it succeeded; how it obtained
confidence and stability, and how it won universal respect for its
conductors, and how also, after a course of ten years--independent of
this institution--they had realised a moderate income; so that they can,
if they are so disposed, retire from it, and it will still continue to
prosper under the direction of Annette P., who was taken as assistant
from the beginning, and who in respect of character and ability has
proved herself a person of rare worth. The name of the sisters Frank
stood estimably at the head of this useful establishment; but it is a
question whether it would have prospered to such an extent, whether it
would have developed itself so beautifully and well without the
assistance of a person who, however, has carefully concealed his
activity from the eye of the public, and whose name, for that reason,
was never praised. Without Assessor Munter's unwearied care and
assistance--so say the sisters--the undertaking could never have gone
forward. What a wonderful affectionate constancy lies in the soul of
this man! He has been, and is still, the benefactor of our family; but
if you would see and hear him exasperated, tell him so, and see how he
quarrels with all thanks to himself. The whole city is now deploring
that it is about to lose him. He is going to reside on his estate in the
country, for it is impossible that he could sustain much longer the way
in which he is at present overworked both night and day. His health has
for some time evidently declined, and we rejoice that he can now take
some rest, by which he may regain new strength. We all love him from our
hearts; but one of us has set on foot a plot to oblige another of us
to--ally herself with him, and therefore our good Assessor is now
exposed to a secret proceeding, which--but I forget that I was to write
about the daughters of the family.

"There is a peculiar little world in the house--a world into which
nothing bad can enter--where live flowers, birds, music, and Gabriele.
The morning would lose its sweetest charms, if during the same
Gabriele's birds and flowers did not play a part, and the evening
twilight would be duskier if it were not enlivened by Gabriele's guitar
and songs. Her flower-stand has extended itself by degrees into an
orangery--not large to be sure, but yet large enough to shelter a
beautiful vine, which is now covered with grapes, and many beautiful and
rare plants also, so as to present to the family a little Italy, where
they may enjoy all the charms of the south, in the midst of a northern
winter. A covered way leads from the dwelling-house down into the
orangery, and it is generally there that in winter they take their
afternoon coffee. The aviary is removed thither; and there upon a table
covered with a green cloth, lie works on botany, together with the
writings of the Swedish gardening society, which often contain such
interesting articles. There stand two comfortable armed chairs, on which
the most magnificent birds and flowers are worked, you can easily
imagine for whom. There my mother sits gladly, and reads or looks at her
'little lady' (she never grows out of this appellation) as she tends her
flowers in the sun, or plays with her tame birds. One may say, in fact,
that Gabriele strews the evening of her mother's days with flowers.

"A man dear to the Swedish heart has said, 'that the grand natural
feature of northern life is a conquered winter,' and this applies
equally to life individually, to family life, and to that of human
nature. It so readily freezes and grows stiff, snow so readily falls
upon the heart; and winter makes his power felt as much within as
without the house. In order to keep it warm within, in order that life
may flourish and bloom, it is needful to preserve the holy fire
everburning. Love must not turn to ashes and die out; if it do, then all
is labour and heaviness, and one may as well do nothing but--sleep. But
if fire be borrowed from heaven, this will not happen; then will house
and heart be warm, and life bloom incessantly, and a thousand causes
will become rich sources of joy to all. If it be so within the
house--then may it snow without--then winter thou mayst do thy worst!

"But I return to Gabriele, whose lively wit and joyous temper, united to
her affectionate and innocent heart, make her deservedly the favourite
of her parents, and the joy of every one. She asserts continually her
own good-for-nothingness, her uselessness, and incorrigible love to a
sweet '_far niente_;' but nobody is of her opinion in this respect, for
nobody can do without her, and one sees that when it is necessary, she
can be as decided and as able as any one need be. It is now some time
since Gabriele made any charades. I almost fancy that the cause of this
is a certain Baron L., who was suspected for a long time of having set
fire to a house, and who now is suspected of a design of setting fire to
a heart, and who, with certain words and glances, has put all sorts of
whims into her head--I will not say heart.

"And so then we have nothing bad to say of 'this Petrea,' as one of the
friends of the house still calls her, but no longer in anger. This
Petrea has had all kind of botherations in the world: in the first place
with her own nose, with which she could not get into conceit, and then
with various other things, as well within her as without her, and for a
long time it seemed as if her own world would never come forth out of
chaos.

"It has however. With eyes full of grateful tears I will dare to say
this, and some time I may perhaps more fully explain how this has been
done. And blessed be the home which has turned back her wandering steps,
has healed the wounds of her heart, and has offered her a peaceful
haven, an affectionate defence, where she has time to rest after the
storms, and to collect and to know herself. Without this home, without
this influence, Petrea certainly might have become a witch, and not, as
now, a tolerably reasonable person.

"You know my present activity, which, whilst it conducts me deeper into
life, discovers to me more beauty, more poetry, than I had ever
conceived of it in the dreams of my youth. Not merely from this cause,
although greatly owing to it, a spring has began to blossom for me on
the other side of my thirty years, which, were it ever to wither, would
be from my own fault. And if even still a painful tear may be shed over
past errors or present faults; if the longing after what is yet
unattainably better, purer, and brighter, may occasion many a pang--what
matters it? What matter if the eye-water burn, so that the eye only
become clear; if heaven humiliate, so that it only draw us upwards?

"One of Petrea's means of happiness is, to require very few of the
temporal things of earth. She regards such things as nearly related to
the family of illusions, and will, on that account, have as little as
possible to do with them. And thus has she also the means of obtaining
for herself many a hearty and enduring pleasure. I will not, however, be
answerable for her not very soon being taken by a frenzy of giving a
feast up in her garret, and thereby producing all kinds of illusions;
such, for example, as the eating little cakes, the favourite illusion of
my mother, and citron-souffle, the almost perfect earthly felicity of
'our eldest,' in which a reconciliation skal with the frenzy-feast might
be proposed to her beloved 'eldest.'

"Would you now make a _summa summarum_ of Petrea's state, it stands
thus: that which was a fountain of disquiet in her is now become a
fountain of quiet. She believes in the actuality of life, and in her own
part therein. She does not allow her peace to be disturbed by accidental
troubles, be they from within or from without; she calls them
mist-clouds, passing storms, after which the sun will come forth again.
And should her little garret tumble to pieces one of these days, she
would regard even that as a passing misfortune, and hold herself ready,
in all humility--to mount up yet a little higher.

"But enough of Petrea and her future ascension.

"Yet one daughter dwelt in the family, and her lovely image lives still
in the remembrance of all, but a mourning veil hangs over it; for she
left home, but not in peace. She was not happy, and for many years her
life is wrapped in darkness. People think that she is dead; her friends
have long believed so, and mourned her as such; but one among them
believes it not. _I_ do not believe that she is dead. I have a strong
presentiment that she will return; and it would gladden me to show her
how dear she is to me. I have built plans for her future with us, and I
expect her continually, or else a token where I may be able to find her;
and be it in Greenland or in Arabia Deserta whence her voice calls me, I
will find out a way to her.

"I would that I could now describe to you the aged pair, to whom all in
the house look up with love and reverence, who soon will have been a
wedded couple forty years, and who appear no longer able to live the one
without the other--but my pen is too weak for that. I will only venture
upon a slight outline sketch. My father is nearly seventy years old--but
do you think he indulges himself with rest? He would be extremely
displeased if he were to sleep longer in a morning than usual: he rises
every morning at six, it being deeply impressed upon him to lose as
little of life as possible. It is unpleasant to him that his declining
sight compels him now to less activity. He likes that we should read
aloud to him in an evening, and that--romances. My mother smilingly
takes credit to herself for having seduced him to that kind of reading;
and he confesses, with smiles, that it is really useful for old people,
because it contributes to preserve the heart young. For the rest, he is
in all respects equally, perhaps more, good, more noble-hearted than
ever; and from that cause he is to us equally respect-inspiring and
dear. Oh, Ida, it is a happy feeling to be able intrinsically to honour
and love those who have given us life!

"And now must I, with a bleeding heart, throw a mournful shadow over
the bright picture of the house, and that shadow comes at the same time
from a beautiful image--from my mother! I fear, I fear, that she is on
the way to leave us! Her strength has been declining for two years. She
has no decided malady, but she becomes visibly weaker and feebler, and
no remedy, as yet, has shown itself availing for her. They talk now of
the air of next spring--of Selzer-water, and a summer journey;--my
father would travel to the world's end with her--they hope with
certainty that she will recover; she hopes so herself, and says
smilingly yes, to the Selzer-water, and the journey, and all that we
propose; says she would gladly live with us, that she is happy with
us,--yet nevertheless there is a something about her, and even in her
smiles, that tells me that she herself does not cherish full faith in
the hope which she expresses. Ah! when I see daily her still paler
countenance; the unearthly expression in her gentle features--when I
perceive her ever slower gait, as she moves about, still arranging the
house and preparing little gratifications for her family; then comes the
thought to me that she perhaps will soon leave us, and it sometimes is
difficult to repress my tears.

"But why should I thus despair? Why not hope like all the rest? Ah, I
will hope, and particularly for the sake of him who, without her, could
no more be joyful on earth. For the present she is stronger and livelier
than she has been for a long time. The arrival of Louise and her family
have contributed to this, as also another day of joy which is
approaching, and which has properly reference to my father. She goes
about now with such joy of heart, with the almanack in her hand, and
prepares everything, and thinks of everything for the joyful festival.
My father has long wished to possess a particular piece of building land
which adjoins our little garden, in order to lay it out for a great and
general advantage; but he has sacrificed so much for his children, that
he has nothing remaining wherewith to carry out his favourite plan. His
children in the mean time have, during the last twelve years, laid by a
sum together, and now have latterly borrowed together what was wanting
for the purchase of the land. On the father's seventieth birthday
therefore, with the joint help of the 'Berserkers,' will the wooden
fence be pulled down, and the genius of the new place, represented by
the graceful figure of Gabriele, will deliver over to him the
purchase-deed, which is made out in his name. How happy he will be! Oh,
it makes us all happy to think of it! How he will clear away, and dig,
and plant! and how it will gladden and refresh his old age. May he live
so long that the trees which he plants may shake their leafy branches
over his head, and may their rustling foretel to him the blessing, which
his posterity to the third and fourth generation will pronounce upon his
beneficent activity.

"I would speak of the circle of friends which has ever enclosed our home
most cordially, of the new Governor Stejernhoek and his wife, whom we
like so much, and whose removal here was particularly welcome to my
father, who almost sees a son in him. I would speak also of the servants
of the house, who are yet more friends than servants--but I fear
extending my letter to too great a length.

"Perhaps you blame me secretly for painting my picture in colours too
uniformly bright, perhaps you will ask, 'Come there then not into this
house those little knocks, disturbances, rubs, overhastinesses,
stupidities, procrastinations, losses, and whatever those spiritual
mosquitoes may be called, which occasion by their stings irritation,
unquiet, and vexation, and whose visits the very happiest families
cannot avoid?'

"Yes, certainly. They come, but they vanish as quickly as they come, and
never leave a poisonous sting behind, because a universal remedy is
employed against them, which is called 'Forgive, forget, amend!' and
which the earlier applied the better, and which makes also the visits of
these ugly fiends of rarer occurrence; they come, indeed, in pure and
mild atmospheres never properly forth.

"Would you, dearest Ida, be convinced of the truth of the picture, come
here and see for yourself. We should all like it so much. Come, and let
our house provide for you the divertisement, perhaps also the rest which
is so needful to your heart. Come, and believe me, Ida, that when one
observes the world from somewhat of an elevation--as for instance, a
garret--one sees illusions like mist, passing over the earth, but above
it heaven vaulting itself in eternal brightness."




CHAPTER II.

A MORNING HOUR


"Good morning!" said Jeremias Munter, as with his pockets full of books
he entered Petrea's garret, which was distinguished from all other rooms
merely by its perfect simplicity and its lack of all ornament. A glass
containing beautiful fresh flowers was its only luxury.

"Oh, so heartily welcome!" exclaimed Petrea as she looked with beaming
eyes on her visitor and on his valuable appendages.

"Yes, to-day," said he, "I am of opinion that I am welcome! Here's a
treat for Miss Petrea. See here, and see here!"

So saying, the Assessor laid one book after another upon the table,
naming at the same time their contents. They belonged to that class of
books which open new worlds to the eye of reflecting minds. Petrea took
them up with a delight which can only be understood by such as have
sought and thirsted after the same fountains of joy, and who have found
them. The Assessor rejoiced quietly in her delight, as she looked
through the books and talked about them.

"How good, how cordially good of you," said Petrea, "to think about me.
But you must see that I also have expected you to-day;" and with eyes
that beamed with the most heartfelt satisfaction she took out of a
cupboard two fine china-plates, on one of which lay cakes of light
wheaten bread, and on the other, piled up, the most magnificent grapes
reposing amid a garland of their own leaves, which were tastefully
arranged in various shades against the golden border of the plate. These
Petrea placed upon a little table in the window, so that the sun shone
upon them.

The Assessor regarded them with the eye of a Dutch fruit painter, and
appeared to rejoice himself over a beautiful picture after his own
manner.

"You must not only look at your breakfast, but you must eat it," said
the lively Petrea; "the bread is home-baked, and--Eva has arranged the
grapes on the plate and brought them up here."

"Eva!" said he, "now, she could not know that I was coming here to-day?"

"And precisely because she thought so as well as I, would she provide
your breakfast." With these words Petrea looked archly at the Assessor,
who did not conceal a pleasurable sensation--broke off a little grape,
seated himself, and--said nothing.

Petrea turned herself to her books: "Oh," said she, "why is life so
short, when there is such an infinite deal to learn? Yet this is not
right, and it evidences ignorance to imagine the time of learning
limited; besides, this remark about the shortness of time and the length
of art proceeds from the heathen writer Hippocrates. But let us praise
God for the hope, for the certainty, that we may be scholars to all
eternity. Ah, Uncle Munter, I rejoice myself heartily over the
industrial spirit of our age! It will make it easy for the masses to
clothe and feed themselves, and then will they begin also to live for
mind. For true is that sentiment, which is about two thousand years old,
'When common needs are satisfied, man turns himself to that which is
more universal and exalted.' Thus when the great week of the world is
past, the Sabbath will commence, in which a people of quiet worshippers
will spread themselves over the earth, no more striving after decaying
treasures, but seeking after those which are eternal; a people whose
life will be to observe, to comprehend, and to adore, revering their
Creator in spirit and in truth. Then comes the day of which the angels
sung 'Peace on earth!'"

"Peace on earth!" repeated Jeremias in a slow and melancholy voice,
"when comes it? It must first enter into the human heart; and there,
there live so many demons, so much disquiet and painful longing--but
what--what is amiss now?"

"Ah, my God!" exclaimed Petrea wildly, "she lives! she lives!"

"What her? who lives? No, really Petrea all is not right with you," said
the Assessor, rising.

"See! see!" cried Petrea, trembling with emotion, and showing to the
Assessor a torn piece of paper, "see, this lay in the book!"

"Well, what then? It is indeed torn from a sepia picture--a hand
strewing roses on a grave, I believe. Have I not seen this somewhere
already?"

"Yes, certainly; yes, certainly! It is the girl by the rose-bush which
I, as a child, gave to Sara! Sara lives! see, here has she written!"

The back of the picture seemed to have been scrawled over by a child's
hand; but in one vacant spot stood these words, in Sara's own remarkably
beautiful handwriting:

    No rose on Sara's grave!
    Oh Petrea! if thou knew'st----

The sentence was unfinished, whilst several drops seemed to prove that
it had been closed by tears.

"Extraordinary!" said the Assessor: "these books which I purchased
yesterday were bought in U. Could she be there? But----"

"Certainly! certainly she is there," exclaimed Petrea, "look at the book
in which the picture lay--see, on the first page is the name, Sara
Schwartz--although it has been erased. Oh! certainly she is in U., or
there we can obtain intelligence of her! Oh, Sara, my poor Sara! She
lives, but perhaps in want, in sorrow! I will be with her to-day if she
be in U.!"

"That Miss Petrea will hardly manage," said the Assessor, "unless she
can fly. It is one hundred and two (English) miles from here to U."

"Alas, that my father should at this time be absent, should have the
carriage with him; otherwise he would have gone with me! But he has an
old chaise, I will take it----"

"Very pretty, indeed," returned he, "for a lady to be travelling alone
in an old chaise, especially when the roads are spoiled with rain;--and
see what masses of clouds are coming up with the south wind--you'll have
soaking rain the whole day through in the chaise."

"And if it rain pokers," interrupted Petrea, warmly, "I must go. Oh,
heavens! she was indeed my sister, she is so yet, and she shall not call
on me in vain! I will run down to my mother in this moment and----"
Petrea took her bonnet and cloak in her hand.

"Calm yourself a little, Miss Petrea," he said; "I tell you, you could
not travel in this way. The chaise would not hold together. Alas, I have
tried it myself--you could not go in it!"

"Now then," exclaimed Petrea determinately, "I will go; and if I cannot
go I'll creep--but go I will!"

"Is that then your firm determination?"

"My firm and my last."

"Well, then, I must creep with you!" said the Assessor, smiling, "if it
be only to see how it goes with you. I'll go home now, but will be back
in an hour's time. Promise me only to have patience for so long, and not
without me to set off--creep off, I should say!"

The Assessor vanished, and Petrea hastened down to her mother and
sisters.

But before her communications and consultations were at an end, a light
travelling carriage drew up at the door. The Assessor alighted from it,
came in, and offered Petrea his arm. Soon again was he seated in the
carriage, Petrea by his side, and was protesting vehemently against the
bag of provisions, and the bottle of wine, which Leonore thrust in,
spite of his protestations, and so away they went.




CHAPTER III.

ADVENTURES.


It was now the second time in their life that the Assessor and Petrea
were out together in such a manner, and now as before it seemed as if no
favourable star would light their journey, for scarcely had they set out
when it began to rain, and clouds as heavy and dark as lead gathered
together above their heads. It is rather depressing when in answer to
the inquiring glances which one casts upwards at the commencement of an
important journey, to be met by a heaven like this. Other omens also
little less fortunate added themselves; the horses pranced about as if
they were unwilling to go farther, and an owl took upon itself to attend
the carriage, set itself on the tree-branches and points of the palings
by the wayside, and then on the coming up of the carriage flew a little
farther, there to await its coming up at a little distance.

As the travellers entered a wood, where on account of the deep road they
were compelled to travel slowly, they saw on the right hand a little
black-grey old woman step forth, as ugly, witch, and Kobold like in
appearance as an old woman ever can be. She stared at the travellers for
a moment, and then vanished among the trunks of the trees.

The Assessor shuddered involuntarily at the sight of her, and remarked,
"What a difference is there between woman and woman--the loveliest upon
earth and the most horrible is yet--woman!"

After he had seen the old witch he became almost gloomy. In the meantime
the owl vanished with her; perhaps, because "birds of a feather flock
together."

Yet it may be that I am calumniating all this time the little old mother
in the most sinful manner; she may be the most good-tempered woman in
the world. It is well that our Lord understands us better than we do
ourselves.

All this time Petrea sate silent, for however enlightened and
unprejudiced people may be, they never can perfectly free themselves
from the impression of certain circumstances, such as presentiments,
omens, apparitions, and forebodings, which, like owls on noiseless
wings, have flown through the world ever since the time of Adam, when
they first shouted their ominous "Too-who! too-whit!" People know that
Hobbes, who denied the resurrection in the warmest manner, never could
sleep in the neighbourhood of a room in which there had been a corpse.
Petrea, who had not the least resemblance in the world to Hobbes, was
not inclined to gainsay anything within the range of probability. Her
temperament naturally inclined her to superstition; and like most people
who sit still a great deal, she felt always at the commencement of a
journey a degree of disquiet as to how it would go on. But on this day,
under the leaden heaven, and the influence of discomforting forebodings,
this unquiet amounted to actual presentiment of evil; whether this had
reference to Sara or to herself she knew not; but she was disposed to
imagine the latter, and asked herself, as she often had done, whether
she were prepared for any occasion which might separate her for ever
from all those whom she loved on earth. By this means Petrea most
livingly discovered--discovered almost with horror, how strongly she
was fettered to her earthly existence, how dear life had become to her.

All human souls have their heights, but then they have also their
morasses, their thickets, their pits (I will not speak of abysses,
because many souls are too shallow to have these). A frequent mounting
upwards, or a more constant abode upon these heights, is the stipulated
condition of man's proximity to heaven. Petrea's soul was an uneven
ground, as is the case with most people; but there existed in her
nature, as we have before seen, a most determined desire to ascend
upwards; and at this time, in which she found her affections too much
bound to earthly things, she strove earnestly to ascend up to one of
those heights where every limited attraction vanishes before more
extended views, and where every fettered affection will become free, and
will revive in what is loftier. The attempt succeeded--succeeded by
making her feel that whatever was most valuable in this life was
intimately connected with that life which only first begins when this
ends. Her lively imagination called forth, one after another, a great
variety of scenes of misfortune and death; and she felt that in the
moment before she resigned life, her heart would be able to raise itself
with the words, "God be praised in all eternity."

With this feeling, and convinced by it that her present undertaking was
good and necessary, whatever its consequences might be, Petrea's heart
became light and free. She turned herself with lively words and looks to
her travelling companion, and drew him by degrees into a conversation
which was so interesting to them both, that they forgot weather and
ways, forebodings, evil omens, and preparations for death. The journey
prospered as well as any autumn journey could prosper. Not a trace of
danger met them by the way. The wind slumbered in the woods; and in the
public-houses they only heard one and another sleepy peasant open his
mouth with a "devil take me!"

In the forenoon of the following day our travellers arrived happily at
U. Petrea scarcely allowed herself time to take any refreshments before
she commenced her inquiries. The result of all her and the Assessor's
labours we give shortly thus:

It soon became beyond a doubt to them that Sara, together with a little
daughter, had been in the city, and had resided in the very inn in which
Petrea and the Assessor now were, although they travelled under a
foreign name. She was described as being in the highest degree weak and
sickly; and, as might be expected in her circumstances, it appeared that
she had besought the host to sell some books for her, which he had done.
One of these books it was which, with its forgotten mark, had fallen
into the hands of Petrea. Sara, on account of her debility, had been
compelled to remain several days in that place, but she had been gone
thence probably a week; and they saw by the Day-book[21] that it had been
her intention to proceed thence to an inn which lay on the road to
Petrea's native place; not, however, on the road by which they had
travelled to U., but upon one which was shorter, although much worse.

Sara then also was on her way home--yes, perhaps might be there already!
This thought was an indescribable consolation for Petrea's heart, which
from the account she had received of Sara's condition, was anxious in
the highest degree. But when she thought on the long time which had
passed since Sara's journey from the city, she was filled with anxiety,
and feared that Sara might be ill upon the road.

Willingly would Petrea have turned back again on the same evening to
seek out traces of Sara; but care for her old friend prevented her from
doing more than speaking of it. The Assessor, indeed, found himself
unwell, and required rest. The cold and wet weather had operated
prejudicially upon him, both mind and body. It was adopted as
unquestionable that they could not continue the journey till the
following morning.

The Assessor had told Petrea that this was his birthday, and perhaps it
was this thought which caused him to be uncommonly melancholy the whole
day. Petrea, who was infinitely desirous of cheering him, hastened,
whilst he was gone out to seek an acquaintance, to prepare a little
festival for his return.

With flowers and foliage which Petrea obtained, heaven knows how!--but
when people are resolutely bent on anything they find out the means to
do it--with these, then, with lights, a good fire, with a table covered
with his favourite dishes and such like, although in a somewhat
disagreeably public-house room, such a picture of comfort and
pleasantness was presented as the Assessor much loved.

Fathers and mothers, and all the members of happy families, are
accustomed to birthday festivals, flower-garlands, and well-covered
tables; but nobody had celebrated the birthday of the Assessor during
his solitary wandering; he had not been indulged with those little
flower-surprises of life--if one may so call them; hence it happened
that he entered from the dark, wet street into this festal room with an
exclamation of astonishment and heartfelt pleasure.

Petrea, on her part, was inexpressibly cordial, and was quite happy when
she saw the pains which she had taken to entertain her old friend
succeed so well. The two spent a pleasant evening together. They made
each other mutually acquainted with the evil omens and the impressions
which they had occasioned, and bantered one another a little thereon;
but decided positively that such fore-tokenings for the most
part--betoken nothing at all.

As they separated for the night the Assessor pressed Petrea's hand with
the assurance that very rarely had a day given him such a joyous
evening. Grateful for these words, and grateful for the hope of soon
finding again the lost and wept friend of her youth, Petrea went to
rest, but the Assessor remained up late--midnight saw him still writing.

Man and woman! There is a deal, especially in novels, said about man and
woman, as of separate beings. However that may be, human beings are they
both--and as human beings, as morally sentient and thinking creatures,
they influence one another for life. Their ways and means are different;
and it is this very difference which, by mutual benefits, and mutual
endeavours to sweeten life to one another, produces what is so beautiful
and so perfect.

The clearest sun brightened the following morning; but the eyes of the
Assessor were troubled, as if he had enjoyed but little repose. Whilst
he and Petrea were breakfasting, he was called out to inspect something
relative to the carriage.

Was it now the hereditary sin of mother Eve, or was it any other cause
which induced Petrea at this moment to approach the table on which the
Assessor's money lay, together with papers ready to be put into a
travelling writing-case. Enough! she did it--she did certainly what no
upright reader will pardon her for doing, quickly ran her eyes over one
of the papers which seemed just lately to have received from the pen
impressions of thought, and she took it. Shortly afterwards the Assessor
entered, and as it was somewhat late, he hastily put together his
papers, and they set off on their journey.

The weather was glorious, and Petrea rejoiced like--nay, even more than
a child, over the objects which met her eyes, and which, after the rain,
stood in the bright sunshine, as if in the glory of a festive-day. The
world was to her now more than ever a magic ring; not the perplexing,
half-heathenish, but the purely Christian, in which everything, every
moment has its signification, even as every dewdrop receives its beaming
point of light from the splendour of the sun. Autumn was, above all,
Petrea's favourite season, and its abundance now made her soul overflow
with joyful thoughts. It is the time in which the earth gives a feast to
all her children, and joyous and changing scenes were represented by the
waysides. Here the corn-field raised to heaven its golden sheaves, and
the harvesters sang; there, around the purple berries of the
service-tree, circled beautiful flocks of the twittering silktails;
round the solitary huts, the flowering potato-fields told that the fruit
was ripe, and merry little barefooted children sprang into the wood to
gather bilberries. Petrea thanked heaven in her heart for all the
innocent joys of earth. She thought of her home, of her parents, of her
sisters, of Sara, who would soon again be one of their circle, and of
how she (Petrea) would cherish her, and care for her, and reconcile her
to life and to happiness. In the blessed, beautiful morning hour, all
thoughts clothed themselves in light. Petrea felt quite happy, and the
joke which she thought of playing on her friend the Assessor with the
stolen piece of paper, contributed not a little to screw up her life's
spirit to greater liveliness. "From the fulness of the heart the mouth
speaketh," and Petrea involuntarily influenced her travelling companion
so far that they both amused themselves with bombarding little children
on the waysides with apples and pears, whereby they were not at all
terrified.

They had now taken the same road upon which Sara had travelled, and in
the first inn at which they stopped, their hopes were strengthened; for
Sara had been there, and had taken thence a horse to the next
public-house. All was on the way towards home. So continued it also at
the three following stations; but at the fifth, they suddenly lost all
traces of her. No one there had seen a traveller answering to her
description, nor was her name to be found in the Travellers' Day-book.
No! a great uneasiness for Petrea. After some deliberation, she and the
Assessor determined to return to the public-house whence they were just
come, in order to discover clearly in what direction Sara had gone
thence.

In the mean time the evening had come on, and the sun was descending as
our friends were passing through one of the gloomiest woods in Sweden,
and one in such ill-report that not long ago a writer speaking of it,
said, "The forest shrouds memories as awful as itself, and monuments of
murder stand by the wayside. Probably the mantle of the mountains falls
not now in such thick folds as formerly, but yet there still are valleys
where the stroke of the axe has never yet been heard, and rocky ranges
which have never yet been smitten by the rays of the sun."

"Here two men murdered the one the other," said the postilion with the
gayest air in the world, whilst the carriage stopped to give the horses
breath, on account of the heaviness of the road, and as he spoke he
pointed with his whip to a heap of twigs and pieces of wood which lay to
the left of the road, directly before the travellers, and which
presented a repulsive aspect. It is customary for every passer-by to
throw a stone or a piece of wood upon such a blood-stained spot, and
thus the monument of murder grows under the continued curse of society.
Thus it now stands there, hateful and repulsive amid the beautiful
fir-trees, and it seemed as if the earth had given forth the ugliest of
its mis-shaped boughs, and the most distorted of its twisted roots,
wherewith to build up the heap. From the very midst of this abomination,
however, a wild-rose had sprung forth and shot upwards its living twigs
from among the dry boughs, whilst, like fresh blood-drops above the
pile, shone its berries illuminated by the sun, which now in its descent
threw a path of light over the broad road.

"When this wild-rose is full of flowers," said Jeremias, as he regarded
it with his expressive glance, "it must awaken the thought, that that
which the state condemns with justice, a Higher Power can cover with the
roses of his love."

The sun withdrew his beams. The carriage set itself again in motion, but
at the very moment when the horses passed the heap, they shyed so
violently that the carriage was backed into a ditch and overturned.

"Farewell life!" cried Petrea, internally; but before she herself knew
how, she was out of the carriage, and found herself standing not at all
the worse upon the soft heather. With the Assessor, however, it did not
fare so well; a severe blow on the right leg made it impossible for him
to support himself upon it without great suffering. His old servant,
who had acted as coachman on the journey, lay in a fainting fit at
a few paces from him, bleeding profusely from a wound in the head,
whilst the little post-boy stood by his horses and cried. Time and
situation were not the most agreeable. But Petrea felt herself after
the fright of the first moment perfectly calm and collected. By the
help of the rain-water, which was there in abundance, she brought the
fainting man back to consciousness, and bound up his head with her
pocket-handkerchief. She then helped him to sit up--to stand he was not
able from dizziness. Soon sate master and man by each other, with their
backs by a strong fir-tree, and looked sadly troubled; for although the
Assessor was far more concerned on account of his servant than himself,
and asserted that his own accident was a mere trifle, still he was quite
pale from the pain which it occasioned him. What was to be done? Could
the carriage have been raised out of the ditch and the two wounded men
put into it, Petrea would have placed herself on the coach-box and have
driven them as well as anybody; nothing could be easier, she thought;
but the accomplishing of the two first conditions was the difficulty,
and in the present circumstances an impossibility, for our poor Petrea's
arms and hands were not able to second her good-will and courage. The
post-boy said that at about three-quarters of a mile (English) there lay
a peasant's hut in the wood by the road side; but it was impossible to
induce him to run there, or under any condition to leave his horses.

"Let us wait," said the Assessor, patiently and calmly, "probably
somebody will soon come by from whom we can beg assistance." They
waited, but nobody came, and every moment the shades became darker; it
seemed as if people avoided this horrible wood at this hour.

Petrea, full of anxiety for her old friend, if he must remain much
longer on the damp ground, and in the increasing coolness of evening,
determined with herself what she would do. She wrapped up the Assessor
and his old servant in every article of clothing of which she could gain
possession, amongst which was her own cloak, rejoicing that this was
unobserved by her friend, and then said to him decidedly, "Now I go
myself to obtain help! I shall soon be back again!" And without
regarding the prohibitions, prayers, and threats, with which he
endeavoured to recal her, she ran quickly away in the direction of the
hut, as the post-boy had described it. She hastened forward with quick
steps, endeavouring to remove all thoughts of personal danger, and only
to strengthen herself by the hope of procuring speedy help for her
friend.

The haste with which she went compelled her after some time to stand
still to recover breath. The quick motion which set her blood in rapid
circulation, the freshness of the air, the beautiful and magnificent
repose of the wood, diffused through her, almost in opposition to her
own will and heart, an irresistible feeling of satisfaction and
pleasure, which however quickly left her as she heard a something
crackling in the wood. The wind it could not be? perhaps it was an
animal! Petrea held her panting breath. It crackled; it
whispered;--there were people in the wood! However bold, or more
properly speaking, rash, Petrea might be at certain moments, her heart
now drew itself together, when she thought on her solitary, defenceless
situation, and on the scenes of horror for which this wood was so
fearfully renowned. Beyond this, she was now no longer in those years
when one stands in life on a flying foot, careless and presumptuous:
she had planted herself firmly in life; had her own quiet room; her
peaceful sphere of activity, which she now loved more than the most
brilliant adventures in the world! It was not therefore to be wondered
at, that she recoiled tremblingly from the unlovely and hateful which is
at home by the road sides.

Petrea listened with a strongly beating heart; the rustling came nearer
and nearer; for one moment she thought of concealing herself on the
opposite side of the way, but in the next she boldly demanded "Who is
there?"

All was still. Petrea strained her eyes to discover some one in the
direction of the sound, but in vain: the wood was thick, and it had
become quite dark. Once again, exclaimed Petrea, "If any one be there
let him come to the help of unfortunate travellers!"

Even the heart of robbers, thought she, would be mollified by
confidence; and prayers for help might remove thoughts of murder. The
rustling in the wood began afresh, and now were heard the voices
of--children. An indescribable sensation of joy went through Petrea's
heart. A whole army, with Napoleon at their head, could not at this
moment have given that feeling of security and protection which came
from those children's voices; and soon came issuing from the wood two
little barefooted human creatures, a boy and a girl, who stared on
Petrea with astonishment. She quickly made herself acquainted with them,
and they promised to conduct her to the cottage, which lay at a little
distance. On their way they gave Petrea bilberries out of their full
birch-wood measure, and related to her that the reason of their being
out so late was, that they had been looking for the cow which was lost
in the wood; that they should have driven her home, but had not been
able to find her; which greatly troubled the little ten-years-old girl,
because, she said, the sick lady could not have any milk that evening.

Whilst Petrea, led by her little guardian-angels, wandered through the
wood, we will make a little flight, and relate what had occurred there a
few days before.

A few days before, a travelling-car drove along this road, in which sate
a lady and a little girl. As they came within sight of a small cottage,
which with its blossoming potato-field looked friendly in the wood, the
lady said to the peasant boy who drove, "I cannot go farther! Stop! I
must rest!" She dismounted, and crawled with his help to the cottage,
and besought the old woman, whom she found there, for a glass of water,
and permission to rest upon the bed for a moment. The voice which prayed
for this was almost inaudible, and the countenance deathly pale. The
little girl sobbed and cried bitterly. Scarcely had the poor invalid
laid herself upon the humble and hardly clean bed, when she fell into a
deep stupor, from which she did not revive for three hours.

On her return to consciousness she found that the peasant had taken her
things into the cottage; taken his horse out of the car, and left her.
The invalid made several ineffectual attempts during three days to leave
the bed, but scarcely had she taken a few steps when she sunk back upon
it; her lips trembled, and bitter tears flowed over her pale cheeks. The
fourth day she lay quite still; but in the afternoon besought the old
woman to procure her an honest and safe person, who, for a suitable sum,
would conduct the little girl to a place which would be made known to
him by a letter that would be given with her. The old woman proposed her
brother's son as a good man, and one to be relied on for this purpose,
and promised in compliance with the prayer of the sick woman to seek him
out that same day and speak with him; but as he lived at a considerable
distance she feared that she should only be able to return late in the
evening. After she was gone, the invalid took paper and a lead pencil,
and with a weak and trembling hand wrote as follows:

      "I cannot arrive--I feel it! I sink before I reach the haven. Oh,
      foster-parents, good sisters, have mercy on my little one, my
      child, who knocks at your door, and will deliver to you my humble,
      my last prayer! Give to her a warm home, when I am resting in my
      cold one! See, how good she looks! Look at her young countenance,
      and see that she is acquainted with want--she is not like her
      mother! I fancy her mild features resemble hers whose name she
      bears, and whose angelic image never has left my soul.

      "Foster-mother, foster-father! good sisters! I had much to say,
      but can say only a little! Forgive me! Forgive me the grief which
      I have occasioned you! Greatly have I erred, but greatly also have
      I suffered. A wanderer have I been on the earth, and have had
      nowhere a home since I left your blessed roof! My way has been
      through the desert; a burning simoom has scorched, has consumed my
      cheek----

      "About to leave the world in which I have erred so greatly and
      suffered so much, I call now for your blessing. Oh, let me tell
      you that that Sara, which you once called daughter and sister, is
      yet not wholly unworthy! She is sunk deep, but she has endeavoured
      to raise herself; and your forms, like good angels, have floated
      around the path of her improvement.

      "It will do your noble hearts good to know that she dies now
      repentant, but hopeful--she has fixed her humble hope upon the
      Father of Mercy.

      "The hand of mercy cherished on earth the days of my
      childhood--later, it has lifted my dying head, and has poured into
      my heart a new and a better life; it has conducted me to hope in
      the mercy of heaven. Foster-father, thou who wast His image to me
      on earth, thou whom I loved much--gentle foster-mother, whose
      voice perhaps could yet call forth life in this cold breast--have
      mercy on my child--call it your child! and thanks and blessings be
      upon you!

      "It never was my intention to come, as a burden, into your house.
      No; I wished only to conduct my child to your door--to see it open
      to her, and then to go forth--go forth quietly and die. But I
      shall not reach so far! God guide the fatherless and the
      motherless to you!

      "And now farewell! I can write no more--it becomes dark before my
      eyes. I write these last words upon my knees. Parents, sisters,
      take my child to you! May it make you some time forget the errors
      of its mother! Pardon all my faults! I complain of no one.

      "God reward you, and be merciful to me!

                              "Sara."

Sara folded her letter hastily, sealed it and directed it, and then,
enfeebled by the exertion, sank down beside her sleeping child, kissed
her softly, and whispered, "for the last time!" Her feet and hands were
like ice; she felt this icy coldness run through all her veins, and
diffuse itself over her whole body; her limbs stiffened; and it seemed
to her as if a cold wind blew into her face.

"It is death!" thought Sara; "my death-bed is lonesome and miserable;
yet--I have deserved no better." Her consciousness became ever darker;
but in the depths of her soul combated still the last, perhaps the
noblest powers of life--suffering and prayer. At length they too also
became benumbed, but not for long, for new impressions waked suddenly
the slumbering life.

It appeared to Sara as if angel voices had spoken and repeated her name,
tender hands had rubbed her stiffened limbs with electrical fire; her
feet were pressed to a bosom that beat strongly; hot drops fell upon
them, and thawed the icy coldness. She felt a heart throbbing against
hers, and the wind of death upon her face vanished before warm summer
breath, kisses, tears. Oh! was it a dream? But the dream became ever
more living and clear. Life, loving, affectionate, warm life, contended
with death, and was the victor! "Sara, Sara!" cried a voice full of love
and anxiety, and Sara opened her eyes, and said, "Oh! Petrea, is it
you?"

Yes, indeed, it was our poor Petrea, whose distress at Sara's condition,
and whose joy over her now returning life, can neither of them be
described. Sara took Petrea's hand, and conveyed it to her lips, and the
humility of this action, so unlike the former Sara, penetrated Petrea's
heart.

"Give me something to drink," prayed Sara, with a feeble voice. Petrea
looked around for some refreshing liquid, but there was nothing to be
found in the cottage excepting a jug containing a little muddy water;
not a drop of milk, and the cow was lost in the wood! Petrea would have
given her heart's blood for a few drops of wine, for she saw that Sara
was ready to die from feebleness. And now, with feelings which are not
to be told, must she give Sara to drink from the muddy water, in which,
however, to make it more refreshing, she bruised some bilberries. Sara
thanked her for it as if it had been nectar.

"Is there anywhere in this neighbourhood a place where one can meet with
people, and obtain the means of life?" asked Petrea from her little
guide.

The little guide knew of none excepting in the village, and in the
public-house there they could obtain everything, "whatever they wished,"
said the child; to be sure it was a good way there, but she knew a
footpath through the wood by which they might soon reach it.

Petrea did not stop thinking for a moment; and after she had encouraged
Sara to courage and hope, she set out most speedily with the little
nimble maiden on the way to the village.

The girl went first: her white head-kerchief guided Petrea through the
duskiness of the wood. But the footway which the girl trod so lightly
and securely, was an actual way of trial for Petrea. Now and then
fragments of her clothes were left hanging on the thick bushes; now a
branch which shot outwards seized her bonnet and struck it flat; now she
went stumbling over tree-roots and stones, which, on account of the
darkness and the speed of her flight, she could not avoid; and now bats
flew into her face. In vain did the wood now elevate itself more
majestically than ever around her; in vain, did the stars kindle their
lights, and send their beams into the deep gullies of the wood; in vain
sang the waterfalls in the quiet evening as they fell from the rocks.
Petrea had now no thought for the beauty of nature; and the lights which
sparkled from the village were to her a more welcome sight than all the
suns and stars in the firmament.

More lights than common streamed in pale beams through the misty windows
of the public-house as Petrea came up to it. All was fermentation within
it as in a bee-hive; violins were playing; the _polska_ was being
danced; women's gowns swung round, sweeping the walls; iron-heeled shoes
beat upon the floor; and the dust flew up to the ceiling. After Petrea
had sought in vain for somebody outside the dancing-room, she was
compelled to go in, and then she saw instantly that there was a wedding.
The gilded crown on the head of the bride wavered and trembled amid the
attacks and the defence of the contending parties, for it was precisely
the hot moment of the Swedish peasant wedding, in which, as it is said,
the crown is danced off the head of the bride. The married women were
endeavouring to vanquish and take captive the bride, whilst the girls
were, on their part, doing their utmost to defend and hold her back. In
the other half of the great room, however, all went on more noisily and
more violently still, for there the married men strove to dance the
bridegroom from the unmarried ones, and they pulled and tore and pushed
unmercifully, amid shouts and laughter, whilst the _polska_ went on its
whirling measure.

It would be almost at the peril of her life that a delicate lady should
enter into such a tumult; but Petrea feared in this moment no other
danger than that of not being able to make herself heard in this wild
uproar. She called and demanded to speak with the host; but her voice
was perfectly swallowed up in the universal din. She then quickly turned
herself, amid the contending and round-about-swinging groups to the two
musicians, who were scraping upon their fiddles with a sort of frenzy,
and beating time with their feet. Petrea caught hold of one of them by
the arm, and prayed him in God's name to leave off for a moment, for
that her business was of life and death. But they paid not the slightest
attention to her; they heard not what she said; they played, and the
others danced with fury.

"That is very mad!" thought Petrea, "but I will be madder still!" and so
thinking, she threw down, upon the musicians, a table which stood near
them covered with bottles and glasses. With this crash the music was
suddenly still. The pause in the music astonished the dancers; they
looked around them. Petrea took advantage of this moment, went into the
crowd and called for the host. The host, who was celebrating his
daughter's wedding, came forward; he was a fat, somewhat pursy man, who
evidently had taken a glass too much.

Petrea related summarily that which had happened; prayed for people to
assist at the carriage, and for some wine and fine bread for an invalid.
She spoke with warmth and determination; but nevertheless the host
demurred, and the crowd, half intoxicated with drink and dancing,
regarded her with a distrustful look, and Petrea heard it whispered
around her--"The mad lady!" "It is the mad lady!" "No, no, it is not
she!" "Yes, it is she!"

And we must confess that Petrea's excited appearance, and the condition
of her toilet after the fatigues of her wandering, gave some occasion
for her being taken for a little crazy; this, and the circumstance of
her being mistaken for another person, may explain the disinclination to
afford her assistance, which otherwise does not belong to the character
of the Swedish peasantry.

Again Petrea exhorted host and peasant to contribute their help, and
promised befitting reward.

The host set himself now in a commanding attitude, cleared his throat,
and spoke with a self-satisfied air.

"Yes, yes," said he, "that's all right-good and handsome, but I should
like to see something of this befitting reward before I put myself out
of the way about overturned carriages. In the end, maybe, one shall find
neither one nor the other. One cannot believe everything that people
say!"

Petrea recollected with uneasiness that she had no money with her; she,
however, let nothing of that be seen, but replied calmly and
collectedly, "You shall receive money when you come to the carriage. But
for heaven's sake, follow me immediately; every moment's delay may cost
a life!"

The men looked undecidedly one on another; but no one stirred from the
place; a dull murmur ran through the crowd. Almost in despair, Petrea
clasped her hands together and exclaimed, whilst tears streamed from her
eyes, "Are you Christians, and yet can hear that fellow-creatures are in
danger without hastening to help them."

She mentioned the name and office of her father, and then went from
prayers to threats.

Whilst all this was going on in the house, something was going on at the
door, of which, in all speed, we will give a glimpse.

There drew up at the inn-door a travelling-calash, accompanied by a
small Holstein carriage in which sate four boys, the eldest of whom,
probably ten years of age, and who, evidently greatly to his
satisfaction, had managed with his own hands a pair of thin travelling
horses. From the coach-box of the calash sprang nimbly a somewhat stout,
jovial-looking gentleman, and out of the carriage came, one after
another, other four little boys, with so many packets and bundles as was
perfectly wonderful; among all these moved a rather thin lady of a good
and gay appearance, who took with her own hands all the things out of
the carriage, and gave them into the care of a maid and the eldest of
the eight boys; the youngest sate in the arms of his father.

"Can you yet hold something, Jacob?" asked the lady from one of the
boys, who stood there loaded up to the very chin. "Yes, with my nose,"
replied he, merrily; "nay, nay, mamma dear, not the whole
provision-basket--that's quite impossible!"

The mother laughed, and instead of the provision-basket, two or three
books were put under the protection of the little nose.

"Take care of the bottles, young ones!" exhorted the mother, "and count
them exactly; there should be ten of them. Adam, don't stand there with
your mouth open, but hold fast, and think about what you have in your
hand, and what you are doing! Take good care of the bottle of mamma's
elixir. What a noise is there within! Does nobody come out? Come here my
young ones! Adam, look after David! Jonathan, stand here! Jacob,
Solomon, where are you? Shem and Seth, keep quiet!"

This was the moment when, by the opening of the door of the
dancing-room, they became aware of the arrival of the travellers, and
when the host hastened out to receive them. Many followed him, and among
the rest Petrea, who quickly interrupted her address to the peasants, in
order, through the interposition of the travellers, as she hoped, to
obtain speedier help.

"Good gentlefolks," cried she, in a voice which showed her agitation of
mind; "I know not, it is true, who you are" (and the darkness prevented
her from seeing it), "but I hope you are Christians, and I beseech of
you, for heaven's sake----"

"Whose voice is that?" interrupted a cheerful, well-toned, manly voice.

"Who speaks?" exclaimed Petrea in astonishment.

A few words were exchanged, and suddenly the names "Petrea! Jacobi!
Louise!" flew exultantly from the lips of the three, and they locked one
another in a heartfelt and affectionate embrace.

"Aunt Petrea! Aunt Petrea!" cried the eight boys in jubilation, and
hopped around her.

Petrea wept for joy that she had not alone met with good Christians, but
had hit upon her most Christian brother-in-law and court-preacher, and
upon "our eldest," who, with her hopeful offspring, "the Berserkers,"
were upon their journey to the paternal house and the new parsonage.

A few minutes afterwards the carriage, containing Petrea, Louise, and
Jacobi, accompanied by peasants on horseback, drove away at full gallop
into the wood, into whose gullies, as well as into Petrea's imploring
eyes, the half-moon, which now ascended, poured its comfortable light.

We leave Petrea now with her relatives, who, on their homeward journey,
fell in with her at the right moment to save her from a situation in the
highest degree painful. We are perfectly sure that the Assessor received
speedy assistance; that Sara was regaled with wine as well as with
Louise's elixir; that Petrea's heart was comforted, and her toilet
brought into order; and in confirmation of this our assurance we will
quote the following lines from a letter of Louise, which on the next day
was sent off home.

"I am quite convinced that Sara, with careful attention, befitting diet,
and above all, by being surrounded with kindness, may be called back to
life and health. But for the present she is so weak that it is
impossible to think of her travelling under several days. And in any
case, I doubt if she will come with us, unless my father come to fetch
her. She says that she will not be a burden to our family. Ah! now it is
a pleasure to open house and heart to her. She is so changed! And her
child is--a little angel! For the Assessor it might be necessary, on
account of his leg, that he go to the city; but he will not leave Sara,
who requires his help so greatly (his servant is out of all danger).
Petrea, spite of all fatigues and adventures, is quite superb. She and
Jacobi enliven us all. As things now stand we cannot fix decidedly the
day of our arrival; but if Sara continue to improve, as appearances
promise, Jacobi sets out to-morrow with the children to you. It is so
dear with them all here in the public-house. God grant that we may all
soon meet again in our beloved home!"

An hour after the receipt of this letter the Judge set off with such
haste as if his life were concerned. He journeyed from home to the
forest-village; we, on the contrary, reverse the journey, and betake
ourselves from the public-house to----

FOOTNOTES:

[21] A Day-book (Dagbok) is kept at every inn in Sweden. The name of
every traveller who takes thence horses, and the name of the next town
to which he proceeds, are entered in it; and thus when once on the
trace, nothing could be easier than to discover such a traveller. The
day-book is renewed each month.--M. H.




CHAPTER IV.

THE HOME.


Lilies were blossoming in the house on the beautiful morning of the
twentieth of September. They seemed to shoot up of themselves under
Gabriele's feet. The mother, white herself as a lily, went about softly
in her fine morning-dress, with a cloth in her hand, wiping away from
mirror or table the smallest particle of dust. A higher expression of
joy than common animated her countenance; a fine crimson tinged her
otherwise pale cheeks, and the lips moved themselves involuntarily as if
they would speak loving and joyful words.

Bergstroem adorned ante-room and steps with foliage and splendid flowers,
so that they represented a continuation of garlands along the white
walls; and not a little delighted was he with his own taste, which
Gabriele did not at all omit to praise. But although an unusually great
deal of occupation pervaded the house this morning, still it was
nevertheless unusually quiet; people only spoke in low voices, and when
the least noise was made, the mother said, "Hush! hush!"

The cause of this was, that the lost but again-found child slept in the
house of her parents.

Sara had arrived there the evening before, and we have passed over this
scene, for the great change in her, and her shaken condition, had made
it sorrowful; yet we wish indeed that the feeling reader had seen the
manly tears which flowed down the cheeks of the Judge, as he laid the
found-again daughter on the bosom of her mother. We should like to have
shown him the unfortunate one, as she rested with her hands crossed over
her breast on the snow-white couch, over which the mother herself had
laid the fine coverlet; have shown him how she looked upon the child,
whose bed stood near her own; upon the beloved ones, who full of
affection surrounded her--and then up to heaven, without being able to
utter one word! And how glad should we have been could he have seen the
Jacobian pair this evening in the paternal home, and how there sate
eating around them, Adam and Jacob, the twin brothers Jonathan and
David, ditto Shem and Seth, together with Solomon and little Alfred.
They were well-trained children, and looked particularly well, all
dressed alike in a blouse of dark stuff, over which fell back the white
shirt collar, leaving free the throat with its lively tint of health,
whilst the slender waist was girded with a narrow belt of white leather.
Such was the light troop of "the Berserkers."

But we return to our bright morning hour. Eva and Leonore were in the
garden, and gathered with their own hands some select Astracan apples
and pears, which were to ornament the dinner table. They were still
glittering with dew, and for the last time the sun bathed them with
purple by the song of the bulfinch. The sisters had spoken of Sara; of
the little Elise, whom they would educate; of Jacobi--and their
conversation was cheerful; then they went to other subjects.

"And to-day," said Leonore, "your last answer goes to Colonel R----,
your last, no! And you feel quite satisfied that it should be so?"

"Yes, quite!" returned Eva; "how the heart changes! I cannot now
conceive how I once loved him!"

"It is extraordinary how he should still solicit your hand, and this
after so long a separation. He must have loved you much more than any of
the others to whom he made court."

"I do not think so, but--ah, Leonore! do you see the beautiful apple
there? It is quite bright. Can you reach it? No? Yes, if you climb on
this bough."

"Must I give myself so much trouble?" asked Leonore; "that is indeed
shocking! Well, but I must try, only catch me if I should fall!"

The sisters were here interrupted by Petrea, whose appearance showed
that she had something interesting to communicate.

"See, Eva," said she, giving to her a written piece of paper, "here you
have something for morning-reading. Now you must convince yourself of
something of which till now you would not believe. And I shall call you
a stock, a stone, an automaton without heart and soul, if you do
not--yes, smile! You will not laugh when you have read it. Leonore!
come, dear Leonore, you must read it also, you will give me credit for
being right. Read, sisters, read!"

The sisters read the following remarks, in the handwriting of the
Assessor.

"'Happy is the lonely and the lowly! He may ripen and refresh himself in
peace!' Beautiful words, and what is better, true.

"The foundling has proved their truth. He was sick in mind, heart, and
sick of the world and of himself, but he belonged to the lowly and to
the unnoticed, and so he could be alone; alone, in the fresh, quiet
wood, alone with the Great Physician, who only can heal the deep wounds
of the heart--and it is become better with him.

"Now I begin to understand the Great Physician, and the regimen which he
has prescribed for me. I feared the gangrene selfishness, and would
drink myself free therefrom by the nectar of love; but he said,
'Jeremias, drink not this draught, but that of self-denial--it is more
purifying.'

"I have drunk it. I have loved her for twenty years without pretension
and without hope.

"To-day I have passed my three-and-sixtieth year; the increasing pain in
my side commands me to leave the steps of the patients, and tells me
that I have not many more paces to count till I reach my grave. May it
be permitted to me to live the remainder of my days more exclusively for
her!

"At the 'Old Man's Rose' will I live for her--for it stands in my will
that it belongs to her, it belongs to Eva Frank.

"I will beautify it for her. I will cultivate there beautiful trees and
flowers for her; vines and roses will I bring there. Old age will some
time seize on her, wither her, and consume her. But then 'the rose of
age' will bloom for her, and the odour of my love bless her, when the
ugly old man wanders on the earth no more. She will take her dear
sisters to her there; there hear the songs of the birds, and see the
glory of the sun upon the lovely objects of nature.

"I will repose on these thoughts during the solitary months or years
that I must pass there. Truly, many a day will be heavy to me; and the
long solitary evenings; truly, it were good to have there a beloved and
gentle companion, to whom one might say each day, 'Good morning, the sun
is beautiful;' or in whose eyes--if it were not so--one could see a
better sun;--a companion with whom one could enjoy books, nature--all
that God has given us of good; whose hand, in the last heavy hour one
could press, and to whom one could say, 'Good night! we meet
again--to-morrow--with love itself--with God!'

"But--but--the foundling shall find no home upon earth!

"Now he will soon find another home, and will say to the master there,
'Father, have mercy on my rose!' and to the habitation of men will he
say, 'Wearisome wast thou to me, O world! but yet receive my thanks for
the good which thou hast given me!'"

       *       *       *       *       *

When the sisters had ceased to read, several bright tears lay upon the
paper, and shone in the light of the sun. Leonore dried her tears, and
turning herself to Petrea, inquired, "But, Petrea, how came this paper
into your hands?"

"Did I not think that would come?" said Petrea. "You should not ask such
difficult questions, Leonore. Nay, now Eva's eyes are inquiring too--and
so grave. Do you think that the Assessor has put it into my hands? Nay,
he must be freed from that suspicion even at my expense. You want to
know how I came by this paper? Well then--I stole it, sisters--stole it
on our journey--on the very morning after it was written."

"But, Petrea!"

"But, Petrea! yes, you good ones! it is too late now to cry, 'but,
Petrea!' now you know the Assessor's secret; you now may do what your
consciences command, mine is hardened--you may start before my act, and
be horrified; I don't ask about it. The whole world may excommunicate
me--I don't trouble myself!--Eva! Leonore! Sisters!"

Petrea laid an arm round the neck of each sister, kissed them, smiling
with a tear in her eye, and vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

Somewhat later in the morning we find Eva and Gabriele on a visit at the
beautiful parsonage-house immediately in the vicinity of the town, where
Mrs. Louise is in full commotion with all her goods and chattels, whilst
the little Jacobis riot with father and grandfather over fields and
meadows. The little four-years-old Alfred, an uncommonly lively and
amiable child, is alone with the mother at home; he pays especial court
to Gabriele, and believing that he must entertain her, he brings out his
Noah's Ark to introduce to her, in his low, clear, young voice, Ham and
Hamina, Shem and Shemina, Japhet and Japhetina.

After all how-do-ye-do's between the sisters had been answered, Gabriele
loosened the paper from a basket which Ulla had brought in, and asked
Louise to be pleased to accept some roast veal and patties. "We
thought," said she, "that you would need something fresh after the
journey, before you get your store-room in order. Just taste a patty!
they are filled with mince-meat, and I assure you are baked since the
Flood."

"Really!" replied Louise, laughing, "they are delicate too! See, there's
one for you, my little manikin; but another time don't come and set
yourself forward and look so hungry! Thanks! thanks, dear sister! Ah,
how charming that we are come again into your neighbourhood! How fresh
and happy you all look! And Petrea! how advantageously she has altered;
she is come to have something quiet and sensible about her; she has
outgrown her nose, and dresses herself neatly; she is just like other
people now. And see--here I have a warm, wadded morning-dress for her,
that will keep her warm up in her garret; is it not superb? And it cost
only ten thalers courant."

"Oh, extraordinary!--out of the common way!--quite unheard of!" said
they, "is it not so?--why it is a piece of clothing for a whole life!"

"What a beautiful collar Eva has on! I really believe she is grown
handsomer," said Louise. "You were and are still the rose of the family,
Eva; you look quite young, and are grown stout. I, for my part, cannot
boast of that; but how can anybody grow stout when they have eight
children to work for! Do you know sisters, that in the last week before
I left Stockholm, I cut out a hundred and six shirts! I hope I can meet
with a good sempstress here; at home; look at my finger, it is quite
hard and horny with sewing. God bless the children! one has one's
trouble with them. But tell me, how is it with our mother? They have
always been writing to me that she was better--and yet I find her
terribly gone off; it really grieves me to see her. What does the
Assessor say?"

"Oh," replied Gabriele warmly, "he says that she will recover. There is
really no danger; she improves every day."

Eva did not look so hopeful as Gabriele, and her eyes were filled with
tears as she said, "When autumn and winter are only over, I hope that
the spring----"

"And do you know," interrupted Louise, with animation, "what I have been
thinking of? In the spring she shall come to us and try the milk cure:
she shall occupy this room, with the view towards the beautiful birch
grove, and shall enjoy the country air, and all the good things which
the country affords and which I can obtain for her--certainly this will
do her good. Don't you think that then she will recover? Don't you think
that it is a bright idea of mine?"

The sisters thought that really it was bright, and Louise continued:

"Now I must show you what I have brought for her. Do you see these two
damask breakfast cloths, and these six breakfast napkins?--all spun in
the house. I have had merely to pay for the weaving. Now, how do they
please you?"

"Oh, excellently! excellently!" said one sister.

"How very handsome! How welcome they will be!" said the other.

"And you must see what I have bought for my father--ah! Jacobi has it in
his carpet-bag--one thing lies here and another there--but you will see
it, you will see it."

"What an inundation of things!" said Gabriele, laughing. "One can see,
however, that there is no shortness of money."

"Thank God!" said Louise, "all is comfortable in that respect, though
you may very well believe that it was difficult at first; but we began
by regulating the mouths according to the dishes. Ever since I married I
have had the management of the money. I am my husband's treasurer; he
gives over to me whatever comes in, and he receives from me what he
wants, and in this way all has gone right. Thank God, when people love
one another all does go right! I am happier than I deserve to be, with
such a good, excellent husband, and such well-disposed children. If our
little girl, our little Louise, had but lived! Ah! it was a happiness
when she was born, after the eight boys; and then for two years she was
our greatest delight. Jacobi almost worshipped her; he would sit for
whole hours beside her cradle, and was perfectly happy if he only had
her on his knee. But she was inexpressibly amiable--so good, so clever,
so quiet; an actual little angel! Ah! it was hard to lose her. Jacobi
grieved as I have never seen a man grieve; but his happy temperament and
his piety came to his help. She has now been dead above a year. Ah!
never shall I forget my little girl!"

Louise's tears flowed abundantly; the sisters could not help weeping
with her. But Louise soon collected herself again, and said, whilst she
wiped her eyes, "Now we have also anxiety with little David's ankles;
but there is no perfect happiness in this world, and we have no right to
expect it. Pardon me that I have troubled you; and now let us speak of
something else, whilst I get my things a little in order. Tell me
something about our acquaintance--Aunt Evelina is well?"

"Yes, and sits as grandmother of five nephews at Axelholm, beloved and
honoured by all. It is a very sweet family that she sees about her, and
she has the happiest old age."

"That is pleasant to hear. But she really deserved to be loved and
honoured. Is her Karin also married?"

"Ah, no! Karin is dead! and this has been her greatest sorrow; they were
so happy together."

"Ah, thou heaven! Is she dead? Ah, yes, now I remember you wrote to me
that she was dead----Look at this dress, sisters--a present from my dear
husband; is it not handsome? and then quite modern. Yes, yes, dear
Gabriele, you need not make such an ambiguous face; it is very handsome,
and quite in the fashion, that I can assure you. But, _a propos_, how is
the Court-preacher? Exists still in a new form, does it? Now that is
good! I'll put it on this afternoon on purpose to horrify Jacobi, and
tell him that for the future I intend to wear it in honour of his
nomination to the office of court-preacher."

All laughed.

"But tell me," continued Louise, "how will our 'great astonishment' go
on? how have you arranged it?"

"In this manner," returned one of the sisters. "We shall all meet for a
great coffee-drinking in the garden, and during this we shall lead the
conversation in a natural sort of way to the piece of ground on the
other side the fence, and then peep through the cracks in it, and then
express that usual wish that this fence might come down. And then, at
this signal, your eight boys, Louise, are to fall on the fence and----"

"How can you think," said Louise--"to be sure my boys are nimble and
strong, but it would require the power of Berserkers to----"

"Don't be alarmed," answered the sisters, laughing, "the fence is sawn
underneath, and stands only so firm that a few pushes will produce the
effect--the thing is not difficult. Besides, we'll all run to the
attack, if it be needful."

"Oh, heaven help us! if it be only so, my young ones will soon manage
the business--and _a propos_! I have a few bottles of select white
sugar-beer with me, which would certainly please my father, and which
will be exactly the right thing if we, as is customary on such
occasions, have to drink healths."

During this conversation little Alfred had gone round ineffectually
offering two kisses, and was just on the point of growing angry because
his wares found no demand, when all at once, summoning resolution, he
threw his arms round Gabriele's neck, and exclaimed, "Now I see really
and thoroughly, that Aunt Gabriele has need of a kiss!" And it was not
Aunt Gabriele's fault if the dear child was not convinced how wholly
indispensable his gift was.

But Louise still turned over her things. "Here," said she, "I have a
waistcoat-piece for Bergstroem, and here a neck-kerchief for Ulla, as
well as this little brush with which to dust mirrors and tables. Is it
not superb? And see, a little pair of bellows, and these trifles for
Brigitta."

"Now the old woman," said the sisters, "will be happy! She is now and
then out of humour, but a feast of coffee, and some little present,
reconcile her with all the world; and to-day she will get both."

"And see," continued Louise, "how capitally these bellows blow: they can
make the very worst wood burn--see how the dust flies!"

"Uh! one can be blown away oneself," said Gabriele, laughing.

While the sisters were still occupied with cleaning and dusting, and
Louise was admiring her own discoveries, the Judge came in, happy and
warm.

"What a deal of business is going forward!" exclaimed he, laughing. "I
must congratulate you," said he, "Louise; your boys please me entirely.
They are animated boys, with, intellects all alive--but, at the same
time, obedient and polite. Little David is a regular hairbrain, and a
magnificent lad--what a pity it is that he will be lame!"

Louise crimsoned from heartfelt joy over the praise of her boys, and
answered quickly to the lamentation over the little David, "You should
hear, father, what a talent he has for the violoncello; he will be a
second Gehrman."

"Nay, that is good," returned the Judge; "such a talent as that is worth
his two feet. But I have hardly had time to notice you properly yet,
Louise. Heavens! it's glorious that you are come again into our
neighbourhood; now I think I shall be able to see you every day! and you
can also enjoy here the fresh air of the country. You have got thin, but
I really think you have grown!"

Louise said laughingly, that the time for that was over with her.

The sisters also, among themselves, made their observations on Louise.
They were rejoiced to see her, among all her things, so exactly herself
again.

Handsomer she certainly had not become--but people cannot grow handsomer
to all eternity. She looked well and she looked good, had no more of the
cathedral about her; she was an excellent Archdeacon's lady.

       *       *       *       *       *

We transport ourselves now to Sara's chamber.

When a beloved and guiltless child returns, after sufferings overcome,
to the bosom of parents into a beloved home, who can describe the sweet
delight of its situation? The pure enjoyment of all the charms of home;
the tenderness of the family; the resigning themselves to the heavenly
feeling of being again at home? But the guilty----

We have seen a picture of the prodigal son which we shall never forget!
It is the moment of reconciliation: the father opens his arms to the
son; the son falls into them and hides his face. Deep compunction of the
heart bows down his head, and over his pale cheek--the only part of his
countenance which is visible, runs a tear--a tear of penitence and pain,
which says everything. The golden ring may be placed upon his hand; the
fatted calf may be killed and served up before him--he cannot feel gay
or happy--embittering tears gush forth from the fountains of memory.

Thus was it with Sara, and exactly to that degree in which her heart was
really purified and ennobled. As she woke out of a refreshing sleep in
her new home, and saw near her her child sleeping on the soft snow-white
bed; as she saw all, by the streaming in light of the morning sun, so
festally pure and fresh; as she saw how the faithful memory of affection
had treasured up all her youthful predilections; as she saw her
favourite flowers, the asters, beaming upon the stove, in an alabaster
vase; and as she thought how all this had been--and how it now was--she
wept bitterly.

Petrea, who was reading in the window of Sara's room waiting for her
awaking, stood now with cordial and consoling words near her bed.

"Oh, Petrea!" said Sara, taking her hand and pressing it to her breast,
"let me speak with you. My heart is full. I feel as if I could tell you
all, and you would understand me. I did not come here of my own
will--your father brought me. He did not ask me--he took me like a
child, and I obeyed like a child. I was weak; I thought soon to die; but
this night under this roof has given me strength. I feel now that I
shall live. Listen, to me, Petrea, and stand by me, for as soon as my
feet will carry me I must go away from here. I will not be a burden to
this house. Stained and despised by the world, as I am, I will not
pollute this sanctuary! Already have I read aversion towards me in
Gabriele's look. Oh, my abode here would be a pain to myself! Might my
innocent little one only remain in this blessed house. I must away from
here! These charms of life; this abundance, they are not for me--they
would wake anguish in my soul! Poverty and labour beseem me! I will
away hence. I must!--but I will trouble nobody: I will not appear
ungrateful. Help me, Petrea--think for me; what I should do and where I
should go!"

"I have already thought," replied Petrea.

"Have you?" said Sara, joyfully surprised, and fixed upon her
searchingly her large eyes.

"Come and divide my solitude," continued Petrea, in a cordial voice.
"You know that I, although in the house of my parents, yet live for
myself alone, and have the most perfect freedom. Next to my room is
another, a very simple but quiet room, which might be exactly according
to your wishes. Come and dwell there! There you can live perfectly as
you please; be alone, or see only me, till the quiet influence of calm
days draw you into the innocent life of the family circle."

"Ah, Petrea," returned Sara, "you are good--but you cannot approach a
person of ill-report--and you do not know----"

"Hush! hush!" interrupted Petrea; "I know very well--because I see and
hear you again! Oh, Sara! who am I that I should turn away from you? God
sees into the heart, and he knows how weak and erring mine is, even if
my outward life remain pure, and if circumstances and that which
surrounds me have protected me, and have caused my conduct to be
blameless. But I know myself, and I have no more earnest prayer to God
than that: 'Forgive me my trespasses!' May I not pray by your side?
Cannot we tread together the path which lies before us? Both of us have
seen into many depths of life--both of us now look up humbly to the
cheerful heaven! Give me your hand--you were always dear to me, and now,
even as in the years of childhood do I feel drawn to you! Let us go; let
us try together the path of life. My heart longs after you; and does not
yours say to you that we are fit for one another, and that we can be
happy together?"

"Should I be a burden to you?" said Sara: "were I but stronger, I would
wait upon you; could I only win my bread by my hands, as in the latter
years I have done--but now!"

"Now give yourself up to me blindly," said Petrea. "I have enough for
us both. In a while, when you are stronger, we will help one another."

"Will not my wasted life--my bitter remembrances make my temper gloomy
and me a burden?" asked Sara; "and do not dark spirits master those who
have been so long in their power?"

"Penitence," said Petrea, "is a goddess--she protects the erring. And if
a heathen can say this, how much more a Christian!--Oh, Sara!
annihilating repentance itself--I know it--can become a strength for
him, by which he can erect himself. It can raise up to new life; it can
arouse a will which can conquer all things--it has raised me erect--it
will do the same for you! You stand now in middle life--a long future is
before you--you have an amiable child; have friends; have to live for
eternal life! Live for these! and you will see how, by degrees, the
night vanishes, the day ascends, and all arranges itself and becomes
clear. Come, and let us two unitedly work at the most important business
of life--improvement!"

Sara, at these words, raised herself in the bed, and new beams were
kindled in her eyes. "I will," said she, "Petrea; an angel speaks
through you; your words strengthen and calm me wonderfully--I will begin
anew----"

Petrea pressed Sara to her breast, and spoke warm and heartfelt
"thanks," and then added softly, "and now be a good child, Sara!--all
weak and sick people are children. Now submit, calmly and resignedly, to
be treated and guided like such a one; gladden by so doing those who are
around you, and who all wish you well! We cannot think of any change
before you are considerably better--it would trouble every one."

At this moment the door was opened, and the mother looked in
inquiringly; she smiled so affectionately as she locked Sara in her
arms. Leonore followed her; but as she saw Sara's excited state, she
went quickly back and returned with a breakfast-tray covered with all
kinds of good things; and now cheerful and merry words emulated one
another to divert the again-found-one, old modes of speech were again
reverted to, and old acquaintances renewed.

"Do you know Madame Folette again? She has been lately repaired. Can she
have the honour of giving you a cup of coffee? There is your old cup
with the stars; it was saved with Madame Folette from the fire, and the
little one here with the rose-buds is allotted to our little Elise. You
must really taste these rusks--they never were in the Ark--they came
with the blushing morning out of the oven. Our 'little lady' has herself
selected and filled the basket with the very best for you; you shall see
whether these home-baked would not please even the Assessor;"--and so
on.

In the mean time the little Elise had awoke, and looked with bright blue
eyes up to great Elise, who bent down to her. They were really like each
other, as often daughter's daughters and grandmothers are, and appeared
to feel related already. When Sara saw her child in Elise's arms, tears
of pure joy filled her eyes for the first time.

       *       *       *       *       *

I do not know whether my lady-readers have nerves to stand by while "the
Berserkers" overthrow the garden-fence. I fancy not; and therefore, with
my reader's permission, I make a little leap over the great event of the
day--the thrown-down wooden fence, which fell so hastily that the
Berserkers themselves tumbled all together over it,--and go into the new
piece of land, where we shall find the family-party assembled, sitting
on a flower-decorated moss-seat, under a tall birch-tree, which waved
over them its crown, tinged already with autumnal yellow. The September
sun, which was approaching its setting, illuminated the group, and
gleamed through the alders on the brook, which softly murmuring among
blue creeks, flowed around the new piece of land, and at once beautified
and bounded it.

Tears shone in the eyes of the family-father; but he spoke not. To see
himself the object of so much love; the thoughts on the future; on his
favourite plan; fatherly joy and pride; gratitude towards his
children--towards heaven, all united themselves to fill his heart with
the most pleasurable sensations which can bless a human bosom.

The mother, immediately after the great surprise, and the explosion of
joy which followed it, had gone into the house with Eva and Leonore.
Among those who remained behind, we see the friend of the family
Jeremias Munter, who wore on the occasion the grimmest countenance in
the world; the Baron L., who was no more the wild extravagant youth,
but a man, and beyond this, a landed-proprietor, whose grave demeanour
was beautified by a certain, agreeable sobriety, particularly visible
when he spoke with "our little lady," at whose feet he was seated.

Louise handed about white-sugar beer, which nobody praised more highly
than herself. She found that it had something unearthly in it, something
positively exalting; but when Gabriele, immediately after she had drank
a half glass, gave a spring upwards, "our eldest" became terrified, for
such a strong working of her effervescing white-beer she had by no means
expected. Nevertheless she was soon surrounded by the eight, who cried
altogether, "Mamma, may I have some beer?" "And I too?" "And I?" "And I
too?" "And I?" "And I?" "Send a deal of foam for me, mamma dear!"

"Nay, nay, nay, dear boys! people must not come clamouring and storming
thus--you don't see that I or the father do so. Solomon must wait to the
very last now. Patience is a good herb. There, you have it; now drink,
but don't wet yourselves!"

After the little Jacobis had all enjoyed the foaming, elevating liquor,
they became possessed by such a buoyant spirit of life, that Louise was
obliged to command them to exhibit their mighty deeds at a distance.
Hereupon they swarmed forth on journeys of discovery, and began to
tumble head over heels round the place. David hobbled along with his
little crutch over stock and stone, whilst Jonathan gathered for him all
sorts of flowers, and plucked the bilberry plants, to which he pointed
with his finger; little nosegays were then made out of them, with which
they overwhelmed their aunts, especially Gabriele, their chosen friend
and patron. The serious Adam, the eldest of the eight, a boy of
exceedingly staid demeanour, sate quietly by the side of his
grandfather, and appeared to consider himself one of the elderly people;
the little Alfred hopped about his mother.

The Judge looked around him with an animated countenance; he planted
alleys and hedges; set down benches and saw them filled with happy
people, and communicated his plans to Jacobi.

Jeremias observed the scene with a bitter, melancholy, and, to him,
peculiar smile. As little David came limping up to him with the
fragrant wood-flowers, he exclaimed suddenly, "Why not rather make here
a botanic garden than a common park? Flowers are indeed the only
pleasant thing here in the world, and because people go all about
snuffing with the nose, it might be as well to provide them with
something to smell at. A water-establishment also could be united with
it, and thus something miserable might get washed away from the pitiable
wretches here in this world."

The Judge seized on the idea with joy. "So we will," said he; "we will
unite pleasure with profit. This undertaking will cost more than a
simple public pleasure-ground, but that need not prevent it. In this
beautiful time of peace, and with the prospect of its long continuance,
people may take works in hand, and hope to complete them, even if they
should require a long time."

"And such works," said Jacobi, "operate ennoblingly on life in times of
peace. Peace requires even as great a mass of power as war, but against
another kind of foe. Every ennobling of this earthly existence,
everything which exalts the mind to a more intellectual life, is a
battery directed against the commoner nature in man, and is a service
done to humanity and one's native land."

"Bah!" cried Jeremias with vexation, "humanity and native land! You have
always large words in the mouth; if a fence is thrown down or a bush
planted, it is immediately called a benefit for one's native land. Plant
your fields and throw down your fences, but let the native land rest in
peace! for it troubles itself just as little about you, as you about it.
For one's country and humanity!--that should sound very affecting--all
mere talk!"

"No, now you are in fact too severe," said the Judge, smiling at the
outbreak of his friend; "and I, as far as regards myself," continued he,
gravely, but cheerfully, "wish that a clearer idea of one's country
accompanied every step of human activity. If there be a love which is
natural and reasonable, it is the love of one's country. Have I not to
thank my country for everything that I have? Are they not its laws, its
institutions, its spiritual life, which have developed my whole being,
as man and as a citizen? And are they not the deeds of my fathers which
have fashioned these; which have given them their power and their
individual life? In fact, love and gratitude towards one's parents is
no greater duty than love and gratitude towards one's native land; and
there is no one, be he man or woman, high or low, but who, according to
his own relationships, can and must pay this holy debt. And this is
exactly the signification of a christianly constituted state, that every
one shall occupy with his pound so as to benefit, at the same time, both
the individual and the community at large."

"Thus," added Petrea, "do the rain-drops swell the brook, which pours
its water into the river, and may, even though it be nameless,
communicate benefit in its course."

"So it is, my dear child," said her father, and extended to her his
hand.

"It is a gladdening thought," said Louise, with tearful eyes. "Pay
attention, Adam, to what grandfather and aunt say, and keep it in your
mind;--but don't open your mouth so wide; a whole frigate could sail
into it."

At these words little Alfred began to laugh so shrilly and so heartily
that all the elderly folks irresistibly bore him company. Adam laughed
too; and at the sound of this peal of laughter came bounding forward
from all ends and corners Shem and Seth, Jacob and Solomon, Jonathan and
David, just as a flock of sparrows comes flying down over a handful of
scattered corn. They came laughing because they heard laughter, and
wished to be present at the entertainment.

In the mean time the sun had set, and the cool elves of evening began to
wander over the place as the family, amid the most cheerful talk, arose
in order to return to the house. As they went into the city the ball on
St. Mary's church glimmered like fire in the last beams of the sun, and
the moon ascended like a pale but gentle countenance over the roof of
their house. There was a something in this appearance which made a
sorrowful impression on Gabriele. The star of the church tower glittered
over the grave of her brother, and the look of the moon made her
involuntarily think on the pale, mild countenance of her mother. For the
rest, the evening was so lovely, the blackbird sang among the alders by
the brook, and the heaven lay clear and brightly blue over the earth,
whilst the wind and every disturbing sound became more and more hushed.

Gabriele walked on, full of thought, and did not observe that Baron L.
had approached her; they were almost walking together as he said, "I am
very glad; it was very pleasant to me to see you all again so happy!"

"Ah, yes," answered Gabriele, "now we can all be together again. It is a
great happiness that Louise and her family are come here."

"Perhaps," continued the Baron--"perhaps it might be audacity to disturb
such a happily united life, and to wish to separate a daughter and
sister from such a family--but if the truest----"

"Ah!" hastily interrupted Gabriele, "don't speak of disturbing anything,
of changing anything--everything is so good as it now is!"

He was silent, with an expression of sorrow.

"Let us be all happy together," said Gabriele, bashfully and cordially;
"you will stop some time with us. It is so charming to have friends and
sisters--this united life is so agreeable with them."

The Baron's countenance brightened. He seized Gabriele's hand, and would
have said something, but she hastened from him to her father, whose arm
she took.

Jacobi conducted Petrea; they were cheerful and confidential together,
as happy brother and sister. She spoke to him of her present happiness,
and of the hope which made up her future. He took the liveliest interest
in it, and spoke with her of his plans; of his domestic happiness; and
with especial rapture of his boys; of their obedience to the slightest
word of their parents; of their mutual affection to each other--and
see--all this was Louise's work! And Louise's praise was sung forth in a
harmonious duet--ever a sweet scent for "our eldest," who appeared,
however, to listen to no one but her father.

They soon reached home. The mother stood with the silver ladle in her
hand, and the most friendly smile on her lips, in the library, before a
large steaming bowl of punch, and with look and voice bade the entering
party welcome.

"My dear Elise," said the Judge, embracing her, "you are become twenty
years younger to-day."

"Happiness makes one young," answered she, looking on him
affectionately.

People seated themselves.

"Don't make so much noise, children!" said Louise to her eight, seating
herself with the little Elise on her knees; "can't you seat yourselves
without so much noise and bustle."

Jeremias Munter had placed himself in a corner, and was quiet, and
seemed depressed.

On many countenances one saw a sort of tension, a sort of consciousness
that before long a something uncommon was about to happen. The Judge
coughed several times; he seemed to have an unusual cause for making his
throat clear. At length he raised his voice and spoke, but not without
evident emotion, "Is it true that our friend Jeremias Munter thinks of
soon leaving us, in order to seat himself down in solitude in the
country? Is it true, as report says, that he leaves us so soon as
to-morrow morning, and that this is the last evening which brings him
into our circle as a townsman of ours?"

The Assessor made an attempt to reply, but it was only a sort of low
grunting tone without words. He looked fixedly upon the floor, and
supported his hands upon his stick.

"In this case," continued the Judge, "I am desired to ask him a
question, which I would ask from no one else, and which nearly sticks in
my throat,--Will our friend Munter allow that any one--any one of us
should follow him into his solitude?"

"Who would accompany me?" snorted Jeremias grumblingly and doubtingly.

"I!" answered a soft, harmonious voice; and Eva, as beautiful and
graceful at this moment as ever, approached him, conducted by her
father. "I," repeated she, blushing and speaking softly but sincerely,
"I will accompany you if you will."

On the countenances of the family it might be read that this to the
members of it was no surprise. Louise had gentle tears in her eyes, and
did not look the least in the world scandalised at this step--so
contrary to the dignity of woman. The Assessor drew himself together,
and looked up with a sharp and astonished look.

"Receive from my hand," said the Judge, with a voice which showed his
feeling, "a companion for whom you have long wished. Only to you,
Munter, would I so resign my beloved child."

"Do you say no to me?" asked Eva, blushing and smiling, as she extended
her white hand to the still stupified Jeremias.

He seized the extended hand hastily, pressed it with both hands to his
breast, and said softly as he bent over it, "Oh, my rose!" When he
raised his head, his eyes were wet; but there was anxiety and disquiet
in his whole being. "Brother," said he to the Judge, "I cannot yet thank
you--I don't know--I don't understand--I must first prove her."

He took Eva by the hand and conducted her into the boudoir adjoining the
library, seated himself opposite to her, and said warmly, "Whence
proceeds this? What jokes are these? How does it arise? Tell me, in
God's name, Eva, with what sentiments do you thus come and woo me? Is it
with true love?--yes, I say, true love; don't be startled at the word!
You can take it as I mean it. Is it love, or is it--pity? As a gift of
mercy I cannot take you. Thus much I can tell you. Do not deceive
yourself--do not deceive me! In the name of God, who proves all hearts,
answer me, and speak the truth. Is it from the full and entire heart
that you come thus to me? Do you think, Eva, angel of God, that I, the
ugly, infirm, ill-tempered old man can make you happy?"

He spoke with a heartfelt anxiety, yet he now looked handsome with love
and feeling.

"My friend, my benefactor," answered Eva, and wiped away some tears
which rolled down her cheeks, "see into--read my inmost heart. Gratitude
led me to the acknowledgment of your worth, and both have led me to
love; not the passionate love which I once felt--but never more can
feel--but a deep inward devotion, which will make me and, as I also
hope, you happy, and which nothing further can disturb. To live for you,
and next to you for my family, is the highest wish that I have on earth.
I can candidly say that in this moment there is no one whom I love more
than you. Is that enough for you?"

The Assessor riveted his deep eyes searchingly and penetratingly on Eva.
"Kiss me!" said he, at once short and sharp.

With an indescribably charming submission, Eva bowed her blushing face
and kissed him.

"Lord God!" said Jeremias, "and you are mine! In his name then!" and
with unspeakable emotion clasped he his long beloved to his heart. He
held her long, and only deep sighs arose from his heart overflowing with
happiness. At length he tore himself from her, and as if animated with
new youth he sprang forward, and exclaimed to the company assembled in
the library, "Nay, now it is all made up--I take her--she shall have
me--she shall have me! She is worthy to be my wife, and I am worthy to
be her husband! Now then, you without there, will not you drink our
healths?"

All gathered around the bowl--Louise with the rest--the eight following
her--it was all a joyful bustle. Leonore and Petrea kept back the little
tumultuous ones amid laughter, and promised to carry the glasses to them
if they would only keep their places.

At length quiet returned to the assembly, the glasses were filled, and
the skal began.

No. 1, which the Judge proposed, was "for the newly betrothed."

No. 2, which Jacobi spoke eloquently, was "for the Parents; for their
happiness and well-being," said he, with emotion, "through which I, and
so many others as well as I, are blessed!"

No. 3, was drunk to "the prosperity of the new Pastor's family."

No. 4, for "the new purchased land."

No. 5, for "the old--ever-new Home."

No. 6, was "the health of all good children!" The eight seemed as if
they could not return thanks enough.

After this yet a many other particular toasts were given. The young
Jacobis drank incessantly to the aunts--Gabriele must continually make
her glass clink against those of her little nephews.

In the mean time Jeremias Munter made with love-warm looks the following
speech to his bride. "That was a joke now! that you should have made me
of such consequence! How did she know that I would have her? To woo me
yourself, and to take me so by surprise! To give me no time to think.
What then? It is quite unheard of! Was the thing arranged beforehand?
No, that is too troublesome. Nay, nay, nay, nay then, nay say I! But now
I think about it, it was quite for the best that I accept you--but
indeed you were a little hasty; I've a good mind to----What now? What is
fresh in hand? Comes her little grace, the little sister-in-law, without
any ceremony and kisses me. Heavens! the world is very merry!"

But nobody in the whole circle found the world so merry as Petrea.

"Are you now satisfied with me, Petrea?" asked Eva, archly laughing.
Petrea clasped her warmly in her arms.

Now the voice of Mother Louise was heard saying, "Nay, nay, children,
you must not drink a drop more! What do you say, my little David? A
thee-and-thou toast with Uncle Munter? No, thank you greatly, my dear
fellow, you can propose that another time. You have drunk to-day toasts
enough--more, perhaps, than your little heads can carry."

"I beg for the boys, sister Louise," said the Assessor; "I will propose
a skal, and they must drink it with me. Fill, yet once more, the
glasses, little carousers!--I propose a skal for peace! peace in our
country, and peace in our homes! A skal for love and knowledge, which
alone can make peace a blessing! A skal, in one word, for--Peace upon
Earth!"

"Amen! amen!" cried Jacobi, drank off his glass, and threw it behind
him. Louise looked at her mother somewhat astonished, but the mother
followed Jacobi's example; she too was carried away.

"All glasses to the ground after this skal!" cried the Judge, and sent
his ringing against the ceiling. With an indescribable pleasure the
little Jacobis threw their glasses up, and endeavoured to make the skal
for Peace as noisy and tumultuous as possible.

       *       *       *       *       *

We leave now the joyful circle, from which we have seen the mother
softly steal away. We see her go into the boudoir, where reposing in
comfortable quiet she writes the following lines to her friend and
sister:

"I have left them now for a few minutes, in order to rest, and to say a
few words to you, my Cecilia. Here it is good and quiet; and joyful
voices--truly festival voices, echo to me here. The heart of my Ernst
enjoys the highest pleasure, for he sees all his children happy around
him. And the children, Cecilia, he has reason to be joyful over them and
proud; they stand all around him, good and excellent human beings; they
thank him that existence has been given to them, and that they have
learned its worth; They are satisfied with their lot. The lost and
again-found-one has come home, in order to begin a new life, and her
charming child is quite established on the knees of the grandfather.

"I hear Gabriele's guitar accompanied by a song. I fancy now they dance.
Louise's eight boys make the floor shake. Jacobi's voice is heard above
all. The good, ever-young man. I also should be joyful, for all in my
house is peaceful and well-arranged. And I am so; my heart is full of
thankfulness, but my body is weary--very weary.

"The fir-trees on the grave wave and beckon me. I see their tops
saluting me in the clear moonlight, and pointing upwards. Dost thou
beckon me, my son? Dost thou call me to come home to thee? My
first-born, my summer-child! Let me whisper to thee that this is my
secret wish. The earth was friendly towards me; friendly was my home:
when thou wast gone, my favourite! I began to follow. Perhaps the day of
my departure is at hand. I feel in myself as if I were able to go to
rest. And might a really bright and beautiful moment be enjoyed by me
before my last sleep, I would yet once more press my husband's hand to
my lips, look around me on earth with a blessing, and upwards towards
heaven with gratitude, and say as now, out of the depths of my heart,
'Thank God for the home here, and the home there.'"


END OF THE HOME.


Transcriber's Notes:

I inserted 'a' into sentence, Never did I envy [a] human being as I
envied her, on Page 90.

In Footnote 3, the word appears to be Niflhem, but the more common
spelling is Niflheim.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Home, by Fredrika Bremer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOME ***

***** This file should be named 20746.txt or 20746.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/7/4/20746/

Produced by Stacy Brown, Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
