The Project Gutenberg eBook, Diary of Anna Green Winslow, by Anna Green
Winslow, Edited by Alice Morse Earle


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Diary of Anna Green Winslow
       A Boston School Girl of 1771


Author: Anna Green Winslow

Editor: Alice Morse Earle

Release Date: March 7, 2007  [eBook #20765]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF ANNA GREEN WINSLOW***


E-text prepared by Louise Hope, Steven desJardins, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 20765-h.htm or 20765-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/7/6/20765/20765-h/20765-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/7/6/20765/20765-h.zip)


Transcriber's Note:

      Spelling, punctuation and capitalization are as in the
      original. This includes the writer's various spellings
      of her own name.

      Ordinals such as "1st", "2d", "4th" were consistently
      written in superscript. They are shown here as unmarked
      text. Other superscript abbreviations are shown with caret
      as M^rs, Hon^d.

      The printed book included a facsimile image of a typical
      diary page. A transcription of this passage appears
      immediately before the diary proper.





DIARY OF ANNA GREEN WINSLOW

A Boston School Girl of 1771

Edited by

ALICE MORSE EARLE







[Illustration: ANNA GREEN WINSLOW]



[Publisher's Device:
 Tout bien ou rien]


Boston and New York
Houghton, Mifflin and Company
The Riverside Press, Cambridge
1895

Copyright, 1894,
By Alice Morse Earle.
All rights reserved.

Third Edition.

The Riverside Press, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A.
Electrotyped and Printed by H. O. Houghton & Co.




This Book

_Is Dedicated_
_To_
_The Kinsfolk Of_

_ANNA GREEN WINSLOW_




_FOREWORD._


_In the year 1770, a bright little girl ten years of age, Anna Green
Winslow, was sent from her far away home in Nova Scotia to Boston,
the birthplace of her parents, to be "finished" at Boston schools by
Boston teachers. She wrote, with evident eagerness and loving care,
for the edification of her parents and her own practice in
penmanship, this interesting and quaint diary, which forms a most
sprightly record, not only of the life of a young girl at that time,
but of the prim and narrow round of daily occurrences in provincial
Boston. It thus assumes a positive value as an historical picture of
the domestic life of that day; a value of which the little girl who
wrote it, or her kinsfolk who affectionately preserved it to our own
day, never could have dreamed. To many New England families it is
specially interesting as a complete rendering, a perfect
presentment, of the childish life of their great grandmothers, her
companions._

_It is an even chance which ruling thought in the clever little
writer, a love of religion or a love of dress, shows most plainly
its influence on this diary. On the whole, I think that youthful
vanity, albeit of a very natural and innocent sort, is more
pervasive of the pages. And it is fortunate that this is the case;
for, from the frankly frivolous though far from self-conscious
entries we gain a very exact notion, a very valuable picture, of the
dress of a young girl at that day. We know all the details of her
toilet, from the "pompedore" shoes and the shifts (which she had
never worn till she lived in Boston), to the absurd and top-heavy
head-decoration of "black feathers, my past comb & all my past
garnet marquasett and jet pins, together with my silver plume."
If this fantastic assemblage of ornament were set upon the "Heddus
roll," so graphically described, it is easy to understand the
denunciations of the time upon women's headgear. In no contemporary
record or account, no matter who the writer, can be found such a
vivacious and witty description of the modish hairdressing of that
day as in the pages of this diary._

_But there are many entries in the journal of this vain little
Puritan devotee to show an almost equal attention to religion;
records of sermons which she had heard, and of religious
conversations in which she had taken a self-possessed part; and her
frequent use of Biblical expressions and comparisons shows that she
also remembered fully what she read. Her ambitious theological
sermon-notes were evidently somewhat curtailed by the sensible
advice of the aunt with whom she resided, who thereby checked also
the consequent injudicious praise of her pastor, the Old South
minister. For Anna and her kinsfolk were of the congregation of the
Old South church; and this diary is in effect a record of the life
of Old South church attendants. Many were what Anna terms "sisters
of the Old South," and nine tenths of the names of her companions
and friends may be found on the baptismal and membership records of
that church._

_Anna was an industrious little wight, active in all housewifely
labors and domestic accomplishments, and attentive to her lessons.
She could make "pyes," and fine network; she could knit lace, and
spin linen thread and woolen yarn; she could make purses, and
embroider pocket-books, and weave watch strings, and piece
patchwork. She learned "dansing, or danceing I should say," from one
Master Turner; she attended a sewing school, to become a neat and
deft little sempstress, and above all, she attended a writing school
to learn that most indispensable and most appreciated of eighteenth
century accomplishments--fine writing. Her handwriting, of which a
fac-simile is here shown, was far better than that of most girls of
twelve to-day; with truth and justice could Anna say, "Aunt says I
can write pretily." Her orthography was quite equal to that of grown
persons of her time, and her English as good as that of Mercy
Warren, her older contemporary writer._

_And let me speak also of the condition of her diary. It covers
seventy-two pages of paper about eight inches long by six and a half
inches wide. The writing is uniform in size, every letter is
perfectly formed; it is as legible as print, and in the entire diary
but three blots can be seen, and these are very small. A few pages
were ruled by the writer, the others are unruled. The old paper,
though heavy and good, is yellow with age, and the water marks
C.F.R. and the crown stand out distinctly. The sheets are sewed in a
little book, on which a marbled paper cover has been placed,
probably by a later hand than Anna's. Altogether it is a remarkably
creditable production for a girl of twelve._

_It is well also to compare her constant diligence and industry
displayed to us through her records of a day's work--and at another
time, of a week's work--with that of any girl of her age in a
corresponding station of life nowadays. We learn that physical pain
or disability were no excuse for slothfulness; Anna was not always
well--had heavy colds, and was feverish; but well or ill was always
employed. Even with painful local afflictions such as a "whitloe,"
she still was industrious, "improving it to perfect myself in
learning to spin flax." She read much--the Bible constantly--and
also found amusement in reading "a variety of composures."_

_She was a friendly little soul, eager to be loved; resenting deeply
that her Aunt Storer let "either one of her chaises, her chariot or
babyhutt," pass the door every day, without sending for her; going
cheerfully tea-drinking from house to house of her friends;
delighting even in the catechising and the sober Thursday Lecture.
She had few amusements and holidays compared with the manifold
pleasures that children have nowadays, though she had one holiday
which the Revolution struck from our calendar--the King's Coronation
Day. She saw the Artillery Company drill, and she visited brides and
babies and old folks, and attended some funerals. When she was
twelve years old she "came out"--became a "miss in her teens"--and
went to a succession of prim little routs or parties, which she
called "constitutions." To these decorous assemblies girls only were
invited,--no rough Boston boys. She has left to us more than one
clear, perfect picture of these formal little routs in the great
low-raftered chamber, softly alight with candles on mantel-tree and
in sconces; with Lucinda, the black maid, "shrilly piping;" and rows
of demure little girls of Boston Brahmin blood, in high rolls and
feathers, discreetly partaking of hot and cold punch, and soberly
walking and curtsying through the minuet; fantastic in costume, but
proper and seemly in demeanor, models of correct deportment as were
their elegant mammas._

_But Anna was not solemn; she was always happy, and often
merry--full of life and wit. She jested about getting a "fresh
seasoning with Globe salt," and wrote some labored jokes and some
unconscious ones home to her mother. She was subject to "egregious
fits of laughterre," and fully proved the statement, "Aunt says I am
a whimsical child." She was not beautiful. Her miniature is now
owned by Miss Elizabeth C. Trott of Niagara Falls, the great
grand-daughter of General John Winslow, and a copy is shown in the
frontispiece. It displays a gentle, winning little face, delicate in
outline, as is also the figure, and showing some hint also of
delicacy of constitution. It may be imagination to think that it is
plainly the face of one who could never live to be old--a face
typical of youth._


_Let us glance at the stock from whence sprung this tender and
engaging little blossom. When the weary Pilgrims landed at Cape Cod
before they made their memorable landing at Plymouth, a sprightly
young girl jumped on shore, and was the first English woman to set
foot on the soil of New England. Her name was Mary Chilton. She
married John Winslow, the brother of Governor Edward Winslow. Anna
Green Winslow was Mary Chilton's direct descendant in the sixth
generation._

_Anna's grandfather, John Winslow the fourth, was born in Boston.
His son Joshua wrote thus in the Winslow Family Bible: "Jno Winslow
my Honor'd Father was born ye 31 Dec. at 6 o'c. in the morning on
the Lords Day, 1693, and was baptized by Mr. Willard the next day &
dyed att sea Octo. 13, 1731 aged 38 years." A curious attitude was
assumed by certain Puritan ministers, of reluctance and even decided
objection and refusal to baptize children who were unlucky enough to
be born on the Lord's Day; but Samuel Willard, the pastor of the
"South Church" evidently did not concur in that extraordinary
notion, for on the day following "Jno's" birth--on New Year's
Day--he was baptized. He was married on September 21, 1721, to Sarah
Pierce, and in their ten years of married life they had three
children._

_Joshua Winslow, Anna's father, was the second child. He was born
January 23, 1727, and was baptized at the Old South. He was
"published" with his cousin Anna Green on December 7, 1758, and
married to her four weeks later, January 3, 1759. An old piece of
embroidered tapestry herein shown gives a good portrayal of a Boston
wedding-party at that date; the costumes, coach, and cut of the
horses' mane and tail are very curious and interesting to note. Mrs.
Winslow's mother was Anna Pierce (sister of Sarah), and her father
was Joseph Green, the fourth generation from Percival Green, whose
descendants have been enumerated by Dr. Samuel Abbott Green, the
president of the Massachusetts Historical Society, in his book
entitled "Account of Percival and Ellen Green and some of their
descendants."_

_Mrs. Joshua Winslow was the oldest of twelve Green children, hence
the vast array of uncles and aunts and cousins in little Anna's
diary._

_Joseph Green, Anna's maternal grandfather, was born December 12,
1703, and was baptised on the same day. He died July 11, 1765. He
was a wealthy man for his time, being able to pay Governor Belcher
L3,600 for a tract of land on Hanover Street. His firm name was
Green & Walker. A fine portrait of him by Copley still exists._

_Thus Anna came of good stock in all lines of descent. The Pierces
were of the New Hampshire provincial gentry, to which the Wentworths
and Langdons also belonged._

_Before Joshua Winslow was married, when he was but eighteen
years of age, he began his soldierly career. He was a Lieutenant
in Captain Light's company in the regiment of Colonel Moore
at the taking of Louisburg in 1745. He was then appointed
Commissary-General of the British forces in Nova Scotia, and an
account-book of his daily movements there still exists. Upon his
return to New England he went to live at Marshfield, Massachusetts,
in the house afterwards occupied by Daniel Webster. But troublous
times were now approaching for the faithful servants of the King.
Strange notions of liberty filled the heads of many Massachusetts
men and women; and soon the Revolution became more than a dream.
Joshua Winslow in that crisis, with many of his Marshfield friends
and neighbors, sided with his King._

_He was in Marshfield certainly in June, 1775, for I have a letter
before me written to him there by Mrs. Deming at that date. One
clause of this letter is so amusing that I cannot resist quoting it.
We must remember that it was written in Connecticut, whence Mrs.
Deming had fled in fright and dismay at the siege of Boston; and
that she had lost her home and all her possessions. She writes in
answer to her brother's urgent invitation to return to Marshfield._

_"We have no household stuff. Neither could I live in the terror of
constant alarms and the din of war. Besides I know not how to look
you in the face, unless I could restore to you your family
Expositer, which together with my Henry on the Bible & Harveys
Meditations which are your daughter's (the gift of her grandmother)
I pack'd in a Trunk that exactly held them, some days before I made
my escape, and did my utmost to git to you, but which I am told are
still in Boston. It is not, nor ever will be in my power to make you
Satisfaction for this Error--I should not have coveted to keep 'em
so long--I am heartily sorry now that I had more than one book at a
time; in that case I might have thot to have bro't it away with me,
tho' I forgot my own Bible & almost every other necessary. But who
can tell whether you may not git your Valuable Books. I should feel
comparatively easy if you had these your Valuable property."_

_Her painful solicitude over the loss of a borrowed book is indeed
refreshing, as well as her surprising covetousness of the Family
Expositor and Harvey's Meditations. And I wish to add to the
posthumous rehabilitation of the damaged credit of this
conscientious aunt, that Anna's book--Harvey's Meditations--was
recovered and restored to the owner, and was lost at sea in 1840 by
another Winslow._

_Joshua Winslow, when exiled, went to England, and thence to Quebec,
where he retained throughout his life his office as Royal Paymaster.
He was separated many years from his wife and daughter, and
doubtless Anna died while her father was far from her; for in a
letter dated Quebec, December 26, 1783, and written to his wife,
he says,_

_"The Visiting Season is come on, a great practice here about
Christmas and the New Year; on the return of which I congratulate my
Dearest Anna and Friends with you, it being the fifth and I hope the
last I shall be obliged to see the return of in a Separation from
each other while we may continue upon the same Globe."_


_She shortly after joined him in Quebec. His letters show careful
preparations for her comfort on the voyage. They then were
childless; Anna's brothers, George Scott and John Henry, died in
early youth. It is interesting to note that Joshua Winslow was the
first of the Winslows to give his children more than one baptismal
name._

_Joshua Winslow was a man of much dignity and of handsome person,
if we can trust the Copley portrait and miniature of him which still
exist. The portrait is owned by Mr. James F. Trott of Niagara Falls,
New York, the miniature by Mrs. J. F. Lindsey of Yorkville, South
Carolina, both grandchildren of General John Winslow. His letters
display much intelligence. His spelling is unusually correct; his
penmanship elegant--as was that of all the Winslows; his forms of
expression scholarly and careful. He sometimes could joke a little,
as when he began his letters to his wife Anna thus--2. N. A.--though
it is possible that the "Obstructions to a free Correspondence, and
the Circumspection we are obliged to practice in our Converse with
each other" arising from his exiled condition, may have made him
thus use a rebus in the address of his letter._

_He died in Quebec in 1801. His wife returned to New England and
died in Medford in 1810. Her funeral was at General John Winslow's
house on Purchase Street, Fort Hill, Boston; she was buried in the
Winslow tomb in King's Chapel burial ground._


_We know little of the last years of Anna Green Winslow's life.
A journal written by her mother in 1773 during their life in
Marshfield is now owned by Miss Sarah Thomas of Marshfield, Mass.
It is filled chiefly with pious sermon notes and religious thoughts,
and sad and anxious reflections over absent loved ones, one of whom
(in the sentimental fashion of the times) she calls "my Myron"--her
husband._

_Through this journal we see "Nanny Green's" simple and monotonous
daily life; her little tea-drinkings; her spinning and reeling and
knitting; her frequent catechisings, her country walks. We find her
mother's testimony to the "appearance of reason that is in my
children and for the readiness with which they seem to learn what is
taught them." And though she repeatedly thanks God for living in a
warm house, she notes that "my bason of water froze on the hearth
with as good a fire as we could make in the chimney." This rigor of
climate and discomfort of residence, and Anna's evident delicacy
shown through the records of her fainting, account for her failing
health. The last definite glimpse which we have of our gentle little
Nanny is in the shape of a letter written to her by "Aunt Deming."
It is dated Boston, April 21, 1779, and is so characteristic of the
day and so amusing also that I quote it in full._


 _Dear Neice_,

_I receivd your favor of 6th instant by nephew Jack, who with the
Col. his trav'ling companion, perform'd an easy journey from you to
us, and arriv'd before sunset. I thank you for the beads, the wire,
and the beugles, I fancy I shall never execute the plan of the head
dress to which you allude--if I should, some of your largest corn
stalks, dril'd of the pith and painted might be more proportionable.
I rejoice that your cloths came off so much better than my
fears--a troublesome journey, I expected you would have; and very
much did I fear for your bones. I was always unhappy in anticipating
trouble--it is my constitution, I believe--and when matters have
been better than my fears--I have never been so dutifully thankful
as my bountiful Benefactor had a right to expect. This, also,
I believe, is the constitution of all my fellow race._

_Mr. Deming had a Letter from your Papa yesterday; he mention'd your
Mama & you as indispos'd & Flavia as sick in bed. I'm at too great a
distance to render you the least service, and were I near, too much
out of health to--some part of the time--even speak to you. I am
seiz'd with exceeding weakness at the very seat of life, and to a
greater degree than I ever before knew. Could I ride, it might help
me, but that is an exercise my income will not permit. I walk out
whenever I can. The day will surely come, when I must quit this
frail tabernacle, and it may be soon--I certainly know, I am not of
importance eno' in this world, for any one to wish my stay--rather
am I, and so I consider myself as a cumberground. However I shall
abide my appointed time & I desire to be found waiting for my
change._

_Our family are well--had I time and spirits I could acquaint you of
an expedition two sisters made to Dorchester, a walk begun at
sunrise last thursday morning--dress'd in their dammasks, padusoy,
gauze, ribbins, flapets, flowers, new white hats, white shades, and
black leather shoes, (Pudingtons make) and finished journey, &
garments, orniments, and all quite finish'd on Saturday, before
noon, (mud over shoes) never did I behold such destruction in so
short a space--bottom of padusoy coat fring'd quite round, besides
places worn entire to floss, & besides frays, dammask, from
shoulders to bottom, not lightly soil'd, but as if every part had
rub'd tables and chairs that had long been us'd to wax mingl'd with
grease. I could have cry'd, for I really pitied 'em--nothing left
fit to be seen--They had leave to go, but it never entered any ones
tho'ts but their own to be dressd in all (even to loading) of their
best--their all, as you know. What signifies it to worry ones selves
about beings that are, and will be, just so? I can, and do pity and
advise, but I shall git no credit by such like. The eldest talks
much of learning dancing, musick (the spinet & guitar), embroidry,
dresden, the French tongue &c &c. The younger with an air of her
own, advis'd the elder when she first mention'd French, to learn
first to read English, and was answered "law, so I can well eno'
a'ready." You've heard her do what she calls reading, I believe.
Poor creature! Well! we have a time of it!_

_If any one at Marshfield speaks of me remember me to them. Nobody
knows I'm writing, each being gone their different ways, & all from
home except the little one who is above stairs. Farewell my dear,
I've wrote eno' I find for this siting._

_Yr affect_

_Sarah Deming._


_It does not need great acuteness to read between the lines of this
letter an affectionate desire to amuse a delicate girl whom the
writer loved. The tradition in the Winslow family is that Anna Green
Winslow died of consumption at Marshfield in the fall of 1779. There
is no town or church record of her death, no known grave or
headstone to mark her last resting-place. And to us she is not dead,
but lives and speaks--always a loving, endearing little child; not
so passionate and gifted and rare a creature as that star among
children--Marjorie Fleming--but a natural and homely little flower
of New England life; fated never to grow old or feeble or dull or
sad, but to live forever and laugh in the glamour of eternal happy
youth through the few pages of her time-stained diary._

   _Alice Morse Earle._

 _Brooklyn Heights, September, 1894._




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                                PAGE
  ANNA GREEN WINSLOW.
    From miniature now owned by Miss Elizabeth C. Trott,
    Niagara Falls, N.Y.                               _Frontispiece._

  FACSIMILE OF WRITING OF ANNA GREEN WINSLOW.
    From original diary                                            1

  WEDDING PARTY IN BOSTON IN 1756.
    From tapestry now owned by American Antiquarian Society       20

  GENERAL JOSHUA WINSLOW.
    From miniature painted by Copley, 1755, and now owned by
    Mrs. John F. Lindsey, Yorkville, S.C.                         34

  EBENEZER STORER.
    From portrait painted by Copley, now owned by
    Mrs. Lewis C. Popham, Scarsdale, N.Y.                         45

  HANNAH GREEN STORER.
    From portrait painted by Copley, now owned by
    Mrs. Lewis C. Popham, Scarsdale, N.Y.                         65

  CUT-PAPER PICTURE.
    Cut by Mrs. Sarah Winslow Deming, now owned by
    James F. Trott, Esq., Niagara Falls, N.Y.                     74




  [Transcriber's Note:
     In this transcription of Anna Green Winslow's handwriting,
     line breaks follow the original. The postscript ("N.B.")
     is in smaller writing, almost surrounding the signature.]

  [Handwriting:]

                            I hope aunt wont let me
  wear the black hatt with the red Dominie--for the
  people will ask me what I have got to sell as I
  go along street if I do. or, how the folk at Newgui
  nie do? Dear mamma, you dont know the fation
  here--I beg to look like other folk. You dont kno
  what a stir would be made in Sudbury Street
  were I to make my appearance there in my red Domi
  nie & black Hatt. But the old cloak & bonnett together
  will make me a decent Bonnet for common ocation
  (I like that) aunt says, its a pitty some of the ribbin
  you sent wont do for the Bonnet--I must now
  close up this Journal. With Duty, Love & Compli
  ments as due, perticularly to my Dear little brother,
  (I long to see him) & M.^rs Law, I will write to her soon
     I am, Hon.^d Papa & mama,
             Y.^r ever Dutiful Daughter
               Anna Green Winslow.
  N.B. my aunt Deming
  dont approve of my English.
  & has not the fear that you will think her concernd in the
    Diction




DIARY OF ANNA GREEN WINSLOW.

1771-1773.

 . . . . .

Lady, by which means I had a bit of the wedding cake. I guess I shall
have but little time for journalising till after thanksgiving. My aunt
Deming[1] says I shall make one pye myself at least. I hope somebody
beside myself will like to eat a bit of my Boston pye thou' my papa and
you did not (I remember) chuse to partake of my Cumberland[2]
performance. I think I have been writing my own Praises this morning.
Poor Job was forced to praise himself when no _man_ would do him that
justice. I am not as he was. I have made two shirts for unkle since I
finish'd mamma's shifts.


Nov^r 18th, 1771.--Mr. Beacons[3] text yesterday was Psalm cxlix. 4.
For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people; he will beautify the meek
with salvation. His Doctrine was something like this, viz: That the
Salvation of Gods people mainly consists in Holiness. The name _Jesus_
signifies _a Savior_. Jesus saves his people _from their Sins_. He
renews them in the spirit of their minds--writes his Law in their
hearts. Mr. Beacon ask'd a question. What is beauty--or, wherein does
true beauty consist? He answer'd, in holiness--and said a great deal
about it that I can't remember, & as aunt says she hant leisure now to
help me any further--so I may just tell you a little that I remember
without her assistance, and that I repeated to her yesterday at Tea--He
said he would lastly address himself to the young people: My dear young
friends, you are pleased with beauty, & like to be tho't beautifull--but
let me tell ye, you'l never be truly beautifull till you are like the
King's daughter, all glorious within, all the orniments you can put on
while your souls are unholy make you the more like white sepulchres
garnish'd without, but full of deformyty within. You think me very
unpolite no doubt to address you in this manner, but I must go a little
further and tell you, how cource soever it may sound to your delicacy,
that while you are without holiness, your beauty is deformity--you are
all over black & defil'd, ugly and loathsome to all holy beings, the
wrath of th' great God lie's upon you, & if you die in this condition,
you will be turn'd into hell, with ugly devils, to eternity.


Nov. 27th.--We are very glad to see Mr. Gannett, because of him "we hear
of your affairs & how you do"--as the apostle Paul once wrote. My unkle
& aunt however, say they are sorry he is to be absent, so long as this
whole winter, I _think_. I long now to have you come up--I want to see
papa, mama, & brother, all most, for I cannot make any distinction which
most--I should like to see Harry too. Mr. Gannett tells me he keeps a
journal--I do want to see that--especially as Mr. Gannett has given me
some specimens, as I may say of his "I and Aunt &c." I am glad Miss Jane
is with you, I will write to her soon--Last monday I went with my aunt
to visit Mrs. Beacon. I was exceedingly pleased with the visit, & so I
_ought_ to be, my aunt says, for there was much notice taken of me,
particylarly by Mr. Beacon. I think I like him better every time I see
him. I suppose he takes the kinder notice of me, because last thursday
evening he was here, & when I was out of the room, aunt told him that I
minded his preaching & could repeat what he said--I might have told you
that notwithstanding the stir about the Proclamatien, we had an agreable
Thanksgiven. Mr. Hunt's[4] text was Psa. xcvii. 1. The LORD
reigneth,--let the earth rejoice. Mr. Beacon's text P M Psa. xxiv. 1.
The earth is the LORD's & the fulness thereof. My unkle & aunt
Winslow[5] of Boston, their son & daughter, Master Daniel Mason (Aunt
Winslows nephew from Newport, Rhode Island) & Miss Soley[6] spent the
evening with us. We young folk had a room with a fire in it to
ourselves. Mr Beacon gave us his company for one hour. I spent Fryday
with my friends in Sudbury Street. I saw Mrs. Whitwell[7] very well
yesterday, she was very glad of your Letter.


Nov. 28th.--I have your favor Hon^d Mamma, by Mr. Gannett, & heartily
thank you for the broad cloath, bags, ribbin & hat. The cloath & bags
are both at work upon, & my aunt has bought a beautifull ermin trimming
for my cloak. AC stands for Abigail Church. PF for Polly Frazior. I have
presented one piece of ribbin to my aunt as you directed. She gives her
love to you, & thanks you for it. I intend to send Nancy Mackky a pair
of lace mittens, & the fag end of Harry's watch string. I hope Carolus
(as papa us'd to call him) will think his daughter very smart with them.
I am glad Hon^d madam, that you think my writing is better than it us'd
to be--you see it is mended just here. I dont know what you mean by
_terrible margins vaze_. I will endeavor to make my letters even for the
future. Has Mary brought me any Lozong Mamma? I want to know whether I
may give my old black quilt to Mrs Kuhn, for aunt sais, it is never
worth while to take the pains to mend it again. Papa has wrote me a
longer letter this time than you have Mad^m.


November the 29th.--My aunt Deming gives her love to you and says it is
this morning 12 years since she had the pleasure of congratulating papa
and you on the birth of your scribling daughter. She hopes if I live 12
years longer that I shall write and do everything better than can be
expected in the _past_ 12. I should be obliged to you, you will dismiss
me for company.


30th Nov.--My company yesterday were

  Miss Polly Deming,[8]
  Miss Polly Glover,[9]
  Miss Peggy Draper,
  Miss Bessy Winslow,[10]
  Miss Nancy Glover,[11]
  Miss Sally Winslow[12]
  Miss Polly Atwood,
  Miss Han^h Soley.

Miss Attwood as well as Miss Winslow are of this family. And Miss
N. Glover did me honor by her presence, for she is older than cousin
Sally and of her acquaintance. We made four couple at country dansing;
danceing I mean. In the evening young Mr. Waters[13] hearing of my
assembly, put his flute in his pocket and played several minuets and
other tunes, to which we danced mighty cleverly. But Lucinda[14] was our
principal piper. Miss Church and Miss Chaloner would have been here if
sickness,--and the Miss Sheafs,[15] if the death of their father had not
prevented. The black Hatt I gratefully receive as your present, but if
Captain Jarvise had arrived here with it about the time he sail'd from
this place for Cumberland it would have been of more service to me, for
I have been oblig'd to borrow. I wore Miss Griswold's[16] Bonnet on my
journey to Portsmouth, & my cousin Sallys Hatt ever since I came home, &
now I am to leave off my black ribbins tomorrow, & am to put on my red
cloak & black hatt--I hope aunt wont let me wear the black hatt with the
red Dominie--for the people will ask me what I have got to sell as I go
along street if I do, or, how the folk at New guinie do? Dear mamma, you
dont know the fation here--I beg to look like other folk. You dont know
what a stir would be made in sudbury street, were I to make my
appearance there in my red Dominie & black Hatt. But the old cloak &
bonnett together will make me a decent bonnett for common ocation
(I like that) aunt says, its a pitty some of the ribbins you sent wont
do for the Bonnet.--I must now close up this Journal. With Duty, Love,
& Compliments as due, perticularly to my Dear little brother (I long to
see him) & Mrs. Law, I will write to her soon.

  I am Hon^d Papa & mama,
    Yr ever Dutiful Daughter
      ANNE GREEN WINSLOW.

N.B. My aunt Deming dont approve of my English & has not the fear that
you will think her concernd in the Diction.


Dec^br. 6th.--Yesterday I was prevented dining at unkle Joshua's[17] by
a snow storm which lasted till 12 o'clock today, I spent some part of
yesterday afternoon and evening at Mr. Glovers. When I came home, the
snow being so deep I was bro't home in arms. My aunt got Mr. Soley's
Charlstown to fetch me. The snow is up to the peoples wast in some
places in the street.


Dec 14th.--The weather and walking have been very winter like since the
above hotch-potch, pothooks & trammels. I went to Mrs. Whitwell's last
wednessday--you taught me to spell the 4 day of the week, but my aunt
says that it should be spelt wednesday. My aunt also says, that till I
come out of an egregious fit of laughterre that is apt to sieze me & the
violence of which I am at this present under, neither English sense, nor
anything rational may be expected of me. I ment to say, that, I went to
Mrs. Whitwell's to see Mad^m Storers[18] funeral, the walking was very
bad except on the sides of the street which was the reason I did not
make a part of the procession. I should have dined with Mrs. Whitwell on
thursday if a grand storm had not prevented, As she invited me. I saw
Miss Caty Vans[19] at lecture last evening. I had a visit this morning
from Mrs Dixon of Horton & Miss Polly Huston. Mrs Dixon is dissipointed
at not finding her sister here.


Dec^r 24th.--Elder Whitwell told my aunt, that this winter began as did
the Winter of 1740. How that was I dont remember but this I know, that
to-day is by far the coldest we have had since I have been in New
England. (N.B. All run that are abroad.) Last sabbath being rainy I went
to & from meeting in Mr. Soley's chaise. I dined at unkle Winslow's, the
walking being so bad I rode there & back to meeting. Every drop that
fell froze, so that from yesterday morning to this time the appearance
has been similar to the discription I sent you last winter. The walking
is so slippery & the air so cold, that aunt chuses to have me for her
scoller these two days. And as tomorrow will be a holiday, so the pope
and his associates have ordained,[20] my aunt thinks not to trouble Mrs
Smith with me this week. I began a shift at home yesterday for myself,
it is pretty forward. Last Saturday was seven-night my aunt Suky[21] was
delivered of a pretty little son, who was baptiz'd by Dr. Cooper[22] the
next day by the name of Charles. I knew nothing of it till noonday, when
I went there a visiting. Last Thursday I din'd & spent the afternoon at
unkle Joshua's I should have gone to lecture with my aunt & heard our Mr
Hunt preach, but she would not wait till I came from writing school.
Miss Atwood, the last of our boarders, went off the same day. Miss
Griswold & Miss Meriam, having departed some time agone, I forget
whether I mention'd the recept of Nancy's present. I am oblig'd to her
for it. The Dolphin is still whole. And like to remain so.


Dec^r 27th.--This day, the extremity of the cold is somewhat abated.
I keept Christmas at home this year, & did a very good day's work, aunt
says so. How notable I have been this week I shall tell you by & by.
I spent the most part of Tuesday evening with my favorite, Miss Soley, &
as she is confined by a cold & the weather still so severe that I cannot
git farther, I am to visit her again before I sleep, & consult with her
(or rather she with me) upon a perticular matter, which you shall know
in its place. How _strangely industrious_ I have been this week, I will
inform you with my own hand--at present, I am so dilligent, that I am
oblig'd to use the hand & pen of my old friend, who being _near by_ is
better than a brother _far off_. I dont forgit dear little John Henry so
pray mamma, dont mistake me.


Dec^r 28th.--Last evening a little after 5 o'clock I finished my shift.
I spent the evening at Mr. Soley's. I began my shift at 12 o'clock last
monday, have read my bible every day this week & wrote every day save
one.


Dec^r 30th.--I return'd to my sewing school after a weeks absence,
I have also paid my compliments to Master Holbrook.[23] Yesterday
between meetings my aunt was call'd to Mrs. Water's[13] & about 8 in the
evening Dr. Lloyd[24] brought little master to town (N.B. As a
memorandum for myself. My aunt stuck a white sattan pincushin[25] for
Mrs Waters.[13] On one side, is a planthorn with flowers, on the
reverse, just under the border are, on one side stuck these words,
Josiah Waters, then follows on the end, Dec^r 1771, on the next side &
end are the words, Welcome little Stranger.) Unkle has just come in &
bro't one from me. I mean, unkle is just come in with a letter from Papa
in his hand (& none for me) by way of Newbury. I am glad to hear that
all was well the 26 Nov^r ult. I am told my Papa has not mention'd me in
this Letter. Out of sight, out of mind. My aunt gives her love to papa,
& says that she will make the necessary enquieries for my brother and
send you via. Halifax what directions and wormseed she can collect.


1st Jan^y 1772.--I wish my Papa, Mama, brother John Henry, & cousin
Avery & all the rest of my acquaintance at Cumberland, Fortlaurence,
Barronsfield, Greenland, Amherst &c. a Happy New Year, I have bestow'd
no new year's gift,[26] as yet. But have received one very handsome one,
viz. the History of Joseph Andrews abreviated. In nice Guilt and flowers
covers. This afternoon being a holiday I am going to pay my compliments
in Sudbury Street.


Jan^y 4th 1772--I was dress'd in my yellow coat, my black bib & apron,
my pompedore[27] shoes, the cap my aunt Storer[28] sometime since
presented me with (blue ribbins on it) & a very handsome loket in the
shape of a hart she gave me--the past pin my Hon^d Papa presented me
with in my cap, My new cloak & bonnet on, my pompedore gloves, &c, &c.
And I would tell you, that _for the first time, they all lik'd my dress
very much_. My cloak & bonnett are really very handsome, & so they had
need be. For they cost an amasing sight of money, not quite L45[29] tho'
Aunt Suky said, that she suppos'd Aunt Deming would be frighted out of
her Wits at the money it cost. I have got _one_ covering, by the cost,
that is genteel, & I like it much myself. On thursday I attended my aunt
to Lecture & heard Dr Chauncey[30] preach a third sermon from Acts ii.
42. They continued stedfastly--in breaking of bread. I din'd & spent the
afternoon at Mr. Whitwell's. Miss Caty Vans was one of our company. Dr.
Pemberton[31] & Dr Cooper had on gowns, In the form of the Episcopal
cassock we hear, the Doct^s design to distinguish themselves from the
inferior clergy by these strange habits [at a time too when the good
people of N.E. are threaten'd with & dreading the comeing of an
episcopal bishop][32] N.B. I dont know whether one sleeve would make a
full trimm'd negligee[33] as the fashion is at present, tho' I cant say
but it might make one of the frugal sort, with but scant triming. Unkle
says, they all have popes in their bellys. Contrary to I. Peter v. 2. 3.
Aunt says, when she saw Dr P. roll up the pulpit stairs, the figure of
Parson Trulliber, recorded by Mr Fielding occur'd to her mind & she was
really sorry a congregational divine, should, by any instance whatever,
give her so unpleasing an idea.


Jan^y 11th.--I have attended my schools every day this week except
wednesday afternoon. When I made a setting up visit to aunt Suky, & was
dress'd just as I was to go to the ball. It cost me a pistoreen[34] to
nurse Eaton for tow cakes, which I took care to eat before I paid for
them.[35] I heard Mr Thacher preach our Lecture last evening Heb. 11. 3.
I remember a great deal of the sermon, but a'nt time to put it down.
It is one year last Sep^r since he was ordain'd & he will be 20 years of
age next May if he lives so long. I forgot that the weather want fit for
me to go to school last thursday. I work'd at home.


Jan^y 17th.--I told you the 27th Ult that I was going to a constitation
with miss Soley. I have now the pleasure to give you the result, viz.
a very genteel well regulated assembly which we had at Mr Soley's last
evening, miss Soley being mistress of the ceremony. Mrs Soley desired me
to assist Miss Hannah in making out a list of guests which I did some
time since, I wrote all the invitation cards. There was a large company
assembled in a handsome, large, upper room in the new end of the house.
We had two fiddles, & I had the honor to open the diversion of the
evening in a minuet with miss Soley.--Here follows a list of the company
as we form'd for country dancing.

  Miss Soley     &     Miss Anna Greene Winslow
  Miss Calif           Miss Scott
  Miss Williams        Miss McCarthy
  Miss Codman          Miss Winslow
  Miss Ives            Miss Coffin
  Miss Scolley[36]     Miss Bella Coffin[37]
  Miss Waldow          Miss Quinsy[38]
  Miss Glover          Miss Draper
  Miss Hubbard

Miss Cregur (usually pronounced Kicker) & two Miss Sheafs were invited
but were sick or sorry & beg'd to be excus'd. There was a little Miss
Russell & the little ones of the family present who could not dance. As
spectators, there were Mr & Mrs Deming, Mr. & Mrs Sweetser Mr & Mrs
Soley, Mr & Miss Cary, Mrs Draper, Miss Oriac, Miss Hannah--our treat
was nuts, rasins, Cakes, Wine, punch,[39] hot & cold, all in great
plenty. We had a very agreeable evening from 5 to 10 o'clock. For
variety we woo'd a widow, hunted the whistle, threaded the needle, &
while the company was collecting, we diverted ourselves with playing of
pawns, no rudeness Mamma I assure you. Aunt Deming desires you would
_perticulary observe_, that the elderly part of the company were
_spectators only_, they mix'd not in either of the above describ'd
scenes.

I was dress'd in my yellow coat, black bib & apron, black feathers on my
head, my past comb, & all my past[40] garnet marquesett[41] & jet pins,
together with my silver plume--my loket, rings, black collar round my
neck, black mitts & 2 or 3 yards of blue ribbin, (black & blue is high
tast) striped tucker and ruffels (not my best) & my silk shoes
compleated my dress.


Jan^y 18th.--Yesterday I had an invitation to celebrate Miss Caty's
birth-day with her. She gave it me the night before. Miss is 10 years
old. The best dancer in Mr Turners[42] school, she has been his scoller
these 3 years. My aunt thought it proper (as our family had a
invitation) that I should attend a neighbor's funeral yesterday
P.M. I went directly from it to Miss Caty's Rout & arriv'd ex  .  .
.  .  .  .


    BOSTON January 25 1772.

Hon^'d Mamma, My Hon^'d Papa has never signified to me his approbation
of my journals, from whence I infer, that he either never reads them,
or does not give himself the trouble to remember any of their contents,
tho' some part has been address'd to him, so, for the future, I shall
trouble only you with this part of my scribble--Last thursday I din'd at
Unkle Storer's & spent the afternoon in that neighborhood. I met with
some adventures in my way viz. As I was going, I was overtaken by a lady
who was quite a stranger to me. She accosted me with "how do you do
miss?" I answer'd her, but told her I had not the pleasure of knowing
her. She then ask'd "what is your name miss? I believe you think 'tis a
very strange questian to ask, but have a mind to know." Nanny Green--She
interrupted me with "not Mrs. Winslow of Cumberland's daughter." Yes
madam I am. When did you hear from your Mamma? how do's she do? When
shall you write to her? When you do, tell her that you was overtaken in
the street by her old friend Mrs Login, give my love to her & tell her
she must come up soon & live on Jamaca plain. we have got a nice
meeting-house, & a charming minister, & all so cleaver. She told me she
had ask'd Unkle Harry to bring me to see her, & he said he would. Her
minister is Mr Gordon. I have heard him preach several times at the
O. South. In the course of my peregrination, as aunt calls it,
I happen'd in to a house where D---- was attending the Lady of the
family. How long she was at his opperation, I know not. I saw him twist
& tug & pick & cut off whole locks of grey hair at a slice (the lady
telling him she would have no hair to dress next time) for the space of
a hour & a half, when I left them, he seeming not to be near done. This
lady is not a grandmother tho' she is both old enough & grey enough to
be one.


Jan^y 31--I spent yesterday with Aunt Storer, except a little while I
was at Aunt Sukey's with Mrs Barrett dress'd in a white brocade, &
cousin Betsey dress'd in a red lutestring, both adorn'd with past, perls
marquesett &c. They were after tea escorted by Mr. Newton & Mr Barrett
to ye assembly at Concert Hall. This is a snowy day, & I am prevented
going to school.


  [Illustration: WEDDING PARTY IN BOSTON IN 1756]


Feb. 9th.--My honored Mamma will be so good as to excuse my useing the
pen of my old friend just here, because I am disabled by a whitloe on my
fourth finger & something like one on my middle finger, from using my
own pen; but altho' my right hand is in bondage, my left is free; & my
aunt says, it will be a nice oppertunity if I do but improve it, to
perfect myself in learning to spin flax. I am pleased with the proposal
& am at this present, exerting myself for this purpose. I hope, when
two, or at most three months are past, to give you occular demonstration
of my proficiency in _this art_, as well as several others. My fingers
are not the only part of me that has suffer'd with sores within this
fortnight, for I have had an ugly great boil upon my right hip & about a
dozen small ones--I am at present swath'd hip & thigh, as Samson smote
the Philistines, but my soreness is near over. My aunt thought it highly
proper to give me some cooling physick, so last tuesday I took 1-2 oz
Globe Salt (a disagreeable potion) & kept chamber. Since which, there
has been no new erruption, & a great alteration for the better in those
I had before.

I have read my bible to my aunt this morning (as is the daily custom) &
sometimes I read other books to her. So you may perceive, I _have the
use of my tongue_ & I tell her it is a good thing to have the use of my
tongue. Unkle Ned[43] called here just now--all well--by the way he is
come to live in Boston again, & till he can be better accomodated, is at
housekeeping where Mad^m Storer lately lived, he is looking for a less
house. I tell my Aunt I feel a disposician to be a good girl, & she
pleases herself that she shall have much comfort of me to-day, which as
cousin Sally is ironing we expect to have to ourselves.


Feb. 10th.--This day I paid my respects to Master Holbrook, after a
week's absence, my finger is still in limbo as you may see by the
writeing. I have not paid my compliments to Madam Smith,[44] for, altho'
I can drive the goos quill a bit, I cannot so well manage the needle.
So I will lay my hand to the distaff, as the virtuous woman did of
old--Yesterday was very bad weather, neither aunt, nor niece at publick
worship.


Feb. 12th.--Yesterday afternoon I spent at unkle Joshuas. Aunt Green
gave me a plaister for my fingure that has near cur'd it, but I have a
new boil, which is under poultice, & tomorrow I am to undergo another
seasoning with globe Salt. The following lines Aunt Deming found in
grandmama Sargent's[45] pocket-book & gives me leave to copy 'em here.--

  Dim eyes, deaf ears, cold stomach shew,
  My dissolution is in view
  The shuttle's thrown, my race is run,
  My sun is set, my work is done;
  My span is out, my tale is told,
  My flower's decay'd, & stock grows old,
  The dream is past, the shadows fled,
  My soul now longs for Christ my head,
  I've lived to seventy six or nigh,
  GOD calls at last, & now I'll die.[46]

My honor'd Grandma departed this vale of tears 1-4 before 4 o'clock
wednesday morning August 21, 1771. Aged 74 years, 2 months & ten days.


Feb. 13th.--Everybody says that this is a bitter cold day, but I know
nothing about it but hearsay for I am in aunt's chamber (which is very
warm always) with a nice fire, a stove, sitting in Aunt's easy chair,
with a tall three leav'd screen at my back, & I am very comfortable.
I took my second (& I hope last) potion of Globe salts this morning.
I went to see Aunt Storer yesterday afternoon, & by the way Unkle Storer
is so ill that he keeps chamber. As I went down I call'd at Mrs
Whitwell's & must tell you Mr & Mrs Whitwell are both ill. Mrs. Whitwell
with the rheumatism. I saw Mad^m Harris, Mrs Mason and Miss Polly
Vans[47] there, they all give their love to you--Last evening I went to
catechizing with Aunt. Our ministers have agreed during the long
evenings to discourse upon the questions or some of 'em in the
assembly's shorter catechism, taking 'em in their order at the house of
Mrs Rogers in School Street, every wednesday evening. Mr. Hunt began
with the first question and shew'd what it is to glorify GOD. Mr Bacon
then took the second, what rule &c. which he has spent three evenings
upon, & now finished. Mr Hunt having taken his turn to show what the
Scriptures principly teach, & what is GOD. I remember he said that there
was nothing properly done without a rule, & he said that the rule God
had given us to glorify him by was the bible. How miraculously (said he)
has God preserv'd this blessed book. It was once in the reign of a
heathen emperor condemn'd to be burnt, at which time it was death to
have a bible & conceal it, but God's providence was wonderful in
preserving it when so much human policy had been exerted to bury it in
Oblivion--but for all that, here we have it as pure & uncorrupted as
ever--many books of human composure have had much pains taken to
preserve 'em, notwithstanding they are buried in Oblivion. He considered
who was the author of the bible, he prov'd that GOD was the author, for
no _good_ man could be the author, because such a one would not be
guilty of imposition, & an evil man could not unless we suppose a house
divided against itself. he said a great deal more to prove the bible is
certainly the word of God from the matter it contains &c, but the best
evidence of the truth of divine revelation, every true believer has in
his own heart. This he said, the natural man had no idea of. I did not
understand all he said about the external and internal evidence, but
this I can say, that I understand him better than any body else that
I hear preach. Aunt has been down stairs all the time I have been
recolecting & writeing this. Therefore, all this of own head, of
consequence.

Valentine day.[48]--My cousin Sally reeled off a 10 knot skane of yarn
today. My valentine was an old country plow-joger. The yarn was of my
spinning. Aunt says it will do for filling. Aunt also says niece is a
whimsical child.


Feb. 17.--Since Wednesday evening, I have not been abroad since
yesterday afternoon. I went to meeting & back in Mr. Soley's chaise. Mr.
Hunt preached. He said that human nature is as opposite to God as
darkness to light. That our sin is only bounded by the narrowness of our
capacity. His text was Isa. xli. 14. 18. The mountains &c. He said were
unbelief, pride, covetousness, enmity, &c. &c. &c. This morning I took a
walk for Aunt as far as Mr. Soley's. I called at Mrs Whitwell's & found
the good man & lady both better than when I saw them last. On my return
I found Mr. Hunt on a visit to aunt. After the usual salutations & when
did you hear from your papa &c. I ask'd him if the blessing pronounced
by the minister before the congregation is dismissed, is not a part of
the publick worship? "Yes."

"Why then, do you Sir, say, let us conclude the publick worship by
singing?" "Because singing is the last act in which the whole
congregation is unanimously to join. The minister in Gods name blesses
his i.e. Gods people agreeable to the practice of the apostles, who
generally close the epistles with a benediction in the name of the
Trinity, to which, Amen is subjoined, which, tho' pronounc'd by the
minister, is, or ought to be the sentiment & prayer of the whole
assembly, the meaning whereof is, So be it."


Feb. 18th.--Another ten knot skane of my yarn was reel'd off today.
Aunt says it is very good. My boils & whitloes are growing well apace,
so that I can knit a little in the evening.

Transcribed from the Boston Evening Post:

Sep. 18, 1771. Under the head of London news, you may find that last
Thursday was married at Worcester the Widow Biddle of Wellsburn in the
county of Warwick, to her grandson John Biddle of the same place, aged
twenty three years. It is very remarkable. the widdow had one son & one
daughter; 18 grandchildren & 5 great grandchildren; her present husband
has one daughter, who was her great granddaughter but is now become her
daughter; her other great grandchildren are become her cousins; her
grandchildren her brothers & sisters; her son & daughter her father
& mother. I think! tis the most extraordinary account I ever read in
a News-Paper. It will serve to puzzel Harry Dering with.

  [Transcriber's Note:
  "I think! tis" may be a typographical error for "I think 'tis".]


Monday Feb. 18th--Bitter cold. I am just come from writing school. Last
Wednesday P.M. while I was at school Aunt Storer called in to see Aunt
Deming in her way to Mr Inches's. She walk'd all that long way. Thursday
last I din'd & spent the afternoon with Aunt Sukey. I attended both my
schools in the morning of that day. I cal'd at unkle Joshua's as I went
along, as I generally do, when I go in town, it being all in my way.
Saterday I din'd at Unkle Storer's, drank tea at Cousin Barrel's, was
entertain'd in the afternoon with scating. Unkle Henry was there.
Yesterday by the help of neighbor Soley's Chaise, I was at meeting all
day, tho' it snow'd in the afternoon. I might have say'd I was at Unkle
Winslow's last Thursday Eve^g & when I inform you that my needle work at
school, & knitting at home, went on _as usual_, I think I have laid
before you a pretty full account of the last week. You see how I improve
in my writing, but I drive on as fast as I can.


Feb. 21, Thursday.--This day Jack Frost bites very hard, so hard aunt
won't let me go to any school. I have this morning made part of a coppy
with the very pen I have now in my hand, writting this with. Yesterday
was so cold there was a very thick vapor upon the water, but I attended
my schools all day. My unkle says yesterday was 10 degrees colder than
any day we have had before this winter. And my aunt says she believes
this day is 10 degrees colder than it was yesterday; & moreover, that
she would not put a dog out of doors. The sun gives forth his rays
through a vapor like that which was upon the water yesterday. But Aunt
bids me give her love to pappa & all the family & tell them that she
should be glad of their company in her warm parlour, indeed there is not
one room in this house but is very warm when there is a good fire in
them. As there is in this at present. Yesterday I got leave (by my
aunt's desire) to go from school at 4 o'clock to see my unkle Ned who
has had the misfortune to break his leg. I call'd in to warm myself at
unkle Joshua's. Aunt Hannah told me I had better not go any further for
she could tell me all about him, so I say'd as it is so cold I believe
aunt won't be angry so I will stay, I therefore took off my things, aunt
gave me leave to call at Unkle Joshua's & was very glad I went no
further. Aunt Hannah told me he was as well as could be expected for one
that has a broken bone. He was coming from Watertown in a chaise the
horse fell down on the Hill, this side Mr Brindley's. he was
afraid if he fell out, the wheel would run over him, he therefore gave a
start & fell out & broke his leg, the horse strugled to get up, but
could not. unkle Ned was affraid if he did get up the chaise
wheels would run over him, so he went on his two hands and his other
foot drawing his lame leg after him & got behind the chaise, (so he was
safe) & there lay in the snow for some time, nobody being near. at last
2 genteelmen came, they tho't the horse was dead when they first saw him
at a distance, but hearing somebody hollow, went up to it. By this time
there was a countraman come along, the person that hollow'd was unkle
Ned. They got a slay and put him in it with some hay and a blanket,
wrapt him up well as they could & brought him to Deacon Smith's in town.
Now Papa & Mamma, this hill is in Brookline. And now again, I have been
better inform'd for the hill is in Roxbury & poor Unkle Ned was alone in
the chaise. Both bones of his leg are broke, but they did not come thro'
the skin, which is a happy circumstance. It is his right leg that is
broke. My Grandmamma sent Miss Deming, Miss Winslow & I one eight^th of
a Dollar a piece for a New Years gift. My Aunt Deming & Miss Deming had
letters from Grandmamma. She was pretty well, she wrote aunt that Mrs
Marting was brought to bed with a son Joshua about a month since, & is
with her son very well. Grandmamma was very well last week. I have made
the purchase I told you of a few pages agone, that is, last Thursday I
purchas'd with my aunt Deming's leave, a very beautiful white feather
hat, that is, the out side, which is a bit of white hollond with the
feathers sew'd on in a most curious manner white & unsullyed as the
falling snow, this hat I have long been saving my money to procure for
which I have let your kind allowance, Papa, lay in my aunt's hands till
this hat which I spoke for was brought home. As I am (as we say) a
daughter of liberty[49] I chuse to wear as much of our own manufactory
as pocible. But my aunt says, I have wrote this account very badly.
I will go on to save my money for a chip & a lineing &c.

Papa I rec'd your letter dated Jan. 11, for which I thank you, Sir, &
thank you greatly for the money I received therewith. I am very glad to
hear that Brother John papa & mamma & cousin are well. I'll answer your
letter papa and yours mamma and cousin Harry's too. I am very glad mamma
your eyes are better. I hope by the time I have the pleasure of hearing
from Cumberland again your eyes will be so well that you will favor me
with one from you.


Feb. 22d.--Since about the middle of December, ult. we have had
till this week, a series of cold and stormy weather--every snow storm
(of which we have had abundance) except the first, ended with rain, by
which means the snow was so hardened that strong gales at NW soon turned
it, & all above ground to ice, which this day seven-night was from one
to three, four & they say, in some places, five feet thick, in the
streets of this town. Last saturday morning we had a snow storm come on,
which continued till four o'clock P.M. when it turned to rain, since
which we have had a warm air, with many showers of rain, one this
morning a little before day attended with thunder. The streets have been
very wet, the water running like rivers all this week, so that I could
not possibly go to school, neither have I yet got the bandage off my
fingure. Since I have been writing now, the wind suddenly sprung up at
NW and blew with violence so that we may get to meeting to-morrow,
perhaps on dry ground. Unkle Ned was here just now & has fairly or
unfairly carried off aunt's cut paper pictures,[50] tho' she told him
she had given them to papa some years ago. It has been a very sickly
time here, not one person that I know of but has been under heavy
colds--(all laid up at unkle Storer's) in general got abroad again. Aunt
Suky had not been down stairs since her lying in, when I last saw her,
but I hear she is got down. She has had a broken breast. I have spun 30
knots of linning yarn, and (partly) new footed a pair of stockings for
Lucinda, read a part of the pilgrim's progress, coppied part of my text
journal (that if I live a few years longer, I may be able to understand
it, for aunt sais, that to her, the contents as I first mark'd them,
were an impenetrable secret) play'd some, tuck'd a great deal (Aunt
Deming says it is very true) laugh'd enough, & I tell aunt it is all
human _nature_, if not human reason. And now, I wish my honored mamma a
very good night.


Saturday noon Feb. 23d--Dear Pappa, do's the winter continue as
pleasant at Cumberland as when you wrote to me last? We had but very
little winter here, till February came in, but we have little else
since. The cold still continues tho' not so extreme as it was last
Thursday. I have attended my schools all this week except one day, and
am going as soon as I have din'd to see how Unkle Ned does. I was
thinking, Sir, to lay up a piece of money you sent me, but as you sent
it to me to lay out I have a mind to buy a chip & linning for my feather
hatt. But my aunt says she will think of it. My aunt says if I behave
myself very well indeed, not else, she will give me a garland of flowers
to orniment it, tho' she has layd aside the biziness of flower
making.[51]


  [Illustration: GENERAL JOSHUA WINSLOW]


Feb. 25th.--This is a very stormy day of snow, hail & rain, so that I
cannot get to Master Holbrook's, therefore I will here copy something I
lately transcribed on a loose paper from Dr. Owen's sermon on Hab. iii,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. "I have heard that a full wind behind the
ship drives her not so fast forward, as a side wind, that seems almost
as much against her as with her; & the reason they say is, because a
full wind fills but some of her sails.


Wednesday.--Very cold, but this morning I was at sewing and writing
school, this afternoon all sewing, for Master Holbrook does not in the
winter keep school of afternoons. Unkle Henrys feet are so much better
that he wears shoos now.


Monday noon Feb. 25th. I have been to writing school this morning and
Sewing. The day being very pleasant, very little wind stirring. Jemima
called to see me last evening. She lives at Master Jimmy Lovel's.[52]
Dear mamma, I suppose that you would be glad to hear that Betty Smith
who has given you so much trouble, is well & behaves herself well & I
should be glad if I could write you so. But the truth is, no sooner was
the 29th Regiment encamp'd upon the common but miss Betty took herself
among them (as the Irish say) & there she stay'd with Bill Pinchion &
awhile. The next news of her was, that she was got into gaol for
stealing: from whence she was taken to the publick whipping post.[53]
The next adventure was to the Castle, after the soldier's were remov'd
there, for the murder of the 5th March last.[54] When they turn'd her
away from there, she came up to town again, and soon got into the
workhouse for new misdemeanours, she soon ran away from there and sit up
her old trade of pilfering again, for which she was put a second time
into gaol, there she still remains. About two months agone (as well as I
can remember) she & a number of her wretched companions set the gaol on
fire, in order to get out, but the fire was timely discovered &
extinguished, & there, as I said she still remains till this day, in
order to be tried for her crimes. I heard somebody say that as she has
some connections with the army no doubt but she would be cleared, and
perhaps, have a pension into the bargain. Mr. Henry says the way of sin
is down hill, when persons get into that way they are not easily
stopped.


Feb. 27.--This day being too stormy for me to go to any school, and
nothing as yet having happen'd that is worth your notice, my aunt gives
me leave to communicate to you something that much pleas'd her when she
heard of it, & which I hope will please you my Papa and Mamma. I believe
I may have inform'd you that since I have been in Boston, Dr. Byles[55]
has pretty frequently preached & sometimes administer'd the sacrament,
when our Candidates have preached to the O.S. Church, because they are
not tho't qualified to administer Gospel Ordinance, till they be settled
Pastours. About two months ago a brother of the church sent Dr Byles a
Card which contain'd after the usual introduction, the following words,
Mr W---- dont set up for an Expositor of Scripture, yet ventures to send
Dr. Byles a short comment on 1 Cor. ix. 11. which he thinks agreeable to
the genuine import of the text, & hopes the Dr will not disapprove it.
The comment was a dozen pounds of Chocolate &c.--To which the D^r
return'd the following very pretty answer. D^r Byles returns respects to
Mr W & most heartily thanks him for his judicious practical Familie
Expositor, which is in Tast. My aunt Deming gives her love to you mamma,
and bids me tell you, as a matter you will be very glad to know, that
D^r Byles & his lady & family, have enjoy'd a good share of health &
perfect harmony for several years past.

Mr Beacon is come home. My unkle Neddy is very comfortable, has very
little pain, & know fever with his broken bone. My Unkle Harry[56] was
here yesterday & is very well. Poor Mrs Inches is dangerously ill of a
fever. We have not heard how she does today.


March 4th.--Poor Mrs Inches is dead. Gone from a world of trouble, as
she has left this to her poor mother. Aunt says she heartyly pities Mrs
Jackson. Mr Nat. Bethune died this morning, Mrs Inches last night.

We had the greatest fall of snow yesterday we have had this winter. Yet
cousin Sally, miss Polly, & I rode to & from meeting in Mr Soley's
chaise both forenoon & afternoon, & with a stove[57] was very
comfortable there. If brother John is as well and hearty as cousin
Frank, he is a clever boy. Unkle Neddy continues very comfortable. I saw
him last saturday. I have just now been writing four lines in my Book
almost as well as the copy. But all the intreaties in the world will not
prevail upon me to do always as well as I can, which is not the least
trouble to me, tho' its a great grief to aunt Deming. And she says by
writing so frightfully above.


March 6.--I think the appearance this morning is as winterish as any I
can remember, earth, houses, trees, all covered with snow, which began
to fall yesterday morning & continued falling all last night. The Sun
now shines very bright, the N.W. wind blows very fresh. Mr Gannett din'd
here yesterday, from him, my unkle, aunt & cousin Sally, I had an
account of yesterday's publick performances,[58] & exhibitions, but aunt
says I need not write about 'em because, no doubt there will be printed
accounts. I should have been glad if I could have seen & heard for
myselfe. My face is better, but I have got a heavy cold yet.


March 9th.--After being confined a week, I rode yesterday afternoon to
& from meeting in Mr Soley's chaise. I got no cold and am pretty well
today. This has been a very snowy day today. Any body that sees this may
see that I have wrote nonsense but Aunt says, I have been a very good
girl to day about my work however--I think this day's work may be called
a piece meal for in the first place I sew'd on the bosom of unkle's
shirt, mended two pair of gloves, mended for the wash two handkerchiefs,
(one cambrick) sewed on half a border of a lawn apron of aunts, read
part of the xxi^st chapter of Exodous, & a story in the Mother's gift.
Now, Hon^d Mamma, I must tell you of something that happened to me
to-day, that has not happen'd before this great while, viz My Unkle &
Aunt both told me, I was a very good girl. Mr Gannett gave us the favour
of his company a little while this morning (our head). I have been
writing all the above gibberish while aunt has been looking after her
family--now she is out of the room--now she is in--& takes up my pen in
_my_ absence to observe, I am a little simpleton for informing my mamma,
that it is _a great while_ since I was prais'd because she will conclude
that it is _a great while_ since I deserv'd to be prais'd. I will
henceforth try to observe their praise & yours too. I mean deserve. It's
now tea time--as soon as that is over, I shall spend the rest of the
evening in reading to my aunt. It is near candle lighting.


March 10, 5 o'clock P.M.--I have finish'd my stent of sewing work for
this day & wrote a billet to Miss Caty Vans, a copy of which I shall
write on the next page. To-morrow if the weather is fit I am to visit.
I have again been told I was a good girl. My Billet to Miss Vans was in
the following words. Miss Green gives her compliments to Miss Vans, and
informs her that her aunt Deming quite misunderstood the matter about
the queen's night-Cap.[59] Mrs. Deming thou't that it was a black skull
cap linn'd with red that Miss Vans ment which she thou't would not be
becoming to Miss Green's light complexion. Miss Green now takes the
liberty to send the materials for the Cap Miss Vans was so kind as to
say she would make for her, which, when done, she engages to take
special care of for Miss Vans' sake. Mrs. Deming joins her compliments
with Miss Green's--they both wish for the pleasure of a visit from Miss
Vans. Miss Soley is just come in to visit me & 'tis near dark.


March 11.--Boast not thyself of tomorrow; for thou knowest not what a
day may bring forth. Thus king Solomon, inspired by the Holy Ghost,
cautions, Pro. xxvii. 1. My aunt says, this is a most necessary lesson
to be learn'd & laid up in the heart. I am quite of her mind. I have met
with a disappointment to day, & aunt says, I may look for them every
day--we live in a changing world--in scripture call'd a vale of tears.
Uncle said yesterday that there had not been so much snow on the ground
this winter as there was then--it has been vastly added to since then,
& is now 7 feet deep in some places round this house; it is above the
fence in the coart & thick snow began to fall and condtinu'd till about
5 o'clock P.M. (it is about 1-4 past 8 o'clock) since which there has
been a steady rain--so no visiting as I hoped this day, & this is the
disappointment I mentioned on t'other page. Last saturday I sent my
cousin Betsy Storer a Billet of which the following is a copy. Miss
Green gives her love to Miss Storer & informs her that she is very
_sensible_ of the effects of a bad cold, not only in the pain she has
had in her throat, neck and face, which have been much swell'd & which
she is not quite clear of, but that she has also been by the same
depriv'd of the pleasure of seeing Miss Storer & her other friends in
Sudbury Street. She begs, her Duty, Love & Compliments, may be presented
as due & that she may be inform'd if they be in health. To this I have
receiv'd no answer. I suppose she don't think I am worth an answer. But
I have finished my stent, and wrote all under this date, & now I have
just daylight eno' to add, my love and duty to dear friends at
_Cumberland_.


  [Illustration: EBENEZER STORER]


March 14.--Mr. Stephen March, at whose house I was treated so kindly
last fall, departed this life last week, after languishing several
months under a complication of disorders--we have not had perticulars,
therefore cannot inform you, whether he engag'd the King of terrors with
Christian fortitude, or otherwise.

  "Stoop down my Thoughts, that use to rise,
  Converse a while with Death;
  Think how a gasping Mortal lies,
  And pants away his Breath."

Last Thursday I din'd with unkle Storer, & family at aunt Sukey's--all
well except Charles Storer who was not so ill but what, _that_ I mean,
he din'd with us. Aunt Suky's Charles is a pretty little boy & grows
nicely. We were diverted in the afternoon with an account of a queer
Feast that had been made that day in a certain Court of this town for
the Entertainment of a number of Tories--perhaps seventeen. One
contain'd three calves heads (skin off) with their appurtinencies
anciently call'd pluck--Their other dish (for they had but two)
contain'd a number of roast fowls--half a dozen, we suppose,[A] & all
roosters at this season no doubt. Yesterday, soon after I came from
writing school we had another snow storm begun, which continued till
after I went to bed. This morning the sun shines clear (so it did
yesterday morning till 10 o'clock.) It is now bitter cold, & such a
quantity of snow upon the ground, as the Old people don't remember ever
to have seen before at this time of the year. My aunt Deming says, when
she first look'd abroad this morning she felt anxious for her brother, &
his family at Cumberland, fearing lest they were covered up in snow. It
is now 1-2 after 12 o'clock noon. The sun has been shineing in his full
strength for full 6 hours, & the snow not melted enough anywhere in
sight of this house, to cause one drop of water.

[Footnote A: There was six as I have since heard.]


March 17.--Yesterday, I went to see aunt Polly, & finding her going out,
I spent the afternoon with aunt Hannah. While I was out, a snow storm
overtook me. This being a fine sun shine (tho' cold) day I have been to
writing school, & wrote two pieces, one I presented to aunt Deming, and
the other I design for my Honor'd Papa, I hope he will approve of it.
I sent a piece of my writing to you Hon'd Mamma last fall, which I hope
you receiv'd. When my aunt Deming was a little girl my Grandmamma
Sargent told her the following story viz. One Mr. Calf who had three
times enjoy'd the Mayorality of the city of London, had after his
decease, a monoment erected to his memory with the following inscription
on it.

  Here lies buried the body of
    Sir Richard Calf,
  Thrice Lord Mayor of London.
    Honor, Honor, Honor.

A drol gentleman passing by with a bit of chalk in his hand underwrote
thus--

  O cruel death! more subtle than a Fox
  That would not let this Calf become an Ox,
  That he might browze among the briers & thorns
  And with his brethren wear,
  Horns. Horns. Horns.


My aunt told me the foregoing some time since & today I ask'd her leave
to insert it in my journal. My aunt gives her love to you & directs me
to tell you that she tho't my piece of linnin would have made me a dozen
of shifts but she could cut no more than ten out of it. There is some
left, but not enough for another. Nine of them are finish'd wash'd &
iron'd; & the other would have been long since done if my fingers had
not been sore. My cousin Sally made three of them for me, but then I
made two shirts & part of another for unkle to help her. I believe
unless something remarkable should happen, such as a _warm day_, my
mamma will consent that I dedicate a few of my next essays to papa.
I think the second thing I said to aunt this morning was, that I
intended to be _very good all day_. To make this out,

  "Next unto _God_, dear Parents I address
  Myself to you in humble Thankfulness,
  For all your Care & Charge on me bestow'd;
  The means of Learning unto me allow'd,
  Go on I pray, & let me still pursue
  Those Golden ARTS the Vulgar never knew."

    Yr Dutifull Daughter

      ANNA GREEN WINSLOW.

The poetry I transcrib'd from my Copy Book.


March 19.--Thursday last I spent at home, except a quarter of an hour
between sunset and dark, I stepped over the way to Mr. Glover's with
aunt. Yesterday I spent at Unkle Neddy's & stitched wristbands for aunt
Polly. By the way, I must inform you, (pray dont let papa see this) that
yesterday I put on No 1 of my new shifts, & indeed it is very
comfortable. It is _long_ since I had a shift to my _back_. I dont know
if I ever had till now--It seem'd so strange too, to have any linen
below my waist--I am going to dine at Mrs. Whitwell's to day, by
invitation. I spent last evening at Mrs Rogers. Mr Hunt discoursed upon
the doctrine of the Trinity--it was the second time that he spoke upon
the subject at that place. I did not hear him the first time. His
business last eve^g was to prove the divinity of the Son, & holy Ghost,
& their equality with the Father. My aunt Deming says, it is a grief to
her, that I don't always write as well as I can, _I can write pretily_.


March 21.--I din'd & spent the afternoon of Thursday last, at Mrs
Whitwell's. Mrs Lathrop, & Mrs Carpenter din'd there also. The latter
said she was formerly acquainted with mamma, ask'd how she did, & when I
heard from her,--said, I look'd much like her. Madam Harris & Miss
P. Vans were also of the company. While I was abroad the snow melted to
such a degree, that my aunt was oblig'd to get Mr Soley's chaise to
bring me home. Yesterday, we had by far the gratest storm of wind & snow
that there has been this winter. It began to fall yesterday morning &
continued falling till after our family were in bed. (P.M.) Mr. Hunt
call'd in to visit us just after we rose from diner; he ask'd me,
whether I had heard from my papa & mamma, since I wrote 'em. He was
answer'd, no sir, it would be strange if I had, because I had been
writing to 'em today, & indeed so I did every day. Aunt told him that
_his name_ went frequently into my journals together with broken & some
times whole sentences of his sermons, conversations &c. He laugh'd &
call'd me Newsmonger, & said I was a daily advertiser. He added, that he
did not doubt but my journals afforded much entertainment & would be a
future benefit &c. Here is a fine compliment for me mamma.


March 26.--Yesterday at 6 o'clock, I went to Unkle Winslow's, their
neighbor Greenleaf was their. She said she knew Mamma, & that I look
like her. Speaking about papa & you occation'd Unkle Winslow to tell me
that he had kiss'd you long before papa knew you. From thence we went to
Miss Rogers's where, to a full assembly Mr Bacon read his 3d sermon on
R. iv. 6, I can remember he said, that, before we all sinned in Adam our
father, Christ loved us. He said the Son of God always did as his father
gave him commandment, & to prove this, he said, that above 17 hundred
years ago he left the bosom of the Father, & came & took up his abode
with men, & bore all the scourgings & buffetings which the vile Jews
inflicted on him, & then was hung upon the accursed tree--he died, was
buried, & in three days rose again--ascended up to heaven & there took
his seat at the right hand of the Majesty on high from whence he will
come to be the supream and impartial judge of quick & dead--and when his
poor Mother & her poor husband went to Jerusalem to keep the passover &
he went with them, he disputed among the doctors, & when his Mother
ask'd him about it he said "wist ye not that I must be about my Father's
business,"--all this he said was a part of that wrighteousness for the
sake of which a sinner is justafied--Aunt has been up stairs all the
time I have been writeing & recollecting this--so no help from her. She
is come down now & I have been reading this over to her. She sais, she
is glad I remember so much, but I have not done the subject justice. She
sais I have blended things somewhat improperly--an interuption by
company.


March 28.--Unkle Harry was here last evening & inform'd us that by a
vessel from Halifax which arriv'd yesterday, Mr H Newton, inform'd his
brother Mr J Newton of the sudden death of their brother Hibbert in your
family 21 January ult. (Just five months to a day since Grandmamma
Sargent's death.) With all the circumstances relating to it. My aunt
Deming gives her love to Mamma & wishes her a sanctified improvement of
all God's dealings with her, & that it would please him to bring her &
all the family safe to Boston. Jarvis is put up for Cumberland, we hope
he will be there by or before Mayday. This minute I have receiv'd my
queen's night cap from Miss Caty Vans--we like it. Aunt says, that if
the materials it is made of were more substantial than gauze, it might
serve occationally to hold any thing mesur'd by an 1-2 peck, but it is
just as it should be, & very decent, & she wishes my writing was _as_
decent. But I got into one of my frolicks, upon sight of the Cap.


April 1st.--Will you be offended mamma, if I ask you, if you remember
the flock of wild Geese that papa call'd you to see flying over the
Blacksmith's shop this day three years? I hope not; I only mean to
divert you. The snow is near gone in the street before us, & mud supplys
the place thereof; After a week's absence, I this day attended Master
Holbrook with some difficulty, what was last week a pond is to-day a
quag, thro' which I got safe however, & if aunt[A] had known it was so
bad, she sais she would not have sent me, but I neither wet my feet, nor
drabled my clothes, indeed I have but one garment that I could contrive
to drabble.

N.B. It is 1 April.

[Footnote A: Miss Green tells her aunt, that the word refer'd to begins
with a dipthong.]


April 3.--Yesterday was the annual Fast, & I was at meeting all day. Mr
Hunt preach'd A.M. from Zac. vii. 4, 5, 6, 7. He said, that if we did
not mean as we said in pray's it was only a compliment put upon God,
which was a high affront to his divine Majesty. Mr Bacon, P.M. from
James v. 17. He said, "pray's, effectual & fervent, might be, where
there were no words, but there might be elegant words where there is no
prayr's. The essence of pray's consists in offering up holy desires to
God agreeable to his will,--it is the flowing out of gracious
affections--what then are the pray'rs of an unrenewed heart that is full
of enmity to God? doubtless they are an abomination to him. What then,
must not unregenerate men pray? I answer, it is their duty to breathe
out holy desires to God in pray's. Prayer is a natural duty. Hannah
pour'd out her soul before the Lord, yet her voice was not heard, only
her lips moved. Some grieve and complain that their pray's are not
answered, but if _thy will be done is_, as it ought to be, in every
prayer; their prayers are answer'd."

The wind was high at N.E. all day yesterday, but nothing fell from the
dark clouds that overspread the heavens, till 8 o'clock last evening,
when a snow began which has continued falling ever since. The bell being
now ringing for 1 o'clock P.M. & no sign of abatement.

My aunt Deming says, that if my memory had been equal to the memory of
some of my ancestors, I might have done better justice to Mr. Bacon's
good sermon, & that if hers had been better than mine she would have
helped me. Mr Bacon _did_ say what is here recorded, but in other
method.


April 6.--I made a shift to walk to meeting yesterday morning. But there
was so much water in the streets when I came home from meeting that I
got a seat in Mr Waleses chaise. My aunt walk'd home & she sais thro'
more difaculty than ever she did in her life before. Indeed had the
stream get up from our meeting house as it did down, we might have taken
boat as we have talk'd some times of doing to cross the street to our
oposite neighbor _Soley's_ chaise. I remember some of Mr Hunts sermon,
how much will appear in my text journal.


April 7.--I visited yesterday P.M. with my aunt at Mr Waldron's. This
afternoon I am going with my aunt to visit Mrs Salisbury who is Dr
Sewall's granddaughter, I expect Miss Patty Waldow will meet me there.
It is but a little way & we can now thro' favour cross the street
without the help of a boat. I saw Miss Polly Vans this morning. She
gives her love to you. As she always does whenever I see her. Aunt
Deming is this minute come into the room, & from what her niece has
wrote last, takes the liberty to remind you, that Miss Vans is a sister
of the Old South Church, a society remarkable for Love. Aunt Deming is
sorry she has spoil'd the look of this page by her carelessness & hopes
her niece will mend its appearance in what follows. She wishes my
English had been better, but has not time to correct more than one word.


April 9.--We made the visit refer'd to above. The company was old Mrs
Salisbury,[60] Mrs Hill, (Mrs Salisbury's sister she was Miss Hannah
Sewall & is married to young Mr James Hill that us'd to live in this
house) Miss Sally Hill, Miss Polly Belcher Lyde, Miss Caty Sewall, My
Aunt & myself. Yesterday afternoon I visited Miss Polly Deming & took
her with me to Mr Rogers' in the evening where Mr Hunt discours'd upon
the 7th question of the catechism viz what are the decrees of God?
I remember a good many of his observations, which I have got set down on
a loose paper. But my aunt says that a Miss of 12 year's old cant
possibly do justice to the nicest subject in Divinity, & therefore had
better not attempt a repetition of perticulars, that she finds lie (as
may be easily concluded) somewhat confused in my young mind. She also
says, that in her poor judgment, Mr Hunt discours'd soundly as well as
ingeniously upon the subject, & very much to her instruction &
satisfaction. My Papa inform'd me in his last letter that he had done me
the honor to read my journals & that he approv'd of some part of them,
I suppose he means that he likes some parts better than other, indeed it
would be wonderful, as aunt says, if a gentleman of papa's understanding
& judgment cou'd be highly entertain'd with _every little_ saying or
observation that came from a girl of my years & that I ought to esteem
it a great favour that he notices any of my simple matter with his
_approbation_.


April 13th.--Yesterday I walk'd to meeting all day, the ground very
dry, & when I came home from meeting in the afternoon the Dust blew so
that it almost put my eyes out. What a difference in the space of a
week. I was just going out to writing school, but a slight rain
prevented so aunt says I must make up by writing well at home. Since I
have been writing the rain is turn'd to snow, which is now falling in a
thick shower. I have now before me, hon^d. Mamma, your favor dated
January 3. I am glad you alter'd your mind when you at first thought not
to write to me. I am glad my brother made an essay for a Post Script to
your Letter. I must get him to read it to me, when he comes up, for two
reasons, the one is because I may have the pleasure of hearing his
voice, the other because I don't understand his characters. I observe
that he is mamma's "Ducky Darling." I never again shall believe that Mrs
Huston will come up to Boston till I see her here. I shall be very glad
to see Mrs Law here & I have some hopes of it. Mr Gannett and the things
you sent by him we safely receiv'd before I got your Letter--you say
"you see I am still a great housekeeper," I think more so than when I
was with you. Truly I answer'd Mr Law's letter as soon as I found
opportunity therefor. I shall be very glad to see Miss Jenny here & I
wish she could live with me. I hope you will answer this "viva vosa" as
you say you intend to. Pray mamma who larnt you lattan? It now rains
fast, but the sun shines, & I am glad to see it, because if it continues
I am going abroad with aunt this afternoon.


April 14th.--I went a visiting yesterday to Col. Gridley's with my
aunt. After tea Miss Becky Gridley sung a minuet. Miss Polly Deming & I
danced to her musick, which when perform'd was approv'd of by Mrs
Gridley, Mrs Deming, Mrs Thompson, Mrs Avery,[61] Miss Sally Hill, Miss
Becky Gridley, Miss Polly Gridley & Miss Sally Winslow. Col^n Gridley
was out o' the room. Col^n brought in the talk of Whigs & Tories &
taught me the difference between them. I spent last evening at home.
I should have gone a visiting to day in sudbury street, but Unkle Harry
told me last night that they would be full of company. I had the
pleasure of hearing by him, that they were all well. I believe I shall
go somewhere this afternoon for I have acquaintances enough that would
be very glad to see me, as well as my sudbury street friends.


April 15th.--Yesterday I din'd at Mrs. Whitwell's & she being going
abroad, I spent the afternoon at Mad^m Harris's & the evening at home,
Unkle Harry gave us his company some part of it. I am going to Aunt
Storer's as soon as writing school is done. I shall dine with her, if
she is not engaged. It is a long time since I was there, & indeed it is
a long time since I have been able to get there. For tho' the walking
has been pretty tolerable at the South End, it has been intolerable down
in town. And indeed till yesterday, it has been such bad walking, that I
could not get there on my feet. If she had wanted much to have seen me,
she might have sent either one of her chaises, her chariot, or her
babyhutt,[62] one of which I see going by the door almost every day.


April 16th.--I dined with Aunt Storer yesterday & spent the afternoon
very agreeably at Aunt Suky's. Aunt Storer is not very well, but she
drank tea with us, & went down to Mr Stillman's lecture in the evening.
I spent the evening with Unkle & Aunt at Mrs Rogers's. Mr Bacon preach'd
his fourth sermon from Romans iv. 6. My cousin Charles Storer lent me
Gulliver's Travels abreviated, which aunt says I may read for the sake
of perfecting myself in reading a variety of composures. she sais
farther that the piece was desin'd as a burlesque upon the times in
which it was wrote,--& Martimas Scriblensis & Pope Dunciad were wrote
with the same design & as parts of the same work, tho' wrote by three
several hands.


April 17th.--You see, Mamma, I comply with your orders (or at least
have done father's some time past) of writing in my journal every day
tho' my matters are of little importance & I have nothing at present to
communicate except that I spent yesterday afternoon & evening at Mr
Soley's. The day was very rainy. I hope I shall at least learn to spell
the word _yesterday_, it having occur'd so frequently in these pages!
(The bell is ringing for good friday.) Last evening aunt had a letter
from Unkle Pierce, he informs her, that last Lords day morning Mrs
Martin was deliver'd of a daughter. She had been siezed the Monday
before with a violent pluritick fever, which continued when my Unkle's
letter was dated 13th instant. My Aunt Deming is affraid that poor Mrs
Martin is no more. She hopes she is reconcil'd to her father--but is
affraid whether that was so--She had try'd what was to be done that way
on her late visits to Portsmouth, & found my unkle was placably
dispos'd, poor Mrs Martin, she could not then be brought to make any
acknowledgements as she ought to have done.


April 18th.--Some time since I exchang'd a piece of patchwork, which
had been wrought in my leisure intervals, with Miss Peggy Phillips,[63]
my schoolmate, for a pair of curious lace mitts with blue flaps which I
shall send, with a yard of white ribbin edg'd with green to Miss Nancy
Macky for a present. I had intended that the patchwork should have grown
large enough to have cover'd a bed when that same live stock which you
wrote me about some time since, should be increas'd to that portion you
intend to bestow upon me, should a certain event take place. I have just
now finish'd my Letter to Papa. I had wrote to my other correspondents
at Cumberland, some time ago, all which with this I wish safe to your &
their hand. I have been carefull not to repeat in my journal any thing
that I had wrote in a Letter either to papa, you, &c. Else I should have
inform'd you of some of Bet Smith's abominations with the deserv'd
punishment she is soon to meet with. But I have wrote it to papa, so
need not repeat. I guess when this reaches you, you will be too much
engag'd in preparing to quit your present habitation, & will have too
much upon your head & hands, to pay much attention to this scrowl. But
it may be an amusement to you on your voyage--therefore I send it.

Pray mamma, be so kind as to bring up all my journal with you. My Papa
has promised me, he will bring up my baby house with him. I shall send
you a droll figure of a young lady,[64] in or under, which you please,
a tasty head Dress. It was taken from a print that came over in one of
the last ships from London. After you have sufficiently amused yourself
with it I am willing . . .


Boston April 20, 1772.--Last Saterday I seal'd up 45 pages of Journal
for Cumberland. This is a very stormy day--no going to school. I am
learning to knit lace.


April 21.--Visited at uncle Joshua Green's. I saw three funerals from
their window, poor Cap^n Turner's was one.


April 22d.--I spent this evening at Miss Rogers as usual. Mr. Hunt
continued his discourse upon the 7th question of the catechism &
finish'd what he had to say upon it.


April 23d.--This morn^g early our Mr Bacon set out upon a tour to
Maryland, he proposed to be absent 8 weeks. He told the Church that
brother Hunt would supply the pulpit till his return. I made a visit
this afternoon with cousin Sally at Dr. Phillip's.


April 24th.--I drank tea at Aunt Suky's. Aunt Storer was there, she
seemed to be in charming good health & spirits. My cousin Charles Green
seems to grow a little fat pritty boy but he is very light. My aunt
Storer lent me 3 of cousin Charles' books to read, viz.--The puzzeling
cap, the female Oraters & the history of Gaffer too-shoes.[65]


April 25th.--I learn't three stitches upon net work to-day.


April 27th.--I din'd at Aunt Storer's & spent the P.M. at aunt Suky's.


April 28th.--This P.M. I am visited by Miss Glover, Miss Draper & Miss
Soley. My aunt abroad.


April 29th.--Tomorrow, if the weather be good, I am to set out for
Marshfield.


  [Illustration: MRS. EBENEZER STORER]


May 11.--The morning after I wrote above, I sat out for Marshfield.
I had the pleasure of drinking tea with aunt Thomas the same day, the
family all well, but Mr G who seems to be near the end of the journey of
life. I visited General Winslow[66] & his son, the Dr., spent 8 days
very agreeably with my friends at Marshfield, & returned on saterday
last in good health & gay spirits which I still enjoy. The 2 first days
I was at Marshfield, the heat was extream & uncommon for the season. It
ended on saterday evening with a great thunder storm. The air has been
very cool ever since. My aunt Deming observ'd a great deal of lightning
in the south, but there was neither thunder, rain nor clouds in Boston.


May 16.--Last Wednesday Bet Smith was set upon the gallows. She behav'd
with great impudence. Thursday I danc'd a minuet & country dances at
school, after which I drank tea with aunt Storer. To day I am somewhat
out of sorts, a little sick at my stomach.


23d.--I followed my schools every day this week, thursday I din'd at
aunt Storer's & spent the P.M. there.


25.--I was not at meeting yesterday, Unkle & Aunt say they had very good
Fish at the O.S. I have got very sore eyes.


June 1st.--All last week till saterday was very cold & rainy. Aunt
Deming kept me within doors, there were no schools on account of the
Election of Councellers,[67] & other public doings; with one eye (for
t'other was bound up) I saw the governer & his train of life guard &c.
ride by in state to Cambridge. I form'd Letters last week to suit cousin
Sally & aunt Thomas, but my eyes were so bad aunt would not let me coppy
but one of them. Monday being Artillery Election[68] I went to see the
hall, din'd at aunt Storer's, took a walk in the P.M. Unkle laid down
the commission he took up last year. Mr Handcock invited the whole
company into his house in the afternoon & treated them very genteelly &
generously, with cake, wine, &c. There were 10 corn baskets of the feast
(at the Hall) sent to the prison & almshouse.


4th.--From June 1 when I wrote last there has nothing extraordinary
happen'd till today the whole regiment muster'd upon the common. Mr
Gannett, aunt & myself went up into the common, & there saw Cap^t
Water's, Cap^t Paddock's, Cap^t Peirce's, Cap^t Eliot's, Cap^t Barret's,
Cap^t Gay's, Cap^t May's, Cap^t Borington's & Cap^t Stimpson's company's
exercise. From there, we went into King street to Col Marshal's[69]
where we saw all of them prettily exercise & fire. Mr. Gannett din'd
with us. On Sabbath-day evening 7 June My Hon^d Papa, Mamma, little
Brother, cousin H. D. Thomas, Miss Jenny Allen, & Mrs Huston arriv'd
here from Cumberland, all in good health, to the great joy of all their
friends, myself in particular--they sail'd from Cumberland the 1st
instant, in the evening.


Aug. 18.--Many avocations have prevented my keeping my journal so
exactly as heretofore, by which means a pleasant visit to the peacock,
my Papa's & mamma's journey to Marshfield &c. have been omitted. The 6
instant Mr Sam^l Jarvis was married to Miss Suky Peirce, & on the 13th I
made her a visit in company with mamma & many others. The bride was
dress'd in a white satin night gound.[70]


27.--Yesterday I heard an account of a cat of 17 years old, that has
just recovered of the meazels. This same cat it is said had the small
pox 8 years ago!


28.--I spent the P.M. & eve at aunt Suky's very agreeably with aunt
Pierce's young ladies viz. Miss Johnson, Miss Walker, Miss Polly & Miss
Betsey Warton, (of Newport) Miss Betsey is just a fortnight wanting 1
day older than I am, who I became acquainted with that P.M. Papa, Mamma,
Unkle & aunt Storer, Aunt Pierce & Mr & Mrs Jarvis was there. There were
18 at supper besides a great many did not eat any. Mrs Jarvis sang after
supper. My brother Johny has got over the measels.


Sept. 1.--Last evening after meeting, Mrs Bacon was brought to bed of a
fine daughter. But was very ill. She had fits.


September 7.--Yesterday afternoon Mr Bacon baptiz'd his daughter by the
name of Elizabeth Lewis. It is a pretty looking child. Mrs Whitwell is
like to loose her Henry Harris. He is very ill.


8.--I visited with mamma at cousin Rogers'. There was a good many.


14.--Very busy all day, went into the common in the afternoon to see
training. It was very prettyly perform'd.


18.--My Papa, aunt Deming, cousin Rogers, & Miss Betsey Gould set out
for Portsmouth. I went over to Charlestown with them, after they were
gone, I came back, & rode up from the ferry in Mrs Rogers' chaise; it
drop'd me at Unkle Storer's gate, where I spent the day. My brother was
very sick.


Sep^r 17. 18.--Spent the days at aunt Storer's, the nights at home.


19.--Went down in the morn^g & spent the day & night there. My brother
better than he was.


20.--Sabbath day. I went to hear Mr Stilman[71] all day, I like him very
much. I don't wonder so many go to hear him.


21st.--Mr. Sawyer, Mr Parks, & Mrs Chatbourn, din'd at aunt Storer's.
I went to dancing in the afternoon. Miss Winslow & Miss Allen visited
there.


22d.--The king's coronation day. In the evening I went with mamma to
Col^n Marshal's in King Street to see the fireworks.


23d.--I din'd at aunt Suky's with Mr & Mrs Hooper[72] of Marblehead. In
the afternoon I went over to see Miss Betsy Winslow. When I came back I
had the pleasure to meet papa. I came home in the evening to see aunt
Deming. Unkle Winslow sup'd here.


24.--Papa cal'd here in the morn^g. Nothing else worth noticeing.


25.--Very pleasant. Unkle Ned cal'd here. Little Henry Harris was buried
this afternoon.


26. 27.--Nothing extraordinary yesterday & to day.


28.--My papa & unkle Winslow spent the evening here.


29. 30.--Very stormy. Miss Winslow & I read out the Generous Inconstant,
& have begun Sir Charles Grandison. . . .


May 25.--Nothing remarkable since the preceding date. Whenever I have
omited a school my aunt has directed me to sit it down here, so when you
dont see a memorandum of that kind, you may conclude that I have paid my
compliments to mess^rs Holbrook & Turner (to the former you see to
very little purpose) & mrs Smith as usual. The Miss Waldow's I mentioned
in a former are Mr. Danl Waldo's daughters (very pretty misses) their
mamma was Miss Becca Salisbury.[73] After making a short visit with my
Aunt at Mrs Green's, over the way, yesterday towards evening, I took a
walk with cousin Sally to see the good folks in Sudbury Street, & found
them all well. I had my HEDDUS roll on, aunt Storer said it ought to be
made less, Aunt Deming said it ought not to be made at all. It makes my
head itch, & ach, & burn like anything Mamma. This famous roll is not
made _wholly_ of a red _Cow Tail_, but is a mixture of that, & horsehair
(very course) & a little human hair of yellow hue, that I suppose was
taken out of the back part of an old wig. But D---- made it (our head)
all carded together and twisted up. When it first came home, aunt put it
on, & my new cap on it, she then took up her apron & mesur'd me, & from
the roots of my hair on my forehead to the top of my notions, I mesur'd
above an inch longer than I did downwards from the roots of my hair to
the end of my chin. Nothing renders a young person more amiable than
virtue & modesty without the help of fals hair, red _Cow tail_, or D----
(the barber).[74] Now all this mamma, I have just been reading over to
my aunt. She is pleas'd with my whimsical description & grave (half
grave) improvement, & hopes a little fals English will not spoil the
whole with Mamma. Rome was not built in a day.


31st May.--Monday last I was at the factory to see a piece of cloth
cousin Sally spun for a summer coat for unkle. After viewing the work we
recollected the room we sat down in was Libberty Assembly Hall,
otherwise called factory hall, so Miss Gridley & I did ourselves the
Honour of dancing a minuet in it. On tuesday I made Mrs Smith my morning
& p.m. visits as usual, neither Mr. Holbrook nor Turner have any school
this week, nor till tuesday next. I spent yesterday with my friends in
sudbury St. Cousin Frank has got a fever, aunt Storer took an emmetick
while I was there, cousin Betsy had violent pains almost all the
forenoon. Last tuesday Miss Ursula Griswold, daughter of the right Hon.
Matthew Griswold Esq governer of one of his Majesty's provinces, was
made one of our family, & I have the honor of being her chambermade.
I have just been reading over what I wrote to the company present, &
have got myself laughed at for my ignorance. It seems I should have said
the daughter of the Hon Lieu^t. Governor of Connecticutt. Mrs Dixon
lodg'd at Capn Mitchell's. She is gone to Connecticutt long since.


31 May.--I spent the afternoon at unkle Joshua's. yesterday, after tea I
went to see how aunt Storer did. I found her well at Unkle Frank's. Mr
Gerrish & wife of Halifax I had the pleasure to meet there, the latter
sends love to you. Indeed Mamma, till I receiv'd your last favour,
I never heard a word about the little basket &c. which I sent to brother
Johny last fall. I suppose Harry had so much to write about cotton, that
he forgot what was of more consequence. Dear Mamma, what name has Mr
Bent given his Son? something like Nehemiah, or Jehoshaphat, I suppose,
it must be an odd name (our head indeed, Mamma.) Aunt says she hopes it
a'nt Baal Gad, & she also says that I am a little simpleton for making
my note within the brackets above, because, when I omit to do it, Mamma
will think I have the help of somebody else's head but, N.B. for herself
she utterly disclames having either her head or hand concern'd in this
curious journal, except where the writing makes it manifest. So much for
this matter.


  [Illustration: CUT-PAPER PICTURE]




  NOTES.


  NOTE 1.

  Aunt Deming was Sarah, the oldest child of John Winslow and Sarah
  Peirce, and therefore sister of Joshua Winslow, Anna Green Winslow's
  father. She was born August 2, 1722, died March 10, 1788. She
  married John West, and after his death married, on February 27,
  1752, John Deming. He was a respectable and intelligent Boston
  citizen, but not a wealthy man. He was an ensign in the Ancient and
  Honorable Artillery in 1771, and a deacon of the Old South Church in
  1769, both of which offices were patents of nobility in provincial
  Boston. They lived in Central Court, leading out of Washington
  Street, just south of Summer Street. Aunt Deming eked out a limited
  income in a manner dear to Boston gentlewomen in those and in later
  days; she took young ladies to board while they attended Boston
  schools. Advertisements in colonial newspapers of "Board and
  half-board for young ladies" were not rare, and many good old New
  England names are seen in these advertisements. Aunt Deming was a
  woman of much judgment, as is shown in the pages of this diary; of
  much power of graphic description, as is proved by a short journal
  written for her niece, Sally Coverly, and letters of hers which are
  still preserved. She died childless.


  NOTE 2.

  Cumberland was the home in Nova Scotia of Anna Green Winslow's
  parents, where her father held the position of commissary to the
  British regiments stationed there. George Green, Anna's uncle,
  writing to Joseph Green, at Paramaribo, on July 23, 1770, said: "Mr.
  Winslow & wife still remain at Cumberland, have one son & one
  daughter, the last now at Boston for schooling, &c." So, at the date
  of the first entry in the diary, Anna had been in Boston probably
  about a year and a half.


  NOTE 3.

  Anna Green Winslow had doubtless heard much talk about this Rev.
  John Bacon, the new minister at the Old South Church, for much had
  been said about him in the weekly press: whether he should have an
  ordination dinner or not, and he did not; accounts of his
  ordination; and then notice of the sale of his sermons in the
  _Boston Gazette_.

  All Mr. Bacon's parishioners did not share Anna's liking for him; he
  found himself at the Old South in sorely troubled waters. He made a
  most unpropitious and trying entrance at best, through succeeding
  the beloved Joseph Sewall, who had preached to Old South listeners
  for fifty-six years. He came to town a stranger. When, a month
  later, Governor Hutchinson issued his annual Thanksgiving
  Proclamation, there was placed therein an "exceptionable clause"
  that was very offensive to Boston patriots, relating to the
  continuance of civil and religious liberties. It had always been the
  custom to have the Proclamation read by the ministers in the Boston
  churches for the two Sundays previous to Thanksgiving Day, but the
  ruling governor very cannily managed to get two Boston clergymen to
  read his proclamation the third Sunday before the appointed day,
  when all the church members, being unsuspectingly present, had to
  listen to the unwelcome words. One of these clerical instruments of
  gubernatorial diplomacy and craft was John Bacon. Samuel Adams wrote
  bitterly of him, saying, "He performed this servile task a week
  before the time, when the people were not aware of it." The _Boston
  Gazette_ of November 11 commented severely on Mr. Bacon's action,
  and many of his congregation were disgusted with him, and remained
  after the service to talk the Proclamation and their unfortunate new
  minister over.

  It might have been offered, one might think, as some excuse, that he
  had so recently come from Maryland, and was probably unacquainted
  with the intenseness of Massachusetts politics; and that he had also
  been a somewhat busy and preoccupied man during his six weeks'
  presence in Boston, for he had been marrying a wife,--or rather a
  widow. In the _Boston Evening Post_ of November 11, 1771, I read
  this notice: "Married, the Rev'd John Bacon to Mrs. Elizabeth
  Cummings, daughter of Ezekiel Goldthwait, Esq."

  He retained his pastorate, however, in spite of his early mistake,
  through anxious tea-party excitement and forlorn war-threatened
  days, till 1775, with but scant popularity and slight happiness,
  with bitter differences of opinion with his people over atonement
  and imputation, and that ever-present stumbling-block to New England
  divines,--baptism under the Half Covenant,--till he was asked to
  resign.

  Nor did he get on over smoothly with his fellow minister, John Hunt.
  In a curious poem of the day, called "Boston Ministers" (which is
  reprinted in the _New England Historical and Genealogical Register_
  of April, 1859), these verses appear:--

    At Old South there's a jarring pair,
      If I am not mistaken,
    One may descry with half an eye
      That Hunt is far from Bacon.
    Wise Hunt can trace out means of grace
      As leading to conversion,
    But Hopkins scheme is Bacons theme,
      And strange is his assertion.

  It mattered little, however, that Parson Bacon had to leave the Old
  South, for that was soon no longer a church, but a riding school for
  the British troops.

  Mr. Bacon retired, after his dismissal, to Canterbury, Conn., his
  birthplace. His friendly intimacy with Mrs. Deming proved of value
  to her, for when she left Boston, in April, 1775, at the time of the
  closing of the city gates, she met Mr. Bacon in Providence. She says
  in her journal:--

  "Towards evening Mr & M^rs Bacon, with their daughter, came into
  town. M^r Bacon came to see me. Enquir'd into my designs, &c. I told
  him truely I did not know what to do. That I had thot of giting
  farther into the country. Of trying to place Sally in some family
  where she might earn her board, & to do something like it for
  Lucinda, or put her out upon wages. That when I left the plain I had
  some faint hope I might hear from Mr Deming while I continued at
  Providence, but that I had little of that hope remaining. M^r Bacon
  advised me to go into Connecticutt, the very thing I was desirous
  of. Mr Bacon sd that he would advise me for the present to go to
  Canterbury, his native place. That he would give me a Letter to his
  Sister, who would receive me kindly & treat me tenderly, & that he
  would follow me there in a few days."

  This advice Mrs. Deming took, and made Canterbury her temporary
  home.

  Mr. Bacon did not again take charge of a parish. After the
  Revolution he became a magistrate, went to the legislature, became
  judge of the court of common pleas, and a member of congress. He did
  not wholly give up his disputatious ways, if we can judge from the
  books written by and to him, one of the latter being, "A Droll,
  a Deist, and a John Bacon, Master of Arts, Gently Reprimanded."

  His wife, who was born in 1733, and died in Stockbridge in 1821, was
  the daughter of Ezekiel Goldthwait, a Tory citizen of Boston,
  a register of deeds, and a wealthy merchant. A portrait of Mrs.
  Bacon, painted by Copley, is remarkable for its brilliant eyes and
  beautiful hands and arms.


  NOTE 4.

  Rev. John Hunt was born in Northampton, November 20, 1744. He was a
  Harvard graduate in the class of 1764, a classmate of Caleb Strong
  and John Scollay. He was installed colleague-pastor of the Old South
  Church with John Bacon in 1771. He found it a most trying position.
  He was of an amiable and gentle disposition, and the poem on "Boston
  Ministers" asserted that he "most friends with sisters made."
  Another Boston rhymester called him "puny John from Northampton,
  a meek-mouth moderate man." When the gates of Boston were closed in
  1775, after the battle of Lexington, he returned to Northampton, and
  died there of consumption, December 20, 1775. A full account of his
  life is given in _Sprague's Annals of the American Pulpit_. See also
  Note 3.


  NOTE 5.

  "Unkle and Aunt Winslow" were Mr. and Mrs. John Winslow. He was the
  brother of Joshua Winslow, was born March, 1725-26, died September
  29, 1773, in Boston. He was married, on March 12, 1752, to Elizabeth
  Mason (born September, 1723, died January, 1780). They had five
  children: I. Gen. John Winslow, born September 26, 1753, married Ann
  Gardner, May 21, 1782, died November 29, 1819. II. Sarah, born April
  12, 1755, married Deacon Samuel Coverly, of Boston, on November 27,
  1787, died April 3, 1804. See Note 13. III. Henry, born January 11,
  1757, died October 13, 1766. IV. Elizabeth, born November 28, 1759,
  died September 8, 1760. V. Elizabeth, born September 14, 1760,
  married John Holland, died November 21, 1795.

  Gen. John Winslow was the favorite nephew of Joshua Winslow and of
  his wife, and largely inherited their property. He remained in
  Boston through the siege, and preserved the communion plate of the
  Old South Church by burying it in his uncle Mason's cellar. He was
  an ardent patriot, and it is said that his uncle Joshua threatened
  to hang him if he caught him during the Revolutionary War. The
  nephew answered, "No catchee--no hangee, Uncle;" but did have the
  contrary fortune of capturing the uncle, whom he released on parole.
  He was the sixth signer and first treasurer of the Society of the
  Cincinnati. General Winslow's daughter, Mary Ann Winslow, born in
  1790, lived till 1882, and from her were obtained many of the facts
  given in these notes.


  NOTE 6.

  Miss Soley was Hannah Soley, daughter of John Soley and Hannah
  Carey, who were married October 11, 1759. Hannah Soley was born June
  5, 1762, and married W. G. McCarty.


  NOTE 7.

  William and Samuel Whitwell and their families were members of the
  Old South Church, and all were friends of the Winslows and Demings.
  William Whitwell was born September 3, 1714, died April 10, 1795.
  He was a prosperous merchant, an estimable and useful citizen, and
  church member. His first wife was Rebecca Keayne, his second
  Elizabeth Scott (or Swett), who died May 13, 1771; his third, the
  widow of Royal Tyler. The Mrs. Whitwell here referred to must have
  been Mrs. Samuel Whitwell, for William Whitwell just at that
  interval was a widower. Samuel Whitwell was born December 17, O.S.
  1717, died June 8, 1801. His first wife was Elizabeth Kelsey; his
  second, Sarah Wood; his third, Mary Smith.


  NOTE 8.

  Polly Deming was a niece of John Deming.


  NOTE 9.

  Miss Polly Glover was Mary Glover, born in Boston, October 12, 1758,
  baptized at the Old South Church, married to Deacon James Morrell,
  of the Old South, on April 23, 1778, and died April 3, 1842. She was
  the daughter of Nathaniel Glover (who was born May 16, 1704, in
  Dorchester; died December, 1773), and his wife, Anne Simpson. They
  were married in 1750. Nathaniel Glover was a graduate of Harvard,
  and a wealthy man; partner first of Thomas Hancock, and then of John
  Hancock.


  NOTE 10.

  Miss Bessy Winslow was Elizabeth, Anna's cousin, who was then about
  ten years old. See Note 5.


  NOTE 11.

  Miss Nancy or Anne Glover was Mary Glover's sister. See Note 9. She
  was born in Boston, March 28, 1753, baptized in the Old South
  Church, died in Roxbury, August, 1797. She married Samuel Whitwell,
  Jr., son of Samuel Whitwell, a prominent Boston merchant. See Note
  7.


  NOTE 12.

  Miss Sally Winslow was Sarah, daughter of John Winslow (see Note 5),
  and was, therefore, Anna's cousin. She was born April 12, 1755, died
  April 3, 1804. She married, November 27, 1787, Samuel Coverly,
  deacon of the Old South Church. She was the Sally Coverly for whom
  Mrs. Deming's journal was written. Several of Sally Coverly's
  letters still exist, and are models of elegant penmanship and
  correct spelling, and redound to the credit of her writing teacher,
  Master Holbrook. All the d's and y's and t's end with elaborately
  twisted little curls. A careful margin of an inch is left on every
  side. The letters speak so plainly of the formal honor and respect
  paid by all well-bred persons of the day to their elders, even
  though familiar kinsfolk, that I quote one, which contains much
  family news:--

  BOSTON, Feb. 17th, 1780.

  I thank you my dear Aunt for your kind Epistles of April 9th & Nov'r
  10th, the kind interestedness you yet continue to take in my concerns
  merits the warmest returns of Gratitude.

  The Particular circumstances you wish to know I shall with pleasure
  inform you of--Mr. Coverly is the youngest son of a Worthy Citizen
  late of this town but his Parents are now no more. His age is
  thirty-five. His Occupation a Shopkeeper who imports his own goods.
  And if you should wish to know who of your acquaintance he
  resembles, Madam, I would answer He has been taken for our Minister
  Mr Eckley, by whom we were married in my Aunt Demings sick chamber
  the 27th of Nov'r last twelve months since. He has two Brothers who
  both reside in town. I have been remarkably favor'd the last year as
  to my health & we are blest likewise with a fine little Daughter
  between 4 & 5 months old, very healthy, which we have named
  Elizabeth for its Grandmamas and an Aunt of each side. My Brother
  call'd today & inform'd me that M^r Powell intended setting out
  tomorrow for Quebeck & left a Letter for you which I shall send with
  this. He is almost if not quite as big as my uncle was last time I
  saw him--he was well & his family, he has three sons, the youngest
  about eleven months old, he has buried one.

  In your last you mention both my Uncle & yourself as not enjoying so
  great a share of health. I hope by this time you have each regain'd
  that blessing more perfectly. Be pleased with him My Dear Aunt to
  accept My Duty in which Mr Coverly joins me.

  My Sister was very well last week & her son John who is a fine child
  about 3 months old. Capt. Holland has purchas'd a house near fort
  hill which has remov'd her to a greater distance from me. She is now
  gone to the West-indies, she is connected in a family that are all
  very fond of her. We expect soon to remove. M^r Coverly has taken a
  lease of a house for some years belonging to M^r John Amory, you
  will please to direct your next for us in Cornhill N^o 10, I shall
  have the pleasure of your friend M^rs Whitwell for my next neighbor
  there. I had not the pleasure of seeing M^r Freeman whiles here
  altho' I expected it, as his brother promis'd to wait on him here.

  In one of your kind Epistles, Madam, you mention'd some of your
  Movables which you would wish me to take possession of which were at
  my Uncle Demings. The Memorandum you did not send me & my Uncle
  Deming has none nor knows of any thing but a great wheel.

  He is now maried to the Widow Sebry who is very much lik'd and
  appears to be a Gentlewoman, they were very well today. My Aunt
  Mason was to see me a few weeks since with M^rs Coburn M^rs Scolly &
  Miss Becky Scolly from Middleborough. M^rs Scolly has since married
  her youngest daughter to M^r Prentice, Minister of Medfield.

  Please to give my Love to Cousin Sally Deming if she is yet with you
  I hope she has regain'd her usual health. I should be very glad to
  be inform'd how her Mamma is & where & her family.

  Be pleased to continue your Indulgence, as your Epistles My Dear
  Aunt will at all times be most gratefully receiv'd by

  Y^r Oblidg'd Niece

  Sarah Coverly.


  NOTE 13.

  Josiah Waters, Jr., was the son of Josiah and Abigail Dawes Waters.
  The latter lived to be ninety-five years old. Josiah Sr. was a
  captain in the Artillery Company in 1769, and Josiah Jr. in 1791.
  The latter married, on March 14, 1771, Mary, daughter of William and
  Elizabeth Whitwell. See Note 7. Their child, Josiah Waters, tertius,
  born December 29, 1771, lived till August 4, 1818. He was a Latin
  School boy, and in the class with Josiah Quincy at Harvard.


  NOTE 14.

  The life of this slave-girl Lucinda was a fair example of the gentle
  form of slavery which existed till this century in our New England
  States. From an old paper written by a daughter of Gen. John
  Winslow, I quote her description of this girl:--

  "Lucinda was born in Africa and purchased by M^rs Deming when she
  was about seven years of age. She was cherished with care and
  affection by the family, and at Mrs. Demings death was 'given her
  freedom.' From that time she chose to make her home with 'Master
  John' (the late Gen. John Winslow, of Boston), a nephew of M^rs
  Demings--at his house she died after some years. The friends of the
  Winslow family attended her funeral; her pastor the Rev D^r Eckley
  of the Old South and Gen. W. walking next the hearse as chief
  mourners. A few articles belonging to her are preserved in the
  family as memorials of one who was a beloved member of the household
  in the olden time."

  Lucinda figures in Mrs. Deming's account of her escape from besieged
  Boston in 1775, and was treated with as much consideration as was
  Sally, the niece; for her mistress remained behind for a time at
  Wrentham; rather than to allow Lucinda to ride outside the coach in
  the rain.

  In a letter written by Sally Coverly, August 6, 1795, to Mrs. Joshua
  Winslow, at Quebec, she says: "You enquire about Lucinda, she is
  very much gratified by it. She has lived with my Brother this ten
  years and is very good help in their family."


  NOTE 15.

  The "Miss Sheafs" were Nancy and Mary Sheaffe, youngest daughters of
  William Sheaffe, who had recently died, leaving a family of four
  sons and six daughters. He had been deputy collector of customs
  under Joseph Harrison, the last royal collector of the port. He left
  his family penniless, and a small shop was stocked by friends for
  Mrs Sheaffe. I have often seen her advertisements in Boston
  newspapers.

  Mrs. Sheaffe was Susanna Child, daughter of Thomas Child, an
  Englishman, one of the founders of Trinity Church. She lived till
  1811. The ten children grew up to fill dignified positions in life.
  One son was Sir Roger Hale Sheaffe. Susanna, at the age of fifteen,
  made a most romantic runaway match with an English officer, Capt.
  Ponsonby Molesworth. Margaret married John R. Livingstone; she was a
  great beauty. Lafayette, on his return to France, sent her a satin
  cardinal lined with ermine, and an elegant gown. Helen married James
  Lovell. (See Note 52.) Nancy, or Anne Sheaffe, married, in
  September, 1786, John Erving, Jr., a nephew of Governor Shirley, and
  died young, leaving three children,--Maria, Frances, and Major John
  Erving. Mary married Benj. Cutler, high sheriff of Boston, and died
  December 8, 1784, leaving no children. These Sheaffes were nearly
  all buried in the Child tomb in Trinity Church.


  NOTE 16.

  Governor Matthew Griswold was born March 25, 1714, died April 28,
  1799. He married, on Nov. 10, 1743, his second cousin, Ursula
  Wolcott, daughter of Gov. Roger Wolcott. A very amusing story is
  told of their courtship. Governor Griswold in early life wished to
  marry a young lady in Durham, Conn. She was in love with a
  physician, whom she hoped would propose to her, and in the mean time
  was unwilling to give up her hold upon her assured lover. At last
  the governor, tired of being held in an uncertainty, pressed her for
  a definite answer. She pleaded that she wished for more time, when
  he rose with dignity and answered her, "I will give you a lifetime."
  This experience made him extremely shy, and when thrown with his
  cousin Ursula he made no advance towards love-making. At last when
  she was nineteen and he ten years older she began asking him on
  every occasion, "What did you say, Cousin Matthew?" and he would
  answer her quietly, "Nothing." At last she asked him impatiently,
  "What did you say, Cousin Matthew?" and when he answered again
  "Nothing," she replied sharply, "Well, it's time you did,"--and _he
  did_.

  Their daughter Ursula, the visitor at Mrs. Deming's, was born April
  13, 1754, and was a great beauty. She married, in November 22, 1777,
  her third cousin, Lynde McCurdy, of Norwich, Conn.


  NOTE 17.

  "Unkle Joshua" was Joshua Green, born in Boston, May 17, 1731,
  "Monday 1/2 past 9 oclock in the morn^g" and died in Wendell, Mass.,
  on September 2, 1811. He attended the Boston Latin School in 1738,
  and was in the class of 1749 at Harvard. He married, as did his
  brother and sister, a Storer--Hannah, daughter of Ebenezer and Mary
  Edwards Storer--on October 7, 1762. After his marriage he lived in
  Court Street, the third house south of Hanover Street. His wife
  Hannah was for many years before and after her marriage--as was her
  mother--the intimate friend and correspondent of Abigail Adams, wife
  of John Adams. Some of their letters may be found in the _Account of
  Percival and Ellen Green and Some of their Descendants_, written by
  Hon. Samuel Abbott Green, who is a great-grandson of Joshua and
  Hannah Green.


  NOTE 18.

  Madam Storer was Mary Edwards Storer, the widow of Ebenezer Storer,
  a Boston merchant. She was the mother of Anna's uncle Ebenezer
  Storer, of her aunt Hannah Storer Green, and of her aunt Mary Storer
  Green. See Notes 19, 32, 59.


  NOTE 19.

  Miss Caty Vans was the granddaughter of Hugh Vans, a merchant of
  Boston, who became a member of the Old South Church in 1728. He was
  born in Ayr, Scotland, in 1699. He married Mary Pemberton, daughter
  of Rev. Ebenezer Pemberton, and died in Boston in 1763. They had
  four sons, John, Ebenezer, Samuel, and William. One of the first
  three was the father of Caty Vans, who was born January 18, 1770.
  There are frequent references to her throughout the diary, but I
  know nothing of her life. William Vans married Mary Clarke, of
  Salem, and had one son, William, and one daughter, Rebecca, who
  married Captain Jonathan Carnes. The Vans family Bible is in the
  library of the Essex Institute.


  NOTE 20.

  In the cordial hatred of the Puritans for Christmas Anna heartily
  joined. It was not till this century that in New England cheerful
  merriment and the universal exchange of gifts marked the day as a
  real holiday.


  NOTE 21.

  "Aunt Sukey" was Susanna Green, born July 26, 1744, died November
  10, 1775. She married, on October 18, 1769, her cousin, Francis
  Green. The little child Charles, of whom Anna writes, proved to be a
  deaf-mute, and was drowned near Halifax in 1787. Francis Green had
  two deaf-mute children by a second wife, and became prominent
  afterwards in Massachusetts for his interest in and promotion of
  methods in instructing the deaf. In a letter of George Green's,
  dated Boston, July 23, 1770, we read: "Frank Green was married to
  Sukey in October last and they live next house to Mrs Storers." From
  another, dated December 5, 1770: "Frank keeps a ship going between
  here & London, but I believe understands little of the matter,
  having never been bred to business wch was one great objection with
  my father to his courting Sukey." I think he must have developed
  into a capable business man, for I have frequently seen his business
  advertisements in Boston newspapers of his day. Anna's mother
  bequeathed seven hundred and fifty dollars to Francis Green in her
  will. He was a man universally esteemed in the community.


  NOTE 22.

  Dr. Samuel Cooper was born March 28, 1725; died December 29, 1783.
  He graduated at Harvard in 1743, and became pastor of the Brattle
  Street Congregational Church, of Boston. He was a brilliant
  preacher, an ardent patriot, the intimate friend of John Adams and
  Benjamin Franklin, and a very handsome man.


  NOTE 23.

  Master Holbrook was Samuel Holbrook, Anna's writing-master, one of a
  highly honored family of Boston writing teachers. Perhaps the best
  known of this family was Abiah Holbrook. In the _Boston Gazette_ of
  January 30, 1769, I find this notice:--

  "Last Friday morning died Mr Abiah Holbrook in the 51st year of his
  Age, Master of the South Writing School in this Town. He was looked
  upon by the Best Judges as the Greatest Master of the Pen we have
  ever had among us, of which he has left a most beautiful
  Demonstration. He was indefatigable in his labours, successful in
  his Instructions, an Honour to the Town and to crown all an Ornament
  to the Religion of Jesus. His Funeral is to be Attended Tomorrow
  Afternoon at Four Oclock."

  The "beautiful Demonstration" of his penmanship which he left behind
  him was a most intricate piece of what was known as "fine knotting"
  or "knot work." It was written in "all the known hands of Great
  Britain." This work occupied every moment of what Abiah Holbrook
  called his "spare time" for seven years. It was valued at L100. It
  was bequeathed to Harvard College, unless his wife should need the
  money which could be obtained from selling it. If this were so, she
  was to offer it first for purchase to John Hancock. Abiah was a
  stanch patriot.

  Samuel Holbrook was a brother of Abiah. He began teaching in 1745,
  when about eighteen years old. A petition of Abiah, dated March 10,
  1745-46, sets forth that his school had two hundred and twenty
  scholars (Well may his funeral notice say that he was indefatigable
  in his labors!), that finding it impossible to properly instruct
  such a great number, he had appointed his brother to teach part of
  them and had paid his board for seven months, else some of the
  scholars must have been turned off without any instruction. He
  therefore prayed the town to grant him assistance. Think of one
  master for such a great school! In 1750 Samuel Holbrook's salary as
  usher of the South Writing School was fifty pounds per annum.

  After serving as writing-master of the school in Queen Street, and
  also keeping a private school, he was chosen master of the South
  Writing School in March, 1769, to supply the place of his brother
  Abiah deceased. His salary was one hundred pounds. In 1776, and
  again in 1777, he received eighty pounds in addition to his salary.
  He also was a patriot. He was one of the "Sons of Liberty" who dined
  at the Liberty Tree, Dorchester, on August 14, 1769; and he was a
  member of Captain John Haskin's company in 1773. He was a member of
  the Old South Church, and he died July 24, 1784. In his later years
  he kept a school at West Street, where afterwards was Amos
  Lawrence's garden.

  Abiah and Samuel left behind them better demonstrations of their
  capacity than pieces of "knot-work"--in the handwriting of their
  scholars. They taught what Jonathan Snelling described as "Boston
  Style of Wri^ting," and loudly do the elegant letters and signatures
  of their scholars, Boston patriots, clergy, and statesmen, redound
  to the credit of the Masters Holbrook.

  Other Holbrooks taught in Boston. From the Selectmen's Minutes of
  that little town, we find that on November 10, 1773,--

  "Mr Holbrook, Master of the Writing School in the Common, and Mr
  Carter the Master Elect of the school in Queen St having recommended
  Mr Abiah Holbrook, a young man near of age, as a suitable person to
  be usher at Mr Carters school--the Selectmen sent for him, and upon
  discoursing with the young man thought proper to appoint him usher
  of said school."

  And from the _Boston Gazette_, of April 17, 1769, we learn that Mr.
  Joseph Ward "Opened an English Grammar School in King St where Mr
  Joseph Holbrook hath for many years kept a Writing School."

  These entries of Anna's relating to her attending Master Holbrook's
  school have an additional value in that they prove that both boys
  and girls attended these public writing schools,--a fact which has
  been disputed.


  NOTE 24.

  Dr. James Lloyd, born March 14, 1728, died March 14, 1810. He began
  his medical practice in 1752. He was appointed surgeon of the
  garrison at Boston, and was a close friend of Sir William Howe and
  Earl Percy, who for a time lived in his house. He was an
  Episcopalian, and one of the indignant protesters against the
  alteration of the liturgy at King's Chapel. Though a warm Tory and
  Loyalist, he was never molested by the American government. He was
  one of Boston's most skilful and popular physicians for many years.
  While other city doctors got but a shilling and sixpence for their
  regular fee, he charged and received the exorbitant sum of half a
  dollar a visit; and for "bringing little master to town," in which
  function he was a specialist, he charged a guinea.


  NOTE 25.

  A pincushion was for many years, and indeed is still, in some parts
  of New England, a highly conventional gift to a mother with a young
  babe. Mrs. Deming must have made many of these cushions. One of her
  manufacture still exists. It is about five inches long and three
  inches wide; one side is of white silk stuck around the edge with
  old-fashioned clumsy pins, with the words, "John Winslow March 1783.
  Welcome Little Stranger." The other side is of gray satin with green
  spots, with a cluster of pins in the centre, and other pins winding
  around in a vine and forming a row round the edge.


  NOTE 26.

  Though the exchange of Christmas gifts was rare in New England,
  a certain observance of New Year's Day by gifts seems to have
  obtained. And we find in Judge Sewall's diary that he was greeted on
  New Year's morn with a levet, or blast of trumpets, under his
  window; and he celebrated the opening of the eighteenth century with
  a very poor poem of his own composition, which he caused to be
  recited through Boston streets by the town-crier.


  NOTE 27.

  The word "pompedore" or Pompadour was in constant use in that day.
  We read of pompedore shoes, laces, capes, aprons, sacques,
  stockings, and head-dresses.


  NOTE 28.

  Aunt Storer was Mrs. Ebenezer Storer. Her maiden name was Elizabeth
  Green. She was a sister of Mrs. Joshua Winslow. She was born October
  12, 1734, died December 8, 1774; was married July 17, 1751, to
  Ebenezer Storer, who was born January 27, 1729-30, died January 6,
  1807. He was a Harvard graduate, and was for many years treasurer of
  that college. He was one of Boston's most intellectual and respected
  citizens. His library was large. His name constantly appears on the
  lists of subscribers to new books. After his death his astronomical
  instruments became the property of Harvard College, and as late as
  1843 his comet-finder was used there.

  As Anna Green Winslow spent so much of her time in her "Aunt
  Storers" home in Sudbury Street, it is interesting to know that a
  very correct picture of this elegant Boston home of colonial days
  has been preserved through the account given in the _Memoir of Eliza
  Susan Morton Quincy_,--though many persons still living remember the
  house:--

  "The mansion of Ebenezer Storer, an extensive edifice of wood three
  stories in height, was erected in 1700. It was situated on Sudbury
  Street between two trees of great size and antiquity. An old English
  elm of uncommon height and circumference grew in the sidewalk of the
  street before the mansion, and behind it was a sycamore tree of
  almost equal age and dimensions. It fronted to the south with one
  end toward the street. From the gate a broad walk of red sandstone
  separated it from a grass-plot which formed the courtyard, and
  passed the front door to the office of Mr. Storer. The vestibule of
  the house, from which a staircase ascended, opened on either side
  into the dining and drawing rooms. Both had windows towards the
  courtyard and also opened by glazed doors into a garden behind the
  house. They were long low apartments; the walls wainscoted and
  panelled; the furniture of carved mahogany. The ceilings were
  traversed through the length of the rooms by a large beam cased and
  finished like the walls; and from the centre of each depended a
  glass globe which reflected as in a convex mirror all surrounding
  objects. There was a rich Persian carpet in the drawing-room, the
  colors crimson and green. The curtains and the cushions of the
  window-seat were of green damask; and oval mirrors and girandoles
  and a teaset of rich china completed the furniture of that
  apartment. The wide chimney-place in the dining room was lined and
  ornamented with Dutch tiles; and on each side stood capacious
  armchairs cushioned and covered with green damask, for the master
  and mistress of the family. On the walls were portraits in crayon by
  Copley, and valuable engravings representing Franklin with his
  lightning rod, Washington, and other eminent men of the last
  century. Between the windows hung a long mirror in a mahogany frame;
  and opposite the fireplace was a buffet ornamented with porcelain
  statuettes and a set of rich china. A large apartment in the second
  story was devoted to a valuable library, a philosophical apparatus,
  a collection of engravings, a solar microscope, a camera, etc."

  As I read this description I seem to see the figure of our happy
  little diary-writer reflected in the great glass globes that hung
  from the summer-trees, while she danced on the Persian carpet, or
  sat curled up reading on the cushioned window-seat.


  NOTE 29.

  As this was in the time of depreciated currency, L45 was not so
  large a sum to spend for a young girl's outfit as would at first
  sight appear.


  NOTE 30.

  Dr. Charles Chauncey was born January 1, 1705; died February 10,
  1787. He graduated at Harvard in 1721, and soon became pastor of the
  First Church in Boston. He was an equally active opponent of
  Whitefield and of Episcopacy. He was an ardent and romantic patriot,
  yet so plain in his ways and views that he wished _Paradise Lost_
  might be turned into prose that he might understand it.


  NOTE 31.

  Rev. Ebenezer Pemberton was pastor of the New Brick Church. He had a
  congregation of stanch Whigs; but unluckily, the Tory Governor
  Hutchinson also attended his church. Dr. Pemberton was the other
  minister of the two who sprung the Governor's hated Thanksgiving
  proclamation of 1771 on their parishes a week ahead of time, as told
  in Note 3, and the astounded and disgusted New Brick hearers, more
  violent than the Old South attendants, walked out of meeting while
  it was being read. Dr. Pemberton's troubled and unhappy pastorate
  came to an end by the closing of his church in war times in 1775. He
  was of the 1721 class of Harvard College. He died September 9, 1777.


  NOTE 32.

  We find frequent references in the writings and newspapers of the
  times to this truly Puritanical dread of bishops. To the descendants
  of the Pilgrims the very name smacked of incense, stole, and monkish
  jargon. A writer, signing himself "America," gives in the _Boston
  Evening Post_, of October 14, 1771, a communication thoroughly
  characteristic of the spirit of the community against the
  establishment of bishops, the persistent determination to "beate
  down every sprout of episcopacie."


  NOTE 33.

  A negligee was a loose gown or sacque open in front, to be worn over
  a handsome petticoat; and in spite of its name, was not only in high
  fashion for many years, but was worn for full dress. Abigail Adams,
  writing to Mrs. Storer, on January 20, 1785, says: "Trimming is
  reserved for full dress only, when very large hoops and negligees
  with trains three yards long are worn." I find advertised in the
  _Boston Evening Post_, as early as November, 1755: "Horse-hair
  Quilted Coats to wear with Negligees." A poem printed in New York in
  1756 has these lines:--

    "Put on her a Shepherdee
    A Short Sack or Negligee
    Ruffled high to keep her warm
    Eight or ten about an arm."


  NOTE 34.

  A pistareen was a Spanish coin worth about seventeen cents.


  NOTE 35.

  There exists in New England a tradition of "groaning cake," made and
  baked in honor of a mother and babe. These cakes which Anna bought
  of the nurse may have been "groaning cakes." It was always customary
  at that time to give "vails" to the nurse when visiting a new-born
  child; sometimes gifts of money, often of trinkets and articles of
  clothing.


  NOTE 36.

  Miss "Scolley" was Mary Scollay, youngest of the thirteen children
  of John Scollay (who was born in 1712, died October, 1799), and his
  wife Mary. Mary was born in 1759. She married Rev. Thomas Prentiss
  on February 9, 1798, had nine children, and lived to be eighty-two
  years old--dying in 1841. Her sister Mercy was engaged to be married
  to General Warren, but he fell at Bunker Hill: and his betrothed
  devoted herself afterwards to the care and education of his orphaned
  children whom he had by his first wife.


  NOTE 37.

  Miss Bella Coffin was probably Isabella, daughter of John Coffin and
  Isabella Child, who were married in 1750. She married Major
  MacMurde, and their sons were officers in India.


  NOTE 38.

  This Miss "Quinsey" was Ann Quincy, the daughter of Col. Josiah
  Quincy (who was born 1710, died 1784), and his third wife, Ann
  Marsh. Ann was born December 8, 1763, and thus would have been in
  her ninth year at the time of the little rout. She married the Rev.
  Asa Packard, of Marlborough, Mass., in 1790.


  NOTE 39.

  In the universal use of wines and strong liquors in New England at
  that date children took unrestrainedly their proportionate part. It
  seems strange to think of this girl assembly of little Bostonians
  drinking wine and hot or cold punch as part of their "treat," yet no
  doubt they were well accustomed to such fare. I know of a little
  girl of still tenderer years who was sent at that same time from the
  Barbadoes to her grandmother's house in Boston to be "finished" in
  Boston schools, as was Anna, and who left her relative's abode in
  high dudgeon because she was not permitted to have wine at her
  meals; and her parents upheld her, saying Missy must be treated like
  a lady and have all the wine she wished. Cobbett, who thought liquor
  drinking the national disease of America, said that "at all hours of
  the day little boys at or under twelve years of age go into stores
  and tip off their drams." Thus it does not seem strange for little
  maids also to drink at a party. The temperance awakening of this
  century came none too soon.


  NOTE 40.

  Paste ornaments were universally worn by both men and women, as well
  as by little girls, and formed the decoration of much of the
  headgear of fashionable dames. Many advertisements appear in New
  England newspapers, which show how large and varied was the
  importation of hair ornaments at that date. We find advertised in
  the _Boston Evening Post_, of 1768: "Double and single row knotted
  Paste Combs, Paste Hair Sprigs & Pins all prices. Marcasite and
  Pearl Hair Sprigs, Garnet & Pearl Hair Sprigs." In the _Salem
  Gazette_ and various Boston papers I read of "black & coloured
  plumes & feathers." Other hair ornaments advertised in the _Boston
  News Letter_, of December, 1768, were "Long and small Tail Garnets,
  Mock Garland of all sorts and Ladies Poll Combs." Steel plumes,
  pompons, aigrettes, and rosettes all were worn on the head, and
  artificial flowers, wreaths of gauze, and silk ribbons.


  NOTE 41.

  Marcasite, spelled also marcassite, marchasite, marquesett, or
  marquaset, was a mineral, the crystallized form of iron pyrites. It
  was largely used in the eighteenth century for various ornamental
  purposes, chiefly in the decoration of the person. It took a good
  polish, and when cut in facets like a rose-diamond, formed a pretty
  material for shoe and knee-buckles, earrings, rings, pins, and hair
  ornaments. Scarce a single advertisement of wares of milliner or
  mantua maker can he found in eighteenth century newspapers that does
  not contain in some form of spelling the word marcasite, and scarce
  a rich gown or headdress was seen without some ornament of
  marcasite.


  NOTE 42.

  Master Turner was William Turner, a fashionable dancing master of
  Boston, who afterward resided in Salem, and married Judith, daughter
  of Dr. Edward Augustus Holyoke, of Salem, who died in 1829, aged one
  hundred and one years. It was recalled by an old lady that the
  scholars in the school of her youth marched through Boston streets,
  to the music of the fiddle played by "Black Henry," to Concert Hall,
  corner Tremont and Bromfield streets, to practice dancing; and that
  Mr. Turner walked at the head of the school. His advertisements may
  be seen in Boston and Salem papers, thus:--

  "Mr. Turner informs the Ladies and Gentlemen in Town and Country
  that he has reduced his price for teaching from Six Dollars Entrance
  to One Guinea, and from Four Dollars per month to Three. Those
  ladies and Gentlemen who propose sending their children to be taught
  will notice no books will be kept as Mr. T. has suffered much by
  Booking. The pupils must pay monthly if they are desirous the School
  should continue."


  NOTE 43.

  "Unkle Ned" was Edward Green, born September 18, 1733; died July 29,
  1790. He married, on April 14, 1757, Mary Storer (sister of Ebenezer
  Storer and of Hannah Storer Green). They had no children. He was, in
  1780, one of the enlisting officers for Suffolk County. In a letter
  of George Green's, written July 25, 1770, we read: "Ned still lives
  gentleman-like at Southwacks Court without doing any business tho'
  obliged to haul in his horns;" and from another of December 5, 1770:
  "Ned after having shown off as long as he you'd with his yell^o
  damask window curtains &c is (the last month) retired into the
  country and lives w^th his wife at Parson Storers at Watertown. How
  long that will hold I cant say."


  NOTE 44.

  Madam Smith was evidently Anna's teacher in sewing. The duties
  pertaining to a sewing school were, in those days, no light matter.
  From an advertisement of one I learn that there were taught at these
  schools:--

  "All kinds of Needleworks viz: point, Brussels, Dresden Gold,
  Silver, and silk Embroidery of every kind. Tambour Feather, India &
  Darning, Spriggings with a Variety of Open-work to each. Tapestry
  plain, lined, and drawn. Catgut, black & white, with a number of
  beautiful Stitches. Diaper and Plain Darnings. French Quiltings,
  Knitting, Various Sorts of marking with the Embellishments of Royal
  cross, Plain cross, Queen, Irish, and Tent Stitches."

  Can any nineteenth century woman read this list of feminine
  accomplishments without looking abashed upon her idle hands, and
  ceasing to wonder at the delicate heirlooms of lace and embroidery
  that have come down to us!


  NOTE 45.

  Grandmamma Sargent was Joshua Winslow's mother. Her maiden name was
  Sarah Pierce. She was born April 30, 1697, died August 2, 1771. She
  married on September 21, 1721, John Winslow, who lived to be
  thirty-eight years old. After his death she married Dr. Nathaniel
  Sargent in 1749.


  NOTE 46.

  These lines were a part of the epitaph said to be composed by
  Governor Thomas Dudley, who died at Andover, Mass., in 1653. They
  were found after his death and preserved in Morton's _New England's
  Memorial_. They run thus:--

    Dim eyes, deaf ears, cold stomach show
    My dissolution is in view;
    Eleven times seven near lived have I,
    And now God calls, I willing die;
    My shuttle's shot, my race is run,
    My sun is set, my deed is done;
    My span is measur'd, tale is told,
    My flower is faded and grown old,
    My dream is vanish'd, shadow's fled,
    My soul with Christ, my body dead;
    Farewell dear wife, children and friends,
    Hate heresy, make blessed ends;
    Bear poverty, live with good men,
    So shall we meet with joy again.
    Let men of God in courts and churches watch
    O'er such as do a toleration hatch;
    Lest that ill egg bring forth a cockatrice,
    To prison all with heresy and vice.
    If men be left, and other wise combine
    My epitaph's, I dy'd no libertine.


  NOTE 47.

  Miss Polly Vans was Mary Vans, daughter of Hugh and Mary Pemberton
  Vans, and aunt of Caty Vans. She was born in 1733. We have some
  scattered glimpses of her life. She joined the Old South in 1755. In
  the _Boston Gazette_, of April 9, 1770, we read, "Fan Mounts mounted
  by Mary Vans at the house of Deacon Williams, in Cornhill." We hear
  of her at Attleborough with Samuel Whitwell's wife when the gates of
  Boston were closed, and we know she married Deacon Jonathan Mason on
  Sunday evening, December 20, 1778. She was his second wife. His
  first wife was Miriam Clark, and was probably the Mrs. Mason who was
  present at Mrs. Whitwell's, and died June 5, 1774. Mary Vans Mason
  lived till 1820, having witnessed the termination of eight of the
  pastorates of the Old South Church. Well might Anna term her "a
  Sister of the Old South." She was in 1817 the President of the Old
  South Charity School, and is described as a "disinterested friend,
  a judicious adviser, an affectionate counsellor, a mild but faithful
  reprover, a humble, self-denying, fervent, active, cheerful
  Christian." Jonathan Mason was not only a deacon, but a prosperous
  merchant and citizen. He helped to found the first bank in New
  England. His son was United States Senator. Two other daughters of
  Hugh Vans were a Mrs. Langdon, of Wiscasset, Maine, and Mrs. John
  Coburn.


  NOTE 48.

  St. Valentine's Day was one of the few English holidays observed in
  New England. We find even Governor Winthrop writing to his wife
  about "challenging a valentine." In England at that date, and for a
  century previous, the first person of the opposite sex seen in the
  morning was the observer's valentine. We find Madam Pepys lying in
  bed for a long time one St. Valentine's morning with eyes tightly
  closed, lest she see one of the painters who was gilding her new
  mantelpiece, and be forced to have him for her valentine. Anna
  means, doubtless, that the first person she chanced to see that
  morning was "an old country plow-joger."


  NOTE 49.

  Boston was at that date pervaded by the spirit of Liberty. Sons of
  Liberty held meetings every day and every night. Daughters of
  Liberty held spinning and weaving bees, and gathered in bands
  pledging themselves to drink no tea till the obnoxious revenue act
  was repealed. Young unmarried girls joined in an association with
  the proud declaration, "We, the daughters of those Patriots who have
  appeared for the public interest, do now with pleasure engage with
  them in denying ourselves the drinking of foreign tea." Even the
  children felt the thrill of revolt and joined in patriotic
  demonstrations--and a year or two later the entire graduating class
  at Harvard, to encourage home manufactures, took their degrees in
  homespun.


  NOTE 50.

  The cut-paper pictures referred to are the ones which are reproduced
  in this book, and which are still preserved. Anna's father finally
  received them. Mrs. Deming and other members of the Winslow family
  seem to have excelled in this art, and are remembered as usually
  bringing paper and scissors when at a tea-drinking, and assiduously
  cutting these pictures with great skill and swiftness and with
  apparently but slight attention to the work. This form of decorative
  art was very fashionable in colonial days, and was taught under the
  ambitious title of Papyrotamia.


  NOTE 51.

  The "biziness of making flowers" was a thriving one in Boston. We
  read frequently in newspapers of the day such notices as that of
  Anne Dacray, of Pudding Lane, in the _Boston Evening Post_, of 1769,
  who advertises that she "makes and sells Head-flowers: Ladies may be
  supplied with single buds for trimming Stomachers or sticking in the
  Hair." Advertisements of teachers in the art of flower-making also
  are frequent. I note one from the _Boston Gazette_, of October 19,
  1767:--

  "To the young Ladies of Boston. Elizabeth Courtney as several Ladies
  has signified of having a desire to learn that most ingenious art of
  Painting on Gauze & Catgut, proposes to open a School, and that her
  business may be a public good, designs to teach the making of all
  sorts of French Trimmings, Flowers, and Feather Muffs and Tippets.
  And as these Arts above mentioned (the Flowers excepted) are
  entirely unknown on the Continent, she flatters herself to meet with
  all due encouragement; and more so, as every Lady may have a power
  of serving herself of what she is now obliged to send to England
  for, as the whole process is attended with little or no expence. The
  Conditions are Five Dollars at entrance; to be confin'd to no
  particular hours or time: And if they apply Constant may be Compleat
  in six weeks. And when she has fifty subscribers school will be
  opened, &c, &c."


  NOTE 52.

  This was James Lovell, the famous Boston schoolmaster, orator, and
  patriot. He was born in Boston October 31, 1737. He graduated at
  Harvard in 1756, then became a Latin School usher. He married Miss
  Helen Sheaffe, older sister of the "two Miss Sheafs" named herein;
  and their daughter married Henry Loring, of Brookline. He was a
  famous patriot: he delivered the oration in 1771 commemorative of
  the Boston Massacre. He was imprisoned by the British as a spy on
  the evidence of letters found on General Warren's dead body after
  the battle of Bunker Hill. He died in Windham, Maine, July 14, 1814.
  A full account of his life and writings is given in Loring's
  _Hundred Boston Orators_.


  NOTE 53.

  Nothing seems more revolting to our modern notions of decency than
  the inhuman custom of punishing criminals in the open streets. From
  the earliest days of the colonies the greatest publicity was given
  to the crime, to its punishment, and to the criminal. Anna shows, in
  her acquaintance with the vices of Bet Smith, a painful familiarity
  with evil unknown in any well-bred child of to-day. Samuel Breck
  wrote thus of the Boston of 1771:--

  "The large whipping-post painted red stood conspicuously and
  prominently in the most public street in the town. It was placed in
  State Street directly under the windows of a great writing school
  which I frequented, and from them the scholars were indulged in the
  spectacle of all kinds of punishment suited to harden their hearts
  and brutalize their feelings. Here women were taken in a huge cage,
  in which they were dragged on wheels from prison, and tied to the
  post with bare backs on which thirty or forty lashes were bestowed
  among the screams of the culprit and the uproar of the mob. A little
  further in the street was to be seen the pillory with three or four
  fellows fastened by the head and hands, and standing for an hour in
  that helpless posture, exposed to gross and cruel jeers from the
  multitude, who pelted them incessantly with rotten eggs and every
  repulsive kind of garbage that could be collected."

  There was a pillory in State Street in Boston as late as 1803, and
  men stood in it for the crime of sinking a vessel at sea and
  defrauding the underwriters. In 1771 the pillory was in constant use
  in Newport.


  NOTE 54.

  In 1770 British troops were quartered in Boston, to the intense
  annoyance and indignation of Boston inhabitants. Disturbances
  between citizens and soldiers were frequent, and many quarrels
  arose. On the night of March 5 in that year the disturbance became
  so great that the troops, at that time under command of Captain
  Preston, fired upon the unarmed citizens in King (now State) street,
  causing the death of Crispus Attucks, a colored man, Samuel Gray and
  James Caldwell, who died on the spot, and mortally wounding Patrick
  Carr and Samuel Maverick. At the burial of these slaughtered men the
  greatest concourse ever known in the colonies flocked to the grave
  in the Granary Burying Ground. All traffic ceased. The stores and
  manufactories were closed. The bells were tolled in all the
  neighboring towns.

  Daniel Webster said, that from the moment the blood of these men
  stained the pavements of Boston streets, we may date the severance
  of the colony from the British empire.

  The citizens demanded the removal of the troops, and the request was
  complied with. For many years the anniversary of this day was a
  solemn holiday in Boston, and religious and patriotic services were
  publicly held.


  NOTE 55.

  Mather Byles was born March 15, 1707; died July 5, 1788. He was
  ordained pastor of the Hollis Street Congregational Church, of
  Boston, in 1733. He was a staunch Loyalist till the end of his days,
  as were his daughters, who lived till 1837. His chief fame does not
  rest on his name as a clergyman or an author, but as an inveterate
  and unmerciful jester.


  NOTE 56.

  Henry Green, the brother of Anna's mother, was born June 2, 1738. He
  was a Latin School boy, was in business in Nova Scotia, and died in
  1774.


  NOTE 57.

  This stove was a foot-stove,--a small metal box, usually of sheet
  tin or iron, enclosed in a wooden frame or standing on little legs,
  and with a handle or bail for comfortable carriage. In it were
  placed hot coals from a glowing wood fire, and from it came a
  welcome warmth to make endurable the freezing floors of the
  otherwise unwarmed meeting-house. Foot-stoves were much used in the
  Old South. In the records of the church, under date of January 16,
  1771, may be read:--

  "Whereas, danger is apprehended from the stoves that are frequently
  left in the meeting-house after the publick worship is over; Voted
  that the Saxton make diligent search on the Lords Day evening and in
  the evening after a Lecture, to see if any stoves are left in the
  house, and that if he find any there he take them to his house; and
  it is expected that the owners of such stoves make reasonable
  satisfaction to the Saxton for his trouble before they take them
  away."

  The Old South did not have a stove set in the church for heating
  till 1783.


  NOTE 58.

  The first anniversary of the Boston Massacre was celebrated
  throughout the city, and a mass-meeting was held at the Old South
  Church, where James Lovell made a stirring address. See Notes 52 and
  54.


  NOTE 59.

  The Queen's night-cap was a very large full cap with plaited
  ruffles, which is made familiar to us through the portraits of
  Martha Washington.


  NOTE 60.

  "Old Mrs. Sallisbury" was Mrs. Nicholas Salisbury, who was married
  in 1729, and was mother of Rebecca Salisbury, who became Mrs. Daniel
  Waldo, and of Samuel Salisbury, who married Elizabeth Sewall. See
  Note 73.


  NOTE 61.

  Mrs. John Avery. Her husband was Secretary of the Commonwealth and
  nephew of John Deming, who in his will left his house to John Avery,
  Jr.


  NOTE 62.

  A baby hutt was a booby-hutch, a clumsy, ill-contrived covered
  carriage. The word is still used in some parts of England, and a
  curious survival of it in New England is the word booby-hut applied
  to a hooded sleigh; and booby to the body of a hackney coach set on
  runners. Mr. Howells uses the word booby in the latter
  signification, and it may be heard frequently in eastern
  Massachusetts, particularly in Boston.


  NOTE 63.

  Peggy Phillips was Margaret Phillips, daughter of William and
  Margaret Wendell Phillips. She was born May 26, 1762, married Judge
  Samuel Cooper, and died February 19, 1844. She was aunt of Wendell
  Phillips.


  NOTE 64.

  This "droll figure" may have been a drawing, or a dressed doll,
  or "baby," as such were called--a doll that displayed in careful
  miniature the reigning modes of the English court. In the _New
  England Weekly Journal_, of July 2, 1733, appears this notice:--

  "To be seen at Mrs. Hannah Teatts Mantua Maker at the Head of Summer
  Street Boston a Baby drest after the Newest Fashion of Mantuas and
  Night Gowns & everything belonging to a dress. Latily arrived on
  Capt. White from London, any Ladies that desire it may either come
  or send, she will be ready to wait on 'em if they come to the House
  it is Five Shilling, & if she waits on 'em it is Seven Shilling."

  These models of fashion were employed until this century.


  NOTE 65.

  We can have a very exact notion of the books imported and printed
  for and read by children at that time, from the advertisements in
  the papers. In the _Boston Gazette and Country Journal_, of January
  20, 1772, the booksellers, Cox and Berry, have this notice:--

  The following Little Books for the Instruction & Amusement of all
  good Boys and Girls.

    The Brother Gift or the Naughty Girl Reformed.
    The Sister Gift, or the Naughty Boy Reformed.
    Hobby Horse or Christian Companion.
    Robin Good-Fellow, A Fairy Tale.
    Puzzling Cap, A Collection of Riddles.
    The Cries of London as exhibited in the Streets.
    Royal Guide or Early Introduction to Reading English.
    Mr Winloves Collection of Stories.
     "      "   Moral Lectures.
    History of Tom Jones         abridg'd from the works of
       "     " Joseph Andrews      H. Fielding.
       "     " Pamela            abridg'd from the works of
       "     " Grandison           S. Richardson, Esq.
       "     " Clarissa


  NOTE 66.

  General John Winslow was but a distant kinsman of Anna's, for he was
  descended from Edward Winslow. He was born May 27, 1702; died April
  17, 1774. He was a soldier and jurist, but his most prominent
  position (though now of painful notoriety) was as commander of that
  tragic disgrace in American history, the expedition against the
  Acadians. It is told in extenuation of his action that before the
  annihilation and dispersion of that unfortunate community he
  addressed them, saying that his duty was "very disagreeable to his
  natural make and temper as it must be grievous to them," but that he
  must obey orders,--and of course what he said was true.


  NOTE 67.

  The exercises attending this election of counsellors must indeed
  have been an impressive sight. The Governor, attended by a troop of
  horse, rode from the Province House to Cambridge, where religious
  services were held. An Election Sermon was preached. Volleys and
  salutes were fired at the Battery and Castle. A protest was made in
  the public press, as on the previous year, against holding this
  election in Cambridge instead of in the "Town House in Boston, the
  accustomed Ancient Place," and also directly to the Governor, which
  was answered by him in the newspapers; and at this election a most
  significant event occurred--John Hancock declined to accept a seat
  among the counsellors, to which he had been elected. The
  newspapers--the _Massachusetts Spy_ and the _Boston Gazette and
  Country Journal_--commented on his action thus:--

  "Mr Hancocks declining a seat in the Council Board is very
  satisfactory to the Friends of Liberty among his constituents. This
  Gentleman has stood five years successively and as often Negativ'd.
  Whatever may have been the Motive of his being approbated at last
  his own Determination now shows that he had rather be a
  Representative of the People since he has had so repeatedly their
  Election and Confidence."


  NOTE 68.

  Boston had two election days. On Artillery Election the Ancient and
  Honorable Artillery had a dress parade on the Common. The new
  officers were chosen and received their new commissions from the new
  Governor. No negroes were then allowed on the Common. The other day
  was called "Nigger Lection," because the blacks were permitted to
  throng the Common and buy gingerbread and drink beer, as did their
  betters at Artillery Election.


  NOTE 69.

  Col. Thomas Marshall was a Revolutionary officer. He commanded the
  Tenth Massachusetts Regiment at Valley Forge. He was Captain of the
  Ancient and Honorable Artillery from 1763 to 1767, and at one time
  commanded Castle Island, now Fort Independence. He was one of the
  Selectmen of Boston at the time when the town was invested by troops
  under Washington. He died at Weston, Mass., on November 18, 1800.


  NOTE 70.

  A night gown was not in those days a garment for wear when sleeping,
  but resembled what we now call a tea-gown. The night attire was
  called a rail. Both men and women wore in public loose robes which
  they called night gowns. Men often wore these gowns in their
  offices.


  NOTE 71.

  Many Boston people agreed with Anna in her estimate of Rev. Samuel
  Stillman. He was called to the First Baptist Church in 1765, and
  soon became one of Boston's most popular and sensational preachers.
  Crowds thronged his obscure little church at the North End, and he
  took an active part in Revolutionary politics. Many were pleased
  with his patriotism who did not agree with him in doctrine. In the
  curious poem on Boston Ministers, already quoted, we read:--

    Last in my list is a Baptist,
      A real saint, I wot.
    Though named Stillman much noise he can
      Make when in pulpit got.
    The multitude, both grave and rude,
      As drove by wind and tide,
    After him hie, when he doth try
      To gain them to his side.


  NOTE 72.

  Mr. and Mrs. Hooper were "King" Hooper and his wife of Marblehead.
  He was so called on account of his magnificent style of living. He
  was one of the Harvard Class of 1763; was a refugee in 1775, and
  died insolvent in 1790. The beautiful mansion which he built at
  Danvers, Mass., is still standing in perfect condition, and is the
  home of Francis Peabody, Esq. It is one of the finest examples of
  eighteenth century architecture in New England.


  NOTE 73.

  This "Miss Becca" was Rebecca Salisbury, born April 7, 1731, died
  September 25, 1811. She was a fine, high-spirited young woman, and
  upon being taunted by a rejected lover with,

    "The proverb old--you know it well,
    That women dying maids, lead apes in hell,"

  (a belief referred to in _Taming of the Shrew_, Act II. Scene 1),
  she made this clever rhyming answer:--

    "Lead apes in hell--tis no such thing;
      The story's told to fool us.
    But better there to hold a string,
      Than here let monkeys lead us."

  She married Daniel Waldo May 3, 1757. The "very pretty Misses" were
  their daughters; Elizabeth, born November 24, 1765, died unmarried
  in Worcester, August 28, 1845; and Martha (who in this diary is
  called Patty), born September 14, 1761, died November 25, 1828. She
  married Levi Lincoln, Lieutenant-Governor of Massachusetts, and
  became the mother of Levi Lincoln, Governor of Massachusetts, Enoch
  Lincoln, Governor of Maine, and Col. John Lincoln.


  NOTE 74.

  The fashion of the roll was of much importance in those days. A roll
  frequently weighed fourteen ounces. We can well believe such a heavy
  mass made poor Anna's head "ach and itch like anything." That same
  year the _Boston Gazette_ had a laughable account of an accident to
  a young woman on Boston streets. She was knocked down by a runaway,
  and her headdress received the most serious damage. The outer
  covering of hair was thrust aside, and cotton, tow, and false hair
  were disgorged to the delight of jeering boys, who kicked the
  various stuffings around the street. A Salem hair-dresser advertised
  that he would "attend to the polite construction of rolls to raise
  ladies heads to any pitch desired." The Abbe Robin, traveling
  through Boston a few years later, found the hair of ladies' heads
  "raised and supported upon rolls to an extravagant height."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF ANNA GREEN WINSLOW***


******* This file should be named 20765.txt or 20765.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/7/6/20765



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

