Project Gutenberg's Exciting Adventures of Mister Robert Robin, by Ben Field

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Exciting Adventures of Mister Robert Robin

Author: Ben Field

Release Date: March 16, 2007 [EBook #20833]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROBERT ROBIN ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





EXCITING ADVENTURES OF MISTER ROBERT ROBIN

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Wildwood Series
BY BEN FIELD

EXCITING ADVENTURES OF MR. TOM SQUIRREL
EXCITING ADVENTURES OF MISTER JIM CROW
EXCITING ADVENTURES OF MISTER GERALD FOX
EXCITING ADVENTURES OF MISTER MELANCTHON COON
EXCITING ADVENTURES OF MISTER ROBERT ROBIN
EXCITING ADVENTURES OF MISTER BOB WHITE

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: They did not move as the great gray bird floated straight
towards their tree.  (Page 10)
(Exciting Adventures of Mr. Robert Robin)]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

_The Wildwood Series_

EXCITING ADVENTURES OF
MISTER ROBERT ROBIN

By BEN FIELD

Illustrated

A. L. BURT COMPANY
Publishers
New York
Printed in U. S. A.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright, 1928, by
A. L. BURT COMPANY

Exciting Adventures of Mister Robert Robin

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

CHAPTER                  PAGE
   I. WHERE MISTER ROBERT ROBIN LIVED, AND SOMETHING
      ABOUT HIS NEIGHBORS                                  1

  II. MISTER ROBERT ROBIN SEES THE FARMER'S NEW
      MALTESE CAT                                         13

 III. ROBERT ROBIN AND WIDOW BLUNT'S STUFFED OWL          29

  IV. MISTER ROBERT ROBIN HAS AN ADVENTURE WITH
      THE FARMER'S MALTESE CAT                            43

   V. ROBERT ROBIN SINGS HIS CHERRY SONG                  52

  VI. MISTER ROBIN DECIDES TO TAKE A VACATION             60

 VII. MISTER ROBERT ROBIN AND HIS FAMILY
      TAKE A VACATION                                     71

VIII. ROBERT ROBIN TELLS THE STORY OF WINTER              85

  IX. MISTER ROBERT ROBIN HAS A BATTLE WITH
      THE SPARROWS                                        99

   X. ROBERT ROBIN AND HIS FAMILY GO SOUTH               110

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

They did not move as the great gray bird
floated straight toward their tree                   Frontis

                                                 FACING PAGE

Both of them were scared almost out of their wits         36

They sat in an apple tree and watched the gulls
swooping and soaring through the air                      76

The sparrows came rushing straight at
Robert Robin and his family                              104

-----------------------------------------------------------------------




THE EXCITING ADVENTURES OF MISTER ROBERT ROBIN

CHAPTER I

WHERE MISTER ROBERT ROBIN LIVED, AND SOMETHING ABOUT HIS NEIGHBORS


Mister and Mrs. Robert Robin lived in the big basswood tree which stood
at the corner of Mister Tom Squirrel's woods.

Their nest was made of sticks, and grass, and mud, and was so well
hidden in the largest fork of the tree that if you had been standing
near the foot of the big basswood, you could not have seen Mister Robert
Robin's nest at all. But if you had been able to fly up into the top of
the big basswood tree, then you might have looked down and seen the nest
and Mrs. Robert Robin's four greenish blue eggs, right in the middle of
it.

But if Mister Robert Robin, or Mrs. Robert Robin had spied you up in
their tree, they would have made a great fuss about it. They would have
screamed with all their might, and if you had gone near their nest they
would have flown right at you, and tried to frighten you away.

Many of Robert Robin's cousins, and aunts, and uncles lived in town.
They built their nests in the parks, and in the shade trees along the
streets. Some of them even built their nests in the porches, and on the
eaves troughs, and in barns, and sheds, and in the church steeples.
Others of Robert Robin's family lived out in the country, and had their
nests around the farmer's buildings, in orchards, under bridges, in
windmills, and in almost every other sort of a place, but Mister and
Mrs. Robert Robin would rather live in their own tall basswood tree than
any other place in the whole wide world.

Each Fall, when the weather grew cold, and the winds were chilly, and
the leaves of the big basswood turned brown, and then blew away, Robert
Robin and his whole family flew south, but each Spring when the weather
grew warmer, Robert Robin and Mrs. Robin came hurrying back north, to
build a new nest in their own basswood tree.

"No other place will ever seem like home to me!" said Mrs. Robin.

"I should never get over feeling homesick, if we should lose our tree!"
said Robert Robin.

So every Spring, before the snow banks in the gully were all melted, and
before the yellow water had ceased running down the lane, Mister and
Mrs. Robert Robin were back in their own tree, and were as busy as could
be building a nice new nest.

When Gerald Pox, and Melancthon Coon, and Jim Crow, and Wellington
Woodchuck, and Billy Rabbit, and Major Partridge saw Robert Robin flying
through the bare woods, or heard him singing his clear notes from the
top of his big basswood tree, they would say to themselves, "Robert
Robin is back from the south, and Spring will soon be here." And the
farmer's wife would say, "I heard a robin singing, it will soon be
Spring!" Then she would get her box of garden seeds down from the top
shelf of the kitchen cupboard and look to see if she had some tomato
seeds, and celery seeds, and pepper seeds, and cabbage seeds to plant in
a box by the south window.

Then it would not be long before the snow banks in the gully were all
melted, and the farmer would be fixing his fences and getting ready to
turn his stock out to pasture, and the farmer's wife's celery plants,
and all her other kinds of plants would be up, and Mister Swallow, and
Mister Swift, and Mister Bob-o-link, and all the other Mister Birds and
their wives would be coming back north, and it would be plain to
everybody that Spring was here and that Summer was on the way.

Even the big basswood tree seemed to wait for Robert Robin, and seemed
to miss him when he was away. All Winter the beautiful tree waved his
bare branches in the air, and when the frosty snow sparkled on the
meadows, and the stars were shining in the winter sky, the chilling wind
swept through the woods, and the branches of the tall basswood made a
sound like a sigh. But almost as quickly as Robert Robin returned, the
buds of the big basswood swelled with the green of new leaves, and soon
the great tree was no longer bare, but dressed from his foot to his
highest twig in broad leaves that fluttered in the summer breezes and
made a sound like the whispering of children.

Early every morning as soon as the sun began to light the east, Mister
Robert Robin was wide awake, and one of the first sounds that woke the
woods in the very early morning was Robert Robin's morning song.

From the highest branch of his tall basswood tree he would sing his
"hurry up song," and his clear cheery voice would echo through all the
woods.

    "Hurry up! Hurry up!
    Hurry up! Hurry up!
    It is time,--
    It is time
    To get up--to get up!
    Hurry up! Hurry up!"

Then Mister Tom Squirrel would come bounding out of his bed, and Major
Partridge would start strutting around, and Mister Wren would shake the
dew from his feathers and begin to sing, and in a few minutes all the
birds and animals that had been sleeping all night would be frisking and
flying around, the sun would begin to shine, the dew would go away, and
it would be daylight in the woods.

After Robert Robin had sung everybody out of bed, he would get his
breakfast, and then he would be ready for his day's work.

Robert Robin _did_ like to sing, but Mrs. Robin did not care to sing.
She was a very quiet sort of person, and did not like to appear in
public. She would much rather sit on her pretty greenish-blue eggs. She
sat on them to keep them warm so that the little baby robins that were
inside the eggs would grow to be strong enough to break the blue shells,
and come out and grow up to be big robins.

One morning after Robert Robin had finished singing his "hurry up song"
and the woods were ringing with the chatter of squirrels, the songs of
other birds, and the "Chip! Chip! Chip!" of Mister Gabriel Chipmunk,
Robert Robin was just going to get his breakfast, when suddenly the
squirrels stopped chattering, and the other birds stopped singing. It
was still in the woods, except for Mister Chipmunk, who was sitting on a
stump and screaming his "Chip! Chip! Chip!"

"There is danger around!" thought Robert Robin. "Something has
frightened the birds and squirrels!" So Robert Robin flew down where
Mrs. Robin was sitting on her nest.

Robert Robin perched on one of the big branches near Mrs. Robin, and
then he sat perfectly still.

Jeremiah Yellowbird was sitting on another branch, and he was sitting
perfectly still. Neither Robert Robin nor Jeremiah Yellowbird could tell
what had frightened the other birds and the squirrels, but both of them
were looking and listening with all their might.

A shadow fell from above, and Robert Robin cocked his head on one side
and looking up, saw Mister Jim Crow flying high above the top of the big
basswood tree. Mister Crow was circling around, and around, and looking
down into the woods, but he was not saying a word. He was trying to see
what had frightened the other birds and the squirrels. Robert Robin
could hear Jim Crow's wings go "Swish! Swish!" through the air.

Suddenly Mister Gabriel Chipmunk stopped screaming his "Chip! Chip!
Chip!" and Robert Robin could see him sitting on the stump. He was
sitting so still that he looked like a little light brown knot.

David Songsparrow, who had his nest in the elderberry bush over by the
fence, came flying into the woods. He perched on one of the big branches
of Robert Robin's tree and started hopping around looking for a bug for
his breakfast, but when he saw Robert Robin and Jeremiah Yellowbird
sitting so very still, he became quiet too, but his bright little eyes
were looking first one way, and then another, and he was listening with
all his might.

Mrs. Sheep, out in the farmer's pasture, called to her little lamb,
"Baa!" and the sound of her voice echoed through the woods until it
seemed as if all the trees were saying "Baa!" to each other. Then the
woods became so still that Robert Robin could hear the sound of the
waterfalls in the brook which flowed past Melancthon Coon's tree, way
over in the middle of the woods.

Out over the meadow, merry Mister Bob-o-link was singing his "Spingle!
Spangle! Song" and his voice sounded so much like the brook that Robert
Robin was just beginning to feel like singing a little song, himself,
when Mister Gabriel Chipmunk screamed "Chip!" and plunged under the
stump. Gabriel Chipmunk lived under the stump, and he went in the front
door of his house.

When Robert Robin heard Mister Chipmunk scream in that tone of voice, he
knew that Mister Chipmunk had seen something which had frightened him
very much.

Then Robert Robin saw something moving among the trees, and a terrible,
great, gray bird came swooping through the woods.

It was Mister Percy Hawk, and he was coming towards Robert Robin's tree.
The hawk's powerful, wide wings scarcely moved as he floated among the
trees, but his cruel eyes were watching to see if a squirrel or bird
might not be moving through the forest. If anything moved, Mister Percy
Hawk would surely see it, and pounce upon it, so all the birds and
squirrels were sitting as still as sticks.

Robert Robin, and David Songsparrow, and Jeremiah Yellowbird, each of
them was sure that the big hawk was looking right at them, but they did
not move as the great gray bird floated straight towards their tree.

"Swish! Swish!" came the sound of wings; "Caw! Caw!" shouted Jim Crow,
and five black crows darted downward through the branches of Robert
Robin's tree, and Mister Percy Hawk knew that the very best thing that
he could do for himself was to hurry away before the angry crows pulled
the feathers out of his back. Percy Hawk soared out of the woods, and
when he was above the pasture he struck the air with his powerful wings
and circled in great loops, and soon he was flying high above the tops
of the tallest tree.

The other crows went home, but Jim Crow came and perched in Robert
Robin's tree.

"Thank you very much for driving that terrible hawk away from my tree!"
said Robert Robin to Mister Jim Crow.

"Oh, you are entirely welcome, Mister Robin!" said Jim Crow. "If I had
only been here a moment before, I would have picked a few feathers out
of that bad Percy Hawk's back to pay him for always trying to catch my
baby crows!"

Then Jim Crow went over where the farmer was plowing, and Jeremiah
Yellowbird went home, and David Songsparrow caught a bug for his
breakfast, and Mister Gabriel Chipmunk came out and sat on his stump
and said "Chip! Chip!" as loudly as he could say it, and the squirrels
began chattering, and Major Partridge played a tune on his drum, and
Mister Robert Robin mounted the very highest twig of his big basswood
tree and sang a song for Mrs. Robin:

    "Cheer up! Cheer up!
    Cheer up! Cheer, up!
    Be cheery!
    Be cheery!
    Cheer up! Cheer up!"




CHAPTER II

MISTER ROBERT ROBIN SEES THE FARMER'S NEW MALTESE CAT


One fine afternoon Mister Robert Robin was down under the pasture-field
brush trying to find some brown bugs. He had caught one, but two more
got away from him, so he was beginning to feel discouraged, when he
happened to look up and see Mrs. Henrietta Partridge sitting on her nest
under a beechwood bush.

Up to that time Mister Robert Robin had not known that Mrs. Partridge
had a nest, although he had suspected it.

"Good afternoon, Mrs. Partridge!" said Robert Robin, as he made a very
polite bow. "This is wonderful weather we are having!"

"Good afternoon, Mister Robin!" said Mrs. Partridge. "Yes, it is fine
weather, but for every nice day that we get, we are almost sure to have
_two_ bad, stormy days!"

"Nonsense, Mrs. Partridge!" said Robert Robin, "I have always noticed
that the more fine weather we have, the more we get! I claim that we are
going to have the nicest summer this year that we have had since the
year we had so many cherries!"

"I do hope that you are right, Mister Robin!" said Mrs. Partridge.
"Major Partridge is always joking me because I am expecting bad weather,
but I have noticed that no matter how many nice days we have, it always
turns around and rains, before it gets through!"

"Certainly! It _should_ rain, or we would all die of thirst! If no rain
came out of the sky, we would not have any cherries, and the bugs would
all be so dry there would not be any taste to them! We must have rain,
Mrs. Partridge! We must have rain!"

"Do you enjoy rainy weather, Mister Robin?" asked Mrs. Partridge.

"I like wet weather, when it is not too wet; I like dry weather when it
is not too dry; I like warm weather when it is not too warm, and I like
cool weather when it is not too cool! And I have a song for each kind
of weather!" said Robert Robin as he again started hunting for brown
bugs.

"You seem to be looking for something, Mister Robin!" said Mrs.
Partridge.

"Yes, I am hunting brown bugs!" said Robert Robin; "two of them hid
under the leaves, but there must be a few more left!"

"Stir the leaves up with your feet!" said Mrs. Partridge, "then if there
are any brown bugs under them you will be able to catch them!"

"I cannot make my feet go backwards!" said Robert Robin. "My feet insist
on hopping! I think that I must be clumsy with my legs, for even the
farmer's big rooster can scratch the ground and dig up wonderful things.
I saw him kick a worm clear through the fence!"

"He must be very strong!" said Mrs. Partridge.

"Strong! I should say he is strong! Even Percy Hawk is afraid of him,
and never goes near the little chickens when that big rooster is
watching him!"

"Major Partridge is very athletic!" said Mrs. Partridge. "He exercises a
great deal on his drum!"

"Here comes the Major now!" said Robert Robin.

"How do you do, sir!" said Major Partridge to Robert Robin.

"Good afternoon, Major!" said Robert Robin. "I have just been telling
Mrs. Partridge about how strong the farmer's big rooster was, and how he
could dig with his feet!"

"Did you ever see _me_ dig with my feet?" asked Major Partridge.

"I do not remember ever having seen you dig with your feet, Major
Partridge, but the farmer's big rooster kicked a worm clear through the
fence!"

"Kicking a little worm is nothing! Once I kicked a stone from hither to
yonder, and Billy Rabbit asked me to help him dig his next hole!"
declared Major Partridge, as he stood very straight and put his chest
out. "If you have a few moments to spare I will dig these leaves up for
you!"

Then Major Partridge began kicking the leaves in all directions, and
Robert Robin began catching the brown bugs, and Mrs. Partridge came from
her nest, and found the ripe partridge berries which Major Partridge was
uncovering, but when the Major happened to see the ripe red partridge
berries he forgot all about kicking the leaves, and he and Mrs.
Partridge ate all the berries and never invited Robert Robin to have a
berry.

"You seem to like partridge berries!" said Robert Robin.

"Yes, we are very fond of them!" said Mrs. Partridge. "They are my
favorite fruit!"

"I seldom eat them!" said Robert Robin. "My favorite fruit is a ripe red
cherry!"

"I thought that cherries were purple when they were ripe," said Mrs.
Partridge.

"Some kinds of wild cherries are purple when they are ripe, but the
cherries which grow on the trees near the farmer's house are red when
they are ripe, and they are ever so much better than wild cherries!"
said Robert Robin.

"I would like some of the farmer's ripe red cherries, but I would never
dare go so near the farmer's house. He would be almost sure to see me
and shoot me with his gun!" said Mrs. Partridge, as she got back on her
nest and snuggled her eggs.

Major Partridge heard Bob White calling to him, so he strutted over to
see what Bob White wanted, but Robert Robin felt like visiting a little
more, so he said to Mrs. Partridge:

"You were speaking about being afraid that the farmer would shoot you;
he never shoots at me, but one time he threw a stone at me when I was
picking some of the cherries to bring home to my babies. He seemed very
angry about something."

"Perhaps he did not like you to be picking his cherries," said Mrs.
Partridge.

"They were not _his_ cherries!" said Robert Robin. "They were on the
tree, and belonged to whoever got them first!"

"Men are great pests!" said Mrs. Partridge. "Old Mister Crow was telling
me that he could remember when the country was all woods, and there
were more of us partridges than there were men. Those must have been the
'good old days!'"

"That farmer seems to think that he owns all the trees, and all the
fences, and all the fields!" said Robert Robin. "The rude manner he uses
towards his horses and the way he slaps them with the straps, and the
way he shouts at them is very disgusting to me! If I were a great big
horse, I would not let a little man, only one fifth of my size, boss me
around like that farmer does his big horses!"

"Neither would I!" exclaimed Mrs. Partridge. "But I shall never let that
farmer catch me if I can help it!"

"Then he has cats around his house and barn!" said Robert Robin. "Cats
are very bad animals!"

"Yes, they are!" agreed Mrs. Partridge. "And I wish that dog of his
would stay out of our woods! He is always prowling around, smelling of
things, and I expect that he will find my nest, and mercy knows what I
would ever do then!"

"Gerald Fox bit him once!" said Robert Robin. "But why not make your
nest up in a tree, Mrs. Partridge? It is much safer from dogs!"

"My mother built hers on the ground, and what was good enough for my
mother ought to be good enough for me!" said Mrs. Partridge, and just
then Robert Robin heard his wife calling to him to come and keep watch
of the nest while she went out for lunch.

"Where have you been all day?" asked Mrs. Robin. "I have been calling,
and calling, and I was beginning to get worried for fear something
dreadful had happened to you! You must have found many good things to
eat, for your crop sticks out like a chicken's!"

"I am very sorry if I kept you waiting, my dear!" said Robert Robin.
"But Major Partridge kicked up the leaves so that I caught a whole
cropful of brown bugs. He must have made so much noise that I did not
hear you calling to me!"

"You are usually so prompt in coming when I call, that I was sure you
would have a good reason!" said Mrs. Robin. "Now I will go over and get
my lunch, but I do not care for brown bugs to-day. I will get me some
black bugs, there must be plenty of them over in Black-bug Swamp."

So Mrs. Robin went to Black-bug Swamp and found plenty of black bugs,
and on the way back she stopped near Mrs. Partridge's nest to get one or
two brown bugs for dessert.

"Good afternoon, Mrs. Robin!" said Mrs. Partridge, and Mrs. Robin jumped
and looked all around, but she did not see Mrs. Partridge.

"Your husband and I have just had a nice long visit!" continued Mrs.
Partridge, and Mrs. Robin kept jumping around and trying to see who was
talking to her. But Mrs. Partridge's feathers were so nearly the color
of the leaves, that Mrs. Robin might not have seen her at all, had she
not moved a little.

"Why! Good afternoon, Mrs. Partridge! I could hear you talking to me
but I could not see you! So Mister Robin has been visiting with you! He
surely does like to visit!"

"So does Major Partridge! He will talk all day if he can coax some one
to listen to him. He is over there now visiting with Bob White. What
those two can find to talk so much about is a mystery to me! It is real
funny to listen to them! They both brag about the big things they have
done or are going to do.

"That little puff ball of a Bob White was saying the other day that he
was almost ready to whip Mister Horned Owl. You would think to hear him
talk that he was larger than Mister Owl!"

"Mister Robin is very apt to boast about himself, when he is talking to
strangers!" said Mrs. Robin.

"Major Partridge is the funniest thing!" said Mrs. Partridge. "He is
desperately afraid of snakes, but when Bob White was telling about his
going to whip Mister Owl, Major Partridge threw his chest out, and
swelled himself up, and said in a very gruff voice, 'To-morrow, I
think, if the weather is good, I shall drive all of the snakes out of
our woods!'"

"That _must_ have sounded funny!" said Mrs. Robin. "But I wish that all
the snakes were driven from the woods, they are such ugly-looking
things!"

"They are so hideous!" said Mrs. Partridge.

"I must hurry back to my eggs!" said Mrs. Robin. "My babies will begin
to hatch next week!"

"I expect that my baby partridges will all be out of the shell before
next Thursday!" said Mrs. Partridge. "I do hope that the weather stays
good! Last year the weather was so cold and wet that it was very
disagreeable!"

"How many eggs are you covering, Mrs. Partridge?" asked Mrs. Robin.

"Only twelve, this year!"

"Twelve! Mercy me! Why! Mrs. Partridge! I cannot see how you will be
able to look after so many children!"

"I do not think twelve is such a large family! Last year I had
fourteen, and every one of them grew to be as big as their father," said
Mrs. Partridge.

"The largest family I ever had was five, and one of _them_ kept falling
out of the nest!" said Mrs. Robin.

"I always take my children out of the nest as soon as they are out of
the shell! It is so much more sanitary!" said Mrs. Partridge.

"My children simply have to stay in their nest until they are ready to
fly! It is such a job to feed and care for them! They never seem to get
enough to eat!"

Just then they heard Mister Robert Robin calling. He was standing beside
the nest and saying, "Tut! Tut! Tut!--Tut! Tut! Tut!"

"Mister Robin is getting uneasy so I had better hurry home before he
does something desperate!"

Mrs. Partridge watched Mrs. Robin as she flew back to her nest in the
tall basswood tree.

"That little Mrs. Robin is a very neat sort of a little body!" she said
to herself. "I just know that she is a tidy nest keeper,--she always
looks so spick and span, herself!"

Robert Robin could hardly wait until Mrs. Robin got back to their tree.
He was in such a hurry. The moment she settled herself on the nest he
darted away across the fields, straight to where the row of cherry trees
bordered the farmer's garden.

He wanted to see if the cherries were ripe. But he was surprised to find
that the cherries were all green and hard, and were too sour to even
taste like a cherry.

"What makes the cherries so late, this year?" he thought to himself. "It
does seem to me that these trees were in bloom so many weeks ago, that
it is high time for them to be ready with their cherries!"

Robert Robin was sitting in the top of one of the farmer's cherry trees,
thinking about the cherries that ought to be ripe when he saw a cat in
the farmer's garden.

It was a big Maltese cat. It was a pretty cat, but Mister Robert Robin
could not see anything pretty about a cat, and he did not like the
looks of this one.

"I never saw this cat before!" thought Robert Robin. "The farmer must
have a new cat! I hope it is a house-cat instead of a cat that goes
prowling around the fields and woods!"

The big Maltese cat went over to the strawberry bed and lay down on some
straw. Then the farmer's wife came into the garden, and there was a
little boy with her. He was her sister's boy, and he was going to spend
the summer at the farmer's home. The boy had a tin whistle, and once in
a while he would blow upon it. The farmer's wife was thinking to
herself, "After he goes to bed to-night, I am going to hide that whistle
where he can't find it!" But she did not say a word to the little boy
about the whistle.

The little boy saw the big Maltese cat lying on the strawberry bed, and
the little boy went up close to the cat and blew his tin whistle at the
cat. The big Maltese cat did not like to hear the whistle so close to
his ears; it made his ears hurt, so he said "Meow!" and started to walk
away, and the naughty little boy laughed, and blew the whistle with all
his might. Then the farmer's wife said: "Do not tease the kitty,
Donald!"

But Donald had not been taught to do as he was told, so he blew the
whistle again and again and chased the Maltese cat across the lettuce
bed, and over two rows of radishes.

The farmer's wife shouted, "Donald! Donald!" but Donald kept blowing the
tin whistle and following the Maltese cat, but the next thing he knew
the farmer's wife took his tin whistle away from him.

Donald was so angry that he jumped right up and down on the celery
plants, and the farmer's wife said, "Look here! Young man!" and shook
Donald until he looked like a jumping jack, and Donald was so surprised
to think that anyone would dare shake him that he stopped right where he
was, and then the farmer's wife said to him:

"Now, young man! You may as well know at the very start that if you want
to be a bad little boy you will have a tough row to hoe, but if you want
to mend your ways and be a nice little boy, things will be different! I
thought I might as well make that plain to you now as later!"

Then Donald wiped his eyes on the farmer's wife's apron, and helped her
weed two whole rows of carrots, and the big Maltese cat went to sleep
under the gooseberry bush, and Robert Robin flew back to the woods and
told Mrs. Robin that the farmer had a new cat and that the farmer's wife
had a new baby that didn't like cats.




CHAPTER III

ROBERT ROBIN AND WIDOW BLUNT'S STUFFED OWL


It was a dismal, rainy day. Long before morning, the storm had begun,
and when the faint light had at last dawned in the east, the rain still
pattered down on the leaves of Mister Robert Robin's big basswood tree,
and fell in great drops from their tips. Robert Robin did not like the
weather. He had not even sung his "Hurry up!" song, and the rain had
pelted down so furiously that his every feather was wet, and he was
soaked to his shivering skin.

Mrs. Robin was afraid that the raindrops would fall inside the nest and
wet the eggs, so she kept her wings spread out so far that her shoulders
ached.

"It is very uncomfortable, sitting in this cramped position!" she said
to Robert Robin. "I am afraid that I will get the rheumatism in my
joints!"

"Let me cover the eggs for you!" said Robert Robin.

"With your feathers all wet?" exclaimed Mrs. Robin. "I am trying to keep
the eggs dry and warm!"

"Let me try it once!" said Robert Robin.

"No! Thank you, dear! your intentions are good, but you are so clumsy
you would be almost sure to break one of the eggs, and to-day is the day
they will hatch!"

"I wish that it would stop raining!" said Robert Robin.

"Why not sing your 'Dry Weather' song?" asked Mrs. Robin. "The rain
might stop coming if it heard you singing your 'Dry Weather' song!"

"I only sing my 'Dry Weather' song when the weather is dry!" answered
Robert Robin. "Still I would do almost anything to make this rain stop
coming down!"

So Robert Robin flew up to the top of his big basswood tree to sing his
"Dry Weather" song, in the rain.

Mister Jim Crow was sitting in his tall hemlock tree. He was wishing
that the rain would stop falling, for he was as wet as water could make
him. From over the tops of the tall forest trees came the sound of
Robert Robin singing his "Dry Weather" song:

    "Dry up the crick!
    Dry up the crick!
    Dry up the beetles!
    Dry up the beetles!
    Dry up the crick!"

"Ha! Ha! Ha!" laughed Jim Crow. "That funny Robert Robin is singing his
'Dry Weather' song! He is saying 'dry up the crick!'--he means 'creek'
of course, but could anything be funnier than that wet bird sitting in
the rain, and singing about dry weather? The creek is roaring down
through the sheep pasture, like a yellow river! 'Dry up the crick!' Ha!
Ha! Ha!" and Jim Crow laughed so hard that he forgot all about being
wet.

"Dry up the crick!" screamed Robert Robin over and over again, until he
was too tired to sing any more. Then he perched near Mrs. Robin and
said, "I sang it seven times, but the rain is coming down harder than
ever!"

"Well! You did your best, dear!" said Mrs. Robin. "It isn't your fault
if it rains," and she could smell his feathers, they were so wet.

Suddenly the sky grew lighter, and with a roar that shook the earth a
mighty wind swept through the woods; the clouds began to break away; the
blue sky shone in patches between the torn clouds, and the rain was
over.

No more rain fell, but all that night the fierce wind raved and roared,
and when the sun came up in the east once more, the fierce gusts were
whipping the branches of the elms, and twisting the tops of the tall
pines, but Robert Robin's big basswood tree stood on the northeast side
of the forest, so that the wind scarcely touched it.

During the night four little baby robins had pecked their way out of the
blue eggs, and when daylight came, Mrs. Robin had cleared the nest of
broken shells and was covering her babies with her warm feathers. Robert
Robin was sitting on the big branch close by. He was oiling and
arranging his feathers with great care.

"You _did_ make it stop raining, didn't you, dear?" said Mrs. Robin.

"I must admit that strange things happen!" said Robert Robin, as he
lifted a feather and oiled it on the under side.

"I have a little surprise for you!" said Mrs. Robin.

Robert Robin looked, and as Mrs. Robin stood up, he saw four little baby
robins. The four little baby robins looked at him and opened their
mouths just as wide as they could.

"Why didn't you tell me they were here?" he said. "The poor little dears
are almost starved!" and away he flew in a great rush to get them some
breakfast. In a few moments he was back again and fed one of them. Then
away he hurried again and in a moment he came carrying more food for the
babies, but the babies looked so nearly alike that Robert Robin fed the
same one twice, and that made Mrs. Robin laugh.

"Men are such blunderbusses!" she said.

"Why don't you have your children marked so one can tell them apart?" he
said.

"I will place little Elizabeth at the north side of the nest, little
Sheldon at the east, Montgomery at the south, and Evelina at the west!"

All day long Robert Robin did nothing except carry food for the baby
robins, but the next day Mrs. Robin helped him, and both of them were
busy, for the four little baby robins were very hungry. They never did
seem to get enough to eat.

"The children have wonderful appetites!" said Mrs. Robin.

"They are simply ravenous!" said Robert Robin.

"What does 'ravenous' mean?" asked Mrs. Robin.

"Ravenous means as hungry as a wolf!" answered Robert Robin. "I wish
that the cherries would hurry and get ripe!"

"Do wolves eat cherries?" asked Mrs. Robin.

"I do not know!" said Robert Robin, "but I do know that ripe red
cherries are good for baby robins, and ever so much easier to find than
bugs and worms!"

"Green cherries make them sick! We must be very careful not to feed our
babies any green cherries!"

"I know where there is an early cherry tree!" said Robert Robin, "and I
am going right over there now and see if any of the early cherries are
ripe!"

So Mrs. Robin waited by their nest while Robert Robin went over to see
about the early cherries.

The early cherry tree grew in Widow Blunt's back yard. Widow Blunt's
father had planted it, and it was the very earliest cherry tree in all
the neighborhood.

When Robert Robin came in sight of it he saw the bright red fruit
shining among the green leaves. The early cherries were ripe, and Robert
Robin was the first to find them.

In a few moments Robert Robin stood beside his own nest with a bright
red cherry in his mouth.

"Be sure to pop the pits, children!" said Mrs. Robin, and after the
little robin had swallowed the cherry, the cherry pit came popping from
his mouth and rattled down to the ground.

Many times that day Robert Robin and Mrs. Robert Robin went back and
forth between their nest and Widow Blunt's early cherry tree, but in the
afternoon, Widow Blunt was out in her garden when she saw a red-breasted
robin picking her cherries.

"Oh! You cute robin red-breast!" she called. "You are after my cherries,
but you will have to wait until I have picked all that I want for my own
use, before you get any more!"

Widow Blunt went into her house, and brought out her stepladder. Then
she went into her parlor and got a big stuffed owl off the mantel. The
owl was one that Mister Blunt had shot, and a friend of his had stuffed
its skin and put in great glass eyes that would scare almost anything.
The owl looked just as if he were going to spring right at you.

[Illustration: Both of them were scared almost out of their wits.
(Page 37) (Exciting Adventures of Mr. Robert Robin)]

Widow Blunt took the owl up the stepladder with her, and tied it fast in
the cherry tree, then she went back into her house and looked out
through the kitchen window.

She had not waited long before Robert Robin came to get another cherry.
He perched on a limb and was picking out a nice red ripe one to take
home to Elizabeth when he saw something shine. It was the stuffed owl's
glass eye.

Robert Robin saw the big fierce owl so close to him that he was so
frightened he dropped the cherry and screamed, "Help! Help!" and almost
fell out of the tree, and just then Mrs. Robin came and almost sat right
beside the big owl, and she screamed, "Help! Help!" and almost fell out
of the tree, and both of them were scared almost out of their wits, and
they flew over to the harvest apple tree and Robert Robin said, "Tut!
Tut! Tut!--Tut! Tut! Tut!" and every time he said, "Tut!" he jerked his
tail.

Widow Blunt sat in her splint-bottomed chair by her kitchen window and
laughed and laughed, and laughed. "That poor robin thought he was a
goner!" she said to herself. "That old owl is good for something, after
all!"

Widow Blunt's full-blooded Plymouth Rock Rooster came around the house
with four hens. He was going to show the hens where the cherries were
falling on the ground. One of the hens saw the big owl sitting in the
cherry tree.

"See that terrible bird in the tree!" she said. Mister Rooster looked up
and saw Mister Sparrow sitting in the English currant bush.

"I could eat four birds like that one!" said the rooster.

"You are very brave!" said the hen, "but something tells me that I do
not care for cherries to-day!" and the hen started running for the barn.

Just then Mister Rooster saw the big owl.

"Ca-daa-cut! Ca-daa-cut!" he screamed. "Run for your lives!" and the big
rooster was one of the first to get under the barn.

Widow Blunt rocked back and forth in her splint-bottomed chair and
laughed, and laughed, and laughed. "It is better than a vaudeville!" she
said.

Mister Samson Crow came flying over, and he saw the big owl sitting in
Widow Blunt's early cherry tree.

Samson Crow was very much surprised to see an owl sitting in a cherry
tree in the daytime, and he said to himself: "My eyes are fairly good,
and they tell me that a whole owl is sitting in that tree!" Then Samson
Crow flew down to where Robert Robin was saying, "Tut! Tut! Tut!" in the
harvest apple tree.

"I am very glad that you came, Mister Crow!" said Robert Robin. "Please
drive that ugly owl out of that cherry tree so that I may get some more
cherries for my baby robins!"

"That is what I am going to do!" said Samson Crow. "But what puzzles me
is why any owl would be sitting in a cherry tree right near a house, in
broad daylight! Why is he there, and what does he want?"

"I have no doubt but that he is after my cherries!" said Robert Robin.

"That is all I care to know about it!" said Samson Crow. "I will drive
him out of your tree this very minute!"

Samson Crow flew straight at the owl. The big owl glared at him with its
great glass eyes and never moved. "Caw! Caw!" screamed Samson Crow, but
the big owl sat perfectly still. Around and around the tree flew Samson
Crow, but the big owl sat perfectly still. Samson Crow perched on a
branch and shouted at the big owl, but the big owl did not even turn his
head, nor change the steady gaze of his great glass eyes. "Help! Help!"
screamed Samson Crow, and he flew away to the woods, and Widow Blunt
laughed, and laughed, and laughed, and rocked backwards and forwards in
her splint-bottomed chair.

Robert Robin kept waiting, and saying, "Tut! Tut! Tut!--Tut! Tut! Tut!"
and wishing that the big owl would fly away, but the big owl did not
move, and just stared straight ahead with his great glass eyes.

About four o'clock Widow Blunt put on her sunbonnet and her cotton
gloves with the fingers cut off, and with an eight-quart tin pail with
strips of zinc soldered across the bottom of it, she climbed the
stepladder and picked eight quarts of ripe red cherries from her early
cherry tree, and the big stuffed owl watched her with his great glass
eyes, and never said a word.

Then the Widow Blunt took her eight-quart pail full of ripe red cherries
into her kitchen and set it on the kitchen table, then she went back to
where her stepladder was standing under the cherry tree, and climbed her
stepladder once more and untied the stuffed owl, and put him under her
arm, and carried him back to her parlor and put him on the mantelpiece
and set the big glass dome over him, to keep the dust off.

Widow Blunt carried her stepladder back into her woodhouse, then she
hung her sunbonnet on a nail behind the kitchen door, and put her cotton
gloves in the secretary drawer, where she would know where to find them
when the berry-picking season came. Widow Blunt then looked out of the
kitchen window, and saw Robert Robin picking one of her ripe red
cherries. Then Widow Blunt sat down in her splint-bottomed chair by the
kitchen window and watched Robert Robin and Mrs. Robert Robin come and
pick her cherries.

"Those robins will not let any of my cherries go to waste," she said.
"But I suppose they have a large family to feed, and eight quarts is all
I need for myself!" And Widow Blunt rocked backwards and forwards in her
splint-bottomed chair and watched the robins, and the next thing she
knew the clock struck six and woke her up.

"Mercy! I went to sleep in my chair!" she said. "Now I will have to
hurry to get those cherries canned before dark!"

"Where did the big owl go?" asked Mrs. Robin of Robert Robin.

"A woman caught him and carried him away, but he ate many of the very
best cherries before she caught him!" said Mister Robert Robin.




CHAPTER IV

MISTER ROBERT ROBIN HAS AN ADVENTURE WITH THE FARMER'S MALTESE CAT


It was a beautiful morning. The sun had just lifted his bright face
above the eastern hills; the dew was still glistening on the leaves, and
Mister Robert Robin was perched in the very top of his big basswood tree
singing his "Sun-up" song.

He looked very handsome in his dark brown topcoat and his red vest, as
he finished singing his "Sun-up" song and looked around to see what he
could see.

From the meadow came the sound of Bob-o-link's "Spingle! Spangle!" song,
and David Songsparrow was singing his seven morning songs, and even
Jeremiah Yellowbird was doing his best to make his little voice ring
through the woods as Robert Robin's mellow notes had sounded a moment
before.

But Robert Robin was not listening to the other birds, he was looking to
see what he could see.

The fields were green, for rain had fallen the day before, and the
tangle of wild-rose bushes along the fence had burst into bloom. From
the high place where he sat, Robert Robin could see the pink blossoms,
and when the wind blew from their direction, he could smell the perfume
of the flowers.

The farmer's sheep were in their pasture, and the little lambs were
frisking and playing with each other. A pile of lumber lay near the
pasture gate, and the little lambs were running and jumping off the
lumber pile. They were having great fun, and Robert Robin felt like
laughing as he watched them.

Suddenly Robert Robin sat up very straight and jerked his tail up and
down three times and said, "Tut! Tut! Tut!" He saw the farmer's Maltese
cat walking along on the rail fence, and the cat was coming towards the
woods.

"I am afraid that big cat is coming over here!" said Robert Robin to
himself. Mrs. Robin heard Robert Robin saying, "Tut! Tut! Tut!" so she
came to see what was the matter.

"There is a big Maltese cat coming towards our tree!" said Robert Robin.

"Where is it?" asked Mrs. Robin, who was very much excited.

"On the rail fence!" said Robert Robin. "It is the same cat that I saw
in the farmer's garden!"

"That terrible cat will eat our baby robins!" said Mrs. Robin. "You must
fly right at him and scare him away!"

"Perhaps it would be better to wait and see if something doesn't
happen!" said Robert Robin.

The big cat did not seem to be in any hurry. He walked slowly along the
rail fence until he came to the brook. There were no rails across the
brook, only a panel of wire fencing--so the big cat sprang to the ground
and walked along the brook until he came to a place where the brook was
narrow, then the farmer's Maltese cat crouched and sprang across the
brook at one leap.

"He is surely coming to our woods!" said Mrs. Robin, and Robert Robin
was so frightened that all he could say was "Tut! Tut! Tut!"

The great cat tiptoed across the corner of the pasture, and crept under
the fence. He was now in the meadow next to the woods, and was walking
slowly towards Mister Robert Robin's tree. Every few moments he would
stand still and look all around. Once he sat down for several minutes,
and Robert Robin was hoping that he would not come any nearer the woods.
Mrs. Bee was buzzing around the basswood blossoms, and Robert Robin
said:

"Mrs. Bee, you are a very good friend of mine! Please fly down there and
sting that big cat for me! It will only take you a moment and it will be
a great favor!" But Mrs. Bee was busy filling her bag with honey, and
had no time to bother, stinging cats.

Mister Jim Crow came flying past and Robert Robin called to him: "Oh!
Mister Crow! Fly right straight at that cat and scare him out of his
wits!"

"Oh! Let him alone!" said Jim Crow, "he is only catching meadow mice!"

And Jim Crow flew over into the other woods.

Then nearer and nearer the big cat crept towards Robert Robin's tree.
Mister Kingbird came fluttering his wings and screaming, "King! King!
King!" but though he feared no hawk nor owl he was afraid of the big cat
and would not go anywhere near him.

The farmer's big Maltese cat was standing almost under Robert Robin's
tree. He was swinging his long tail from side to side, and looking at
Robert Robin with his green eyes. The big cat was thinking to himself,
"I would like to have that robin for my breakfast!"

But Robert Robin had no fear of the cat catching him; he was afraid that
the animal might climb his big basswood tree and eat his baby robins.

"I will climb that big basswood tree and catch Mister Robin!" said the
big cat to himself. Then he crawled under the fence and started
climbing up the big tree. The big basswood was very tall and straight,
and as the farmer's cat climbed higher and higher he saw Mister and Mrs.
Robert Robin sitting in a maple tree screaming at him with all their
might.

"What is the use of my climbing this tall tree when the birds are in the
top of the other one?" the cat asked himself. "I think that I will slide
down!"

The big cat slid down the big basswood tree and when he came to the
ground, he saw Mister Gabriel Chipmunk sitting on top of his old home
stump shouting "Chip! Chip!" as loudly as he could scream.

"Ho! Ho!" said the Maltese cat, "there is a striped squirrel for my
breakfast!" and the big cat tiptoed towards Mister Gabriel Chipmunk. But
Mister Chipmunk was watching the big cat all the while, and he was all
ready to jump into his hole.

Somewhere in the woods a twig snapped, and Robert Robin looked and saw
an animal coming through the woods. It was a big bulldog, and he was out
for a walk.

The big bulldog did not like cats, and if there was any one thing which
he liked to do, it was to chase cats. He did like to see them run.

When he saw the farmer's big Maltese cat, he said "Woof!" and the big
cat forgot all about Mister Chipmunk, and forgot all about Robert Robin,
and ran for the fence.

"Woof! Woof!" roared the bulldog. "Pstt! Pstt!" said the cat, and the
cat jumped through the fence, and the dog jumped through the fence, and
the cat jumped back through the fence, and the dog jumped back through
the fence, and then the cat ran up an elm tree which stood outside the
woods, and the big bulldog put both of his front paws against the tree,
and said "Woof! Woof! Woof!" Then the dog sat down and barked at the
cat, and the cat laid his ears back close to his head and growled at the
dog.

The big bulldog laughed and showed all his teeth and said, "Come down
and take a walk, Kitty! Come down and take a walk, Kitty!" Then the dog
sat down and waited three hours for the cat to come down.

The farmer's Maltese cat did not like to stay in the elm tree. The sun
was hot and some little flies kept trying to get into his ears, but the
dog was sitting in the shade, and he was thinking to himself, "That cat
will come down soon, and then I will give him another race! I do enjoy
seeing those fraidy cats run!"

Robert Robin did not like to have the farmer's cat anywhere around, and
he kept saying "Tut! Tut! Tut!" but Mrs. Robin went and got the baby
robins their breakfasts.

The sun kept getting hotter and hotter, and the farmer's big cat kept
getting warmer and warmer. "I shall roast in this tree!" he said to
himself. "This is the last time that I will ever come into these woods!
I had no idea that a big bulldog lived here!"

After a long time the big bulldog happened to remember a bone which he
had buried in the garden, and the more he thought about the bone, the
hungrier he became, so at last he looked up at the farmer's Maltese cat
and said:

"Woof! The next time I see you, Kitty! The next time I see you, Kitty!"

And the farmer's Maltese cat growled at the big bulldog and said, "If my
dog was here he would eat you up!"

Then Mister Bulldog laughed and showed all his teeth and said, "The next
time I see you, Kitty!" And then he went back to the place where he was
visiting and dug up the bone, and it was even better than he had
expected.

When the dog had gone, the farmer's Maltese cat slid down the elm tree
and ran all the way home, and found that the farmer's long-eared hound
dog had eaten all the breakfast which the farmer's wife had put in the
cat dish.

And Mister Robert Robin said to Mrs. Robin: "I hope that nice bulldog
stays all summer!"

And every time the farmer's big Maltese cat looked at the woods he said
to himself, "That is the place where that bulldog lives!"




CHAPTER V

ROBERT ROBIN SINGS HIS CHERRY SONG


Robert Robin was very happy. The cherries were ripe, and from the top of
his tall basswood tree he could see dozens of cherry trees laden with
the ripe, red fruit.

The little robins were very fond of cherries, and they never forgot to
pop the pits, so that under Robert Robin's basswood tree there were soon
great quantities of cherry pits.

One day the farmer and his hired man were coming through the woods, and
they saw the cherry pits scattered around under the big basswood.

"Look at those cherry pits!" said the hired man.

"Those are not cherry pits, they are basswood bobs!" said the farmer.

"No! They are cherry pits!" said the hired man.

"Ha! Ha!" laughed the farmer. "Cherries do not grow on basswood trees!"

"I guess that I know a cherry pit when I see one!" said the hired man.
"And if those are not cherry pits, I'll fry my mittens and eat 'em for
supper!"

"The trouble with you, Hank, is that you are never willing to give up
when you are wrong!" said the farmer. "How could so many cherry pits be
under a basswood tree?"

Just then, one of the baby robins "popped" a pit, and the little cherry
stone rattled against the branches of the basswood and fell to the
ground near the hired man's feet.

The farmer picked it up and said: "Now, look here, Hank! There is no use
of your standing there and telling me that that is a cherry pit, when
both of us saw it drop off that basswood! Cherry pits don't drop off
basswood trees, and for you to try to tell me that I don't know the
difference between a cherry tree and a basswood tree is going just a
little bit too far!"

"Maybe you're right!" said the hired man.

"There ain't no 'maybe' about it!" said the farmer. "I am most generally
right when it comes to understanding nature!"

"All except when you pulled up that poison ivy, barehanded!" said the
hired man, and both of them laughed, and the farmer said:

"Those basswood bobs did look so much like cherry pits, that they would
have fooled anybody but an expert!"

And the hired man said: "They looked so much like cherry pits that the
next time I am over this way, I am going to get some of them, and plant
'em in a box and raise me a cherry orchard!"

After the farmer and his hired man had gone, Mister Gabriel Chipmunk
came out from under his old home stump. Mister Chipmunk was worried. He
did not know what he was going to have to eat next winter.

So he sat on top of his old home stump and tried to think where he
could find something to put in his granary bins.

Jeremiah Yellowbird sat in a bush near by, and when he saw Mister
Chipmunk keeping so still, he said to him:

"What makes you so quiet to-day, Mister Chipmunk?"

"I am worried about what I will have to eat next winter, Mister
Yellowbird! There are no beechnuts, this year, the wild-pea crop is a
failure, the farmer has no fields of grain near my woods, and I have not
seen a groundnut for six seasons!"

"Can't you find something to take the place of those things?" asked
Mister Yellowbird.

"If the country was what it used to be, I would not worry a bit. But
every year it gets worse and worse! Why, last winter, Mrs. Chipmunk and
I had a miserable time living through the winter on wild buckwheat! My
grandfather would have starved rather than eat wild buckwheat! And he
would have starved, all right, if he had boarded at our house last
winter, for wild buckwheat was all that we had! Imagine me, the monarch
of all the woods, living on wild buckwheat!"

"Are you the monarch of the woods, Mister Chipmunk?" asked Jeremiah
Yellowbird.

"I would like to know who has a better right to be called the 'monarch
of the woods,'" said Gabriel Chipmunk. "When I sit on my old home stump
and say 'Chip! Chip! Chip!' everyone knows that I am taking care of the
woods, and if I did not keep a sharp lookout when men, and dogs, and
cats come around, there would be many lives lost! A monarch is supposed
to take care of his realm, and then I have plenty of time to be monarch,
and I like the work, so that makes me the 'monarch of the woods.'"

Something fell from the big basswood tree. It was a cherry pit which one
of the baby robins had "popped."

"Was that a nut which fell from the big basswood?" asked Gabriel
Chipmunk. But Jeremiah Yellowbird did not know, so Mister Chipmunk
hurried over to see, and when Gabriel Chipmunk saw all the nice cherry
pits scattered on the ground under the big basswood, he was very much
pleased, for Gabriel Chipmunk and all his folks liked cherry pits.

Mister Chipmunk filled his two big pockets with the nice cherry pits,
and ran for home as fast as his little legs would carry him.

Gabriel Chipmunk's pockets were in his cheeks, and when he had both
pockets full of cherry pits, his head looked larger than all the rest of
him. Billy Rabbit saw him running through the woods. "Who on earth is
that?" said Billy Rabbit to himself. "That big head is running around
without anybody! Help! Help!" and Billy Rabbit ran home and told Mrs.
Rabbit that he had just seen a terrible head running through the woods.

When Gabriel Chipmunk got home he dumped his two pocketsful of nice
cherry pits into his granary bins, and called Mrs. Chipmunk to come and
help him, and both of them worked as fast as they could and in a very
short time all the nice cherry pits from under Robert Robin's big
basswood tree were safe and snug in Mister Gabriel Chipmunk's granary
under his old home stump.

Both of them were so tired that they went to bed and slept until the
next morning.

Towards night Mister Robert Robin perched on the top of his big basswood
and sang his "Cherry Song," and while he was singing he heard some one
coming through the woods. It was the farmer's hired man. He was going to
get some of the cherry pits to plant in a box.

He scuffed his feet among the leaves, and looked, and looked, but he
could not find even just one cherry pit.

"Where did all those cherry pits go?" he asked himself. "There was
forty-'leven hundred of 'em here this forenoon, and now they are as
scarce as hen's teeth! Some bird must have picked up every last one of
them! I wouldn't have cared, only I was so sure about their bein' cherry
pits, and the farmer hates to get beat in an argument--but now I'll
never hear the last of fryin' them mittens."

The hired man climbed over the fence and stood still. He was listening
to Robert Robin's cherry song.

    "Cherry sweeter!
    Cherry sweeter!
    Cherry sweet!
    Cherry sweet!
    Call Peter--
    Call Peter!
    Call Pete,
    Call Pete!
    Cherry sweet!
    Cherry sweeter!
    Cherry sweet!"

"That robin is a fine singer, and he is singing about cherries all
right!" said the hired man, "and if I knew as much as he does about what
became of those cherry pits, I could go right to 'em, this minute!"




CHAPTER VI

MISTER ROBIN DECIDES TO TAKE A VACATION


The days sped by, and the baby robins grew so fast that very soon the
four filled the nest chock-full, and so one day Robert Robin was not
much surprised to see two of them standing up in the nest.

"Sit down at once, children!" he said. "You might fall out and frighten
your mother!"

But the next day little Sheldon hopped out of the nest and stood beside
it, and Elizabeth insisted upon standing so near the edge of the nest
that Mrs. Robin was very nervous for fear she would upset the nest and
spill Montgomery and Evelina to the ground.

"Do sit down, child!" said Robert Robin. "Your mother does not like to
have you stand up in the nest that way!" But Elizabeth gave a great jump
and in a moment she was standing on a big limb fluttering her wings,
and getting ready to fly. Then little Sheldon gave a great jump and flew
clear into the maple tree. Mrs. Robin was very much excited, and was
screaming loudly, and Robert Robin was saying, "Tut! Tut!" and jerking
his tail up and down.

Suddenly Evelina stood up and jumped and the nest went rolling over and
over down the side of the tall basswood tree, spilling little Montgomery,
heels over head.

"Do be careful! Do be careful!" screamed Mrs. Robin. "You will all be
killed! You will all be killed!"

But Montgomery was already flopping his wings at a great rate, and had
started to fly when the heavy nest fell right on top of him, and there
was little Montgomery under the nest, and the nest was wrong side up on
the ground.

"Help! Help!" screamed little Montgomery. "Help! Help! I am under the
nest!"

Robert Robin tugged at the nest, but the nest was too heavy for him to
lift. Mrs. Robin came, and both of them tugged and pulled at the nest,
but it was so heavy that both of them together could not lift it.

"Let us tear the nest apart!" said Mrs. Robin, but the dry mud was so
hard that the twigs could not be pulled apart.

Just then Elizabeth went fluttering past, and little Sheldon fell off
his limb, and Evelina began crying--she was so frightened,--so both
parent birds were forced to leave poor little Montgomery under the heavy
nest and look after their other children.

And what a time they had with them! For over an hour the three little
robins went flying in all directions through the woods. Mister Tom
Squirrel sat on a limb and laughed and chuckled, and said to Robert
Robin: "The way your baby robins fly makes me remember the time I showed
my cousins--the flying squirrels--the way to fly straight down!"

But Mister Robin was too excited to feel like visiting with Mister Tom
Squirrel. He was afraid that he would lose one of his children. But at
last the baby robins were tired enough to feel like resting. Little
Sheldon was in the top of a cedar tree, Elizabeth was sitting in a
green osier, and little Evelina was sitting on Mister Chipmunk's stump,
but poor little Montgomery was still under the heavy nest, and neither
Robert Robin nor Mrs. Robin could think of any way to get him out.

Over in the pasture a cow was wearing a cowbell. Every time the cow
moved her head the bell said "Tonk! Tonkle! Tonk! Tonkle!" Robert Robin
could hear the cowbell making the noise to let the farmer know where his
brindle cow was. But Robert Robin kept hearing another sound. "Tonkle!
Tonkle!" Then he heard some one talking, and he saw two little girls
coming into the woods. They were out strawberrying, and they were
carrying tin pails on their arms, and whenever they dropped a strawberry
in their tin pails it made a noise like "Tonkle! Tonkle!"

"Let us go through this corner of the woods, and maybe we will find some
white strawberries!" said one little girl.

"Or some wintergreen berries!" said the other.

"Be careful and not tear your dress on the twigs!" said the first.

"This is an old dress, so I don't care!" said the other.

"There is a bird's nest!" said the first little girl.

"Turn it over and see what is inside of it!" said the other.

So the little girl poked Robert Robin's nest with the toe of her shoe
and turned it over, and out jumped Montgomery Robin, and the first thing
that he did was to open his mouth just as wide as he could. Both the
little girls laughed.

"It is a young robin!" said Lucy, "let's feed it some of our
strawberries!"

"You may feed it some of yours, if you want to, but I am going to take
mine home to mother!" said Lettie, who was a fussy little girl, and her
mother did not eat strawberries. They gave her neuritis and pimples.

"That poor little robin may have been under that nest, days, and days,
and he is almost starved!" said Lucy. "So I am going to feed the poor
thing some of my strawberries!"

So Lucy fed Montgomery three ripe strawberries. "Now that is all you may
have now!" said Lucy to Montgomery. "People who have been having a
famine should not overload their stomachs!"

"Don't touch the dirty thing or you will get bugs on you!" said Lettie.

"Oh! Bugs yourself!" said Lucy. "I hope you step on a snake! It would
serve you right for being so nicey nicey!"

"You are a very rude little girl, to say such things!" said Lettie.

"I am very sorry if I hurt your feelings, Lettie!" said Lucy. "It was
very rude of me to wish that you would step on a snake! I will take it
all back, but I would laugh if you got a spider down your neck!"

Then Lucy and Lettie went out of the woods and left little Montgomery
sitting on the ground, but in a very few minutes he started flying from
stump to stump, and soon he was sitting in the cedar tree close by
little Sheldon.

Towards night Robert Robin and Mrs. Robin coaxed the baby robins back
into the big basswood tree, and all that night the four of them sat on
the same limb and slept just as fine as could be.

At dawn, Robert Robin sang his "Hurry up!" song, then he came back to
see how his family was getting along. The four baby robins looked very
good in their new silky feathers, and they seemed almost as large as
Mrs. Robin, and if their breasts had been red instead of speckled you
could hardly have told them from full-grown robins. But they were still
quite babies, and had to be fed, and it was several days before their
parents taught them to find food for themselves.

"You are a great big man-bird, now. Almost as tall as your father, and
you ought to be ashamed to even think of letting your mother feed you!"
said Mrs. Robin to Montgomery, who still had the habit of opening his
mouth as wide as he could.

About the middle of the week, they were all flying around and getting
their own food, so Robert Robin said to Mrs. Robin: "I have had a
little matter on my mind for quite a while!"

"What is it?" asked Mrs. Robin.

"I have been thinking about taking a vacation!" said Robert Robin. "I
have been working pretty hard, this summer, and the strain is beginning
to tell! Only last night, I dreamed that seven spotted cats were chasing
me through a briar patch! When I awoke I was all covered with a cold
sweat! What I need is a little rest and relaxation!"

"What is relaxation?" asked Mrs. Robin.

"Something like rest, only more refined!" said Robert Robin.

"I think that I need a little vacation!" said Mrs. Robin, "so I will go
along with you!"

"That will be fine!" said Robert Robin, "and we will take the children!
But where shall we go?"

"Where have you been planning on going, dear?" asked Mrs. Robin.

"I would like to go to some quiet, restful place, where there was
plenty to eat and drink, and nothing to do."

"That would be a wonderful place to live!" said Mrs. Robin. "I should
like to stay there always!"

"I was thinking that I would like to loaf around Brigg's Brambles for a
few days, then go over to Black-bug Swamp for a few days, then drop over
to the river for a day or two, or possibly spend a short time at the
lake!"

"Brigg's Brambles is not a very safe place to take the children--there
are so many owls and hawks around, and there is such an odor to
Black-bug Swamp, and the last time we were over to the river, we saw all
those boys shooting with their air guns. I was thinking that if we went
to the mountains or to the seashore we would meet a great many more of
our friends,--but have your own way, dear--I will be perfectly happy
anywhere!"

"Perhaps we had better go to the mountains!" said Robert Robin. "It
would be safer for the children!"

"That would be fine if the weather stays warm, but I shall never forget
that awful chill I had, year before last!"

"That settles it!" said Robert Robin. "We will go to the seashore, where
the weather is almost always good!"

"You have the best judgment about everything, dear!" said Mrs. Robin.
"You always know just how to decide it! It is perfectly wonderful how
quickly you make up your mind!"

"My father was the same way!" said Robert Robin. "I think it runs in our
family!" Then Robert Robin felt so fine that he flew up to the top of a
hickory tree and sang his "Pick Pickles" song.

    "Pick pickles!
    Pick pickles!
    A teasel tick tickles!
    A peasel pick pickles!
    A teasel pick pickles!"

And old Mister Woodpecker stopped drumming on his tree, and looked at
Robert Robin and laughed and said:

"Every time I hear you sing that foolish song, I have to laugh in spite
of myself!"

Then Old Mister Woodpecker started to drill another hole, but he was
still so full of giggles that he could not get his mouth closed, and
every time just as he went to tap the tree with his bill he would give a
giggle.

"A teasel pick pickles! Ha! Ha! Ha!" laughed Old Mister Woodpecker. "Ho!
Ho! Ho!" and it was four minutes before he could get the corner of his
lips down so that he could get his mouth closed.

So Old Mister Woodpecker could not laugh and work at the same time, and
that may be the reason why only a very few people have ever heard Mister
Woodpecker laugh out loud, and not so very many people have even seen
him smile.




CHAPTER VII

MISTER ROBERT ROBIN AND HIS FAMILY TAKE A VACATION


In the country where Robert Robin lived there were a great many lakes
and streams. The streams ran down through the valleys, and emptied into
the lakes, and the waters from the lakes emptied into larger streams
which flowed into a great lake which looked as large as the sea.

Mister Robert Robin thought that the big lake was the sea, and all the
other robins in his part of the country thought the same thing, so it
was to the shore of the great lake that Robert Robin and his family went
for their vacation.

The children were delighted with the trip across the country. It was
great fun to fly from one woods to another, and then look around to see
what new things could be found. No one was in a hurry to get anywhere.

"We have all the time there is!" said Mrs. Robin.

"Let us not be in a hurry!" said Robert Robin. "When one is taking a
vacation he should never be in a hurry to get where he is going!"

"Much haste, less speed!" said Mrs. Robin. "Children, get your father to
sing you his Wait-a-bit song!"

Then all the youngster robins began to coax Robert Robin to sing his
Wait-a-bit song.

"Daddy! Please sing us your Wait-a-bit song! Daddy! Please sing us your
Wait-a-bit song!"

So at last Robert Robin perched himself in the top of a tall butternut
tree and sang them his Wait-a-bit song:

    "Never hurry,
    Wait a bit!
    Never worry,
    Wait a bit!
    Do your work!
    Never shirk!
    Never hurry!
    Never worry!
    Wait a bit!"

Before Robert Robin had finished singing his Wait-a-bit song Mister
Catbird came rushing over from the edge of a tangled swamp, and perched
himself near Robert Robin, in the top of the tall butternut tree. When
Robert Robin was through with his song, Mister Catbird said: "Mister
Robin, you are a stranger to me but as I have never heard any other
robin sing that same song, I would be pleased if you would do me the
favor of singing it over once more!"

So Robert Robin sang his Wait-a-bit song over again for Mister Catbird,
and Mister Catbird said: "Now sing it again, and I will sing along with
you! I would like very much to learn that song! It is one of the best
songs that I ever heard."

So Robert Robin sang the song again, and Mister Catbird sang along with
him, but although Mister Catbird had a very fine voice, and could sing
very good indeed, he put in so many wrong words that Robert Robin got
all mixed up and sang a part of his Cherry song.

That made Mister Catbird laugh, and then he made a noise like a cat, and
the little robins were very much surprised to see a nice-looking bird
like Mister Catbird who could make a noise almost exactly like a cat.

Mister Catbird was a jolly person, and he was full of jokes. He sat
there in the top of the tall butternut tree, and pretended that he was
Mister Blackbird, and he sang Mister Blackbird's song all the way
through. Then he said "Meow!" and then he sang a song very much like
Robert Robin's "Rain" song, then he said "Meow!" again, and laughed. It
made Robert Robin very angry to have Mister Catbird spoiling a good song
like that by saying "Meow!" and he thought that Mister Catbird was
making fun of him, so he said to Mister Catbird:

"I am very pleased to have had the pleasure of meeting you, sir, but we
are on our way to the seashore, so we must hurry along! Good
afternoon!"

"Good afternoon!" shouted Mister Catbird. "Good afternoon, EVERYBODY!
MEOW!"

As Robert Robin, and his family flew away they heard Mister Catbird
singing with all his might:

    "Never hurry!
    Wait a bit!
    Never worry!
    MEOW! MEOW!
    Ha! Ha! Ha!
    Do your work!
    MEOW! MEOW!"

And the young robins couldn't help but laugh, but Mister Robert Robin
pretended that he did not hear Mister Catbird at all, and started
talking with Mrs. Robin about something else.

Before night they came to the shore of the great lake, and at first the
little robins were badly frightened. They saw the hundreds of gulls in
the air and thought that they were all hawks.

"Those are not hawks, children!" said Mrs. Robin. "Those are sea gulls,
but there are many hawks here, too, but if you keep under the cover of
the bushes, the hawks will not see you, and if a hawk cannot see you, he
cannot catch you!"

For a long time they sat in an apple tree and looked at the great lake,
and watched the gulls swooping and soaring through the air. Many boats
were plowing through the water, and many people were strolling along the
beach or swimming in the surf.

"I want a drink!" said little Sheldon.

"I want a drink!" said little Elizabeth.

"I want a drink!" said little Evelina.

"I want a drink!" said little Montgomery.

"The water in the lake is not fit to drink, children!" said Robert
Robin. "It tastes bric-a-brac-ish! We will go over to General Scamp's
fountain, and get a drink of marble water!"

[Illustration: They sat in an apple tree and watched the gulls swooping
and soaring through the air.
(Page 76) (Exciting Adventures of Mr. Robert Robin)]

So Robert Robin and his family went over to General Scamp's lawn and had
a fine drink from his nice bird fountain, and Robert Robin plunged into
the bird basin and took a bath, and spattered water all over little
Evelina.

But in a few moments all of them were bathing in General Scamp's bird
basin.

"There is nothing like a cold plunge, when one is traveling!" said
Robert Robin. "Now I will teach you children to catch earthworms!"

"Oh! Goody!" shouted all the young birdsters. "In which tree are they?"

"They are not in any tree! They are in General Scamp's lawn!" said
Robert Robin, as he hopped down and began tripping over the green grass.
Suddenly he stood perfectly still and turned his head to one side.
Robert Robin was listening and looking closely at the ground.

"Watch your father, children!" said Mrs. Robin. "You must learn to stop,
look, and listen before you become a good worm hunter!"

Robert Robin was standing as still as a stick. Then, like a flash, he
drove his sharp beak into the green sod and pulled out a long wiggly
worm.

In an instant the young robins had seized the worm and were pulling this
way and that.

"Look out! Look out!" screamed Robert Robin. "A cat is coming! A cat is
coming!"

The young robins dropped the big worm, and all of them flew up into a
tulip tree.

The big cat tiptoed across the lawn, until she came to an iron fountain.
No water was coming from the fountain, and its basin was dry. It was an
old fountain and was not much used.

"Ho! Ho!" said the cat. "Here is a good place to hide! I will get into
this old fountain and wait until a robin gets near enough for me to
catch. Then I will pounce upon it!"

So the big cat hid in the old iron fountain.

A man was trimming the hedge. He was a caretaker, and he saw the big cat
hide in the old iron fountain.

"That old cat thinks that she will hide in the old iron fountain and
catch a bird!" he said to himself. "She is the same cat that has been
catching birds around here all summer! What she needs is a good
dousing!"

The man laid down his clippers, and tiptoed along behind the hedge until
he came to a place where a little iron wheel stuck up out of the ground.
The man took hold of the little iron wheel and turned it just as quickly
as he could, and the water came rushing out of the old iron fountain,
and the big cat jumped first one way and then another, and whichever way
she sprang she spattered right into streams of cold water that squirted
all over her.

"Pstt! Pstt!" she said as she jumped out of the basin, and ran across
the nice green lawn, and hurried home.

When the big cat got home she shook herself and said: "That old iron
fountain is no good! It is a poor place to hide! I am as wet as a mop!
Who would ever have expected that old fountain to blow up like that?
General Scamp is letting his place run down so fast that I do not think
I will go over there any more! I will dry my fur, then I will go over
to the dump and catch a rat!"

When Robert Robin saw the big cat get wet in the old iron fountain, he
told the little robins never to go near that place. "That big cat got
very wet, and a little bird, like you, might drown!" he said.

Then, as it was getting towards night, Robert Robin led his family over
to the city park. He expected to get a room in the Bird House, but the
rooms were all taken, so Robert Robin and his family were forced to
sleep all night in a maple tree.

During the night a dense bank of fog rolled in from the lake, and the
black smoke of a factory chimney drifted through the park. The lights of
the city and the noise of the traffic kept Robert Robin's family awake
most of the night.

"I do not enjoy sleeping in a strange tree!" said Mrs. Robin, the next
morning.

"The fog and smoke were very bad!" said Robert Robin, "and those bright
lights made my eyes smart!"

Little Evelina had caught cold, Montgomery had hurt his toe, and the
other youngster birds were tired and not a bit pleasant, so when Mrs.
Robin said, "I would like to go back to our own basswood tree, and build
us a nice new nest, in the place where the old one was, then I could lay
four more eggs, and we would have plenty of time to raise another family
this summer!" When Mrs. Robin said that, all the young robins cried at
once: "I want to go home! I want to go home!" and all that Robert Robin
said was, "I would like to go to some place where I can get a good
night's sleep!"

The whistles of the city were blowing, and the big clock in the Court
House was just striking seven, when Robert Robin and his family flew
along the shore of the great lake for a short distance, and then
suddenly swerved up into the high air over the woods and fields, and at
half-past four that afternoon, they could see Brigg's Brambles, and
their own woods, with their tall basswood tree standing in the corner of
it.

Mister Jim Crow was sitting on a fence stake listening to Mister
Bob-o-link who was singing his Spingle, Spangle song, when he saw six
robins dart into Robert Robin's basswood tree.

"Some strange robins are in Robert Robin's tree!" he said to himself. "I
had better go over and see where they came from, what they are going to
do, and who they are!"

So Jim Crow flew over towards the big basswood tree and sang out: "What,
ho! Strangers! Whence came ye! Whither bound, and who's't?"

A tired-looking robin hopped to the end of a twig and answered: "Well!
Well! If there isn't my old friend, Jim Crow! It does seem so good to
get back home again and see the neighbors!"

"Why! It is Robert Robin!" exclaimed Jim Crow. "I thought that you were
away on your vacation!"

"We have been, and we have returned!" said Robert Robin.

"You made a short stay of it!" said Jim Crow. "You left us yesterday
morning!"

"Can that be possible?" said Robert Robin. "It seems to me that we were
away a week! But the very best part of a vacation is the getting back!"
said Robert Robin, and Jim Crow said:

"It was very quiet around the woods while you were away. There was no
one to sing us a Hurry-up song in the morning, and no one to sing us a
Cheer-up song in the afternoon, and no one to sing us a Good-night song
when the red sun was sinking behind the purple hill. Mrs. Crow has had
the blues all day, Billy Rabbit has been very lonely, and even
Melancthon Coon was asking what had become of you; he had missed your
singing. I came over here just on purpose to listen to little Mister
Bob-o-link sing his Spingle, Spangle song. So you see, Mister Robin, we
all need you to cheer us up with your songs and keep us good-natured!"

"Thank you very much, Mister Crow!" said Robert Robin, "I will surely
remember to sing you my Good-night song, when the sun goes down behind
the hill!"

And that evening, when the red sun was sinking behind the purple hill,
and the sky of the west was hung with the tapestry of clouds, and the
shadows in the valley were soft as black velvet, and the breath of the
wind was like a whisper among the leaves, Robert Robin sang his
Good-night song:

    "Mellow light!
    Mellow light!
    Yellow light!
    Yellow light!
    Has gone!
    Has gone!
    Let us rest,--
    Let us rest!
    'Til dawn,--'til dawn!"

Then Mister Robert Robin fluttered down into his own big basswood tree,
and he and all of his family slept soundly all night, and not even
Mister Screech-owl and his whistle disturbed them.




CHAPTER VIII

ROBERT ROBIN TELLS THE STORY OF WINTER


It was well towards Fall when Mister and Mrs. Robert Robin's second
family were out of the nest, and flying around. The days were getting
shorter and the nights seemed very, very long to Robert Robin, who kept
the sharpest watch to see the first faint light of dawn in the east. For
Robert Robin felt it his duty to waken everybody just as quickly as he
was sure that morning was about to break. But as the sun came up in the
east a little later each morning, Robert Robin had longer and longer to
wait.

"It seems to me that last night was the longest night that we have had
this summer!" he said to Mrs. Robin.

"Perhaps to-night will not be as long!" said Mrs. Robin.

"Perhaps not!" said Robert Robin, "but if to-night is any longer than
last night, I am going to get the children together and tell them about
the Great White Bear and the Little Gray Mouse!"

That afternoon the clouds covered the sky, and towards night a fine
misty rain fell, so that the afternoon was dark, and it seemed to Robert
Robin that night arrived long before time for it.

"It is getting dark here in the middle of the afternoon!" he said.

The next morning a fog covered all the land, and Robert Robin had good
reason to think that the night was far too long.

"Some one is taking our days away from us! By this time to-morrow we
will not have any light left, if it keeps on this way!"

But in the afternoon the fog banks drifted away, and the bright sun
shone, so Robert Robin felt much better, and he even sang a few songs to
cheer up Jim Crow and the other neighbors.

"This is a very fine day!" said Mrs. Robin. And so it was.

The sky was clear and of the deepest blue, the wind was still, and the
woods were quiet. Over in the farmer's barnyard a hen was cackling, but
in the woods not a sound could be heard. Mister Chipmunk was sitting on
his old home stump, but he had nothing to say, and Mister Tom Squirrel
had been working so hard lately, that he was too tired to talk.

"To-day would be a good day to tell the children the story of the Great
White Bear, and the Little Gray Mouse!" said Mrs. Robin to Robert Robin.

"Well! Get them together, and I will tell them the story!" said Robert
Robin. "I may as well do it one time as another, and it doesn't take any
longer to do a thing when you think of it than it does to put it off and
then have to think of it again!"

So Mrs. Robin called to the children to come and hear Robert Robin tell
the story of the Great White Bear and the Little Gray Mouse.

When the children had all gathered in the big basswood tree Robert Robin
said, "Come with me!" and led the way to the other side of the woods,
near the big stone under which Gerald Fox had his new home, and not far
from the old stump fence. Here were many sumach bushes with their
fernlike leaves and bright red bobs.

Robert Robin perched on a sumach limb, and straightened his feathers,
then he sat up very much as if he were about to sing, and said:

"I have brought you to this side of the woods to tell you the story of
the Great White Bear, and the Little Gray Mouse, because it was in this
very spot that my father told me the same story, and it was in this same
place that his father told the story to him, and no one knows how many,
many years the family has gathered here by the big stone, to listen to
this same story of the Great White Bear and the Little Gray Mouse.
Sheldon! Will you please turn around and look this way?"

"All of you children should pay the closest attention to this story. You
should not miss a single word of it, for it will be your duty to tell it
to your children, just as I am telling it to you, for this is the story
of Winter, and the story of why all robins fly southward every Fall,
and why they return to the north in the Spring!"

Then Robert Robin told them the story of the Great White Bear, and the
Little Gray Mouse.

     _Robert Robin's Story_

     It was many, many seasons ago, before there was any north or south,
     and when there was only an east and a west, that there lived in the
     deep, dark woods of the north a King Robin. This King Robin and his
     mate and their four baby robins were all the robins that there were
     to be found in all the deep, dark woods.

     Every morning when the gray light in the east glowed through the
     woods, King Robin sang a song, and every evening when the sun was
     about to sink behind the hills of the west, King Robin sang another
     song.

     King Robin's breast was covered with the softest and whitest down,
     but one day Mrs. Robin noticed that the tiny tips of the feathers
     were stained with red.

     "You have some cherry juice on your white breast!" said Mrs. King
     Robin.

     "I will wash it off!" said King Robin.

     So King Robin plunged into Lake Win-a-ke-tea-cup and washed his
     white breast, but the stain would not come off, and each day the
     tiny tips of the soft white feathers of King Robin's breast became
     a darker red until at last as King Robin sat in the top of his tall
     tree and sang his evening song, his breast was the color of the red
     sunset, and each morning as he sang his morning song, the red
     sunrise was no redder than King Robin's breast. And King Robin grew
     very proud of his red breast which was stained by the dyes of the
     glowing sky.

     Near the foot of King Robin's tree a Little Gray Mouse had his
     nest, and as the weather was neither too warm nor too cold, the
     Little Gray Mouse often sat outside his door and visited with King
     Robin.

     One day they were talking about the Great White Bear. The Great
     White Bear lived in a cave. The cave was very large, and in one
     corner of it the Great White Bear had his nest. The Little Gray
     Mouse said to King Robin: "I am not afraid of the Great White Bear.
     Are you?"

     And King Robin answered, "Yes, I am very much afraid of the Great
     White Bear."

     "I dare go into his cave, and tangle his fur!" said the Little Gray
     Mouse.

     "I would not do that, if I were you!" said King Robin. "If the
     Great White Bear grew angry, he might do something terrible to
     you!"

     "Pooh!" said the Little Gray Mouse, "who is afraid of a bear? I
     will stay in his cave all night, and tangle his fur into little
     hard knots!"

     And that night while the Great White Bear was hunting in the
     woods, the Little Gray Mouse slipped into his cave and hid himself
     in a corner of the rocks.

     But when the Great White Bear came home he smelled the Little Gray
     Mouse and roared: "Some mouse is hiding in my cave! I smell a
     mouse!" Then the Great White Bear listened to hear what the mouse
     had to say, but the Little Gray Mouse was very much frightened, and
     was trembling all over and did not say a word.

     The Great White Bear was very tired, so he thought that he would
     not catch the Little Gray Mouse until morning, so he crawled into
     his nest and went to sleep.

     When the Great White Bear was sound asleep and snoring, the Little
     Gray Mouse came from the corner of the rocks and tangled the Great
     White Bear's tail fur into little hard knots.

     The next morning when the Great White Bear awoke he found that the
     Little Gray Mouse had tangled his tail fur into little hard knots,
     and the Great White Bear was very angry, and said to the mouse:

     "I let you sleep in my warm cave and then you tangled my tail fur
     into little hard knots!"

     The Little Gray Mouse was so frightened that he ran out of the cave
     and hid in the woods.

     The Great White Bear sat down and tried to untangle the little hard
     knots, but his tail was so short, and the place where his tail fur
     was tangled was so hard to reach that the Great White Bear could
     not untangle his tail fur, and he kept getting angrier every
     minute, and at last he became so furious that he rushed from his
     cave and began tearing the woods to pieces to find the Little Gray
     Mouse. But the Little Gray Mouse hid under some leaves, and the
     Great White Bear could not find him.

     The Great White Bear saw King Robin sitting in his tree. "Tell me,
     King Robin, where I can find the Little Gray Mouse?"

     "I do not know where the Little Gray Mouse may be!" said King
     Robin. "He is hiding in the woods!"

     Then the Great White Bear sat down and thought, and thought, and
     thought, and at last he said: "I am going to find the Little Gray
     Mouse if I have to freeze the woods! You have always been a good
     friend of mine, King Robin, and I dislike to put you to any
     trouble, but if I were you I would take my family and go across the
     lakes and over the mountains and along the river to the great bay!"

     King Robin thought that the Great White Bear was joking, but the
     Great White Bear stood in the door of his cave and blew the cold
     air into the woods, and soon the frost from his cold breath
     whitened the twigs of the trees, and turned the leaves many strange
     and beautiful colors.

     "What a pretty woods you are making!" said King Robin to the Great
     White Bear, but the Great White Bear only answered:

     "If I were you I would take my family and go across the lakes, and
     over the mountains, and along the river to the great bay!"

     And the next night the Great White Bear stood in the door of his
     cave and blew his cold breath through the woods, and when the
     morning came the bare branches of the trees were singing in the
     wind, and the leaves were drifting in the hollows, and King Robin
     and his family were cold and hungry.

     "If I were you, I would take my family and go across the lakes and
     over the mountains, and along the river to the great bay!" said the
     Great White Bear to King Robin.

     And that night the Great White Bear stood in the door of his cave
     and blew his cold breath through the woods, and when the morning
     came the ground was white with snow, and the streams were covered
     with ice, and the Great White Bear saw King Robin sitting in his
     tree,--"If I were you, I would take my family and go across the
     lakes and over the mountains, and along the river to the great
     bay."

     Then King Robin called his family together, and repeated to them
     what the Great White Bear had told him,--"Across the lakes and over
     the mountains and along the river to the great bay!" and King Robin
     made each one repeat it over and over again,--"Across the lakes,
     and over the mountains, and along the river to the great bay."

     And that very day while the snow was still falling and the cold
     breath of the Great White Bear was blowing through the woods, King
     Robin led his family southward across the lakes and over the
     mountains, and along the river to the great bay, and they could
     feel the cold breath of the Great White Bear on their backs until
     they reached the great bay.

     And the Great White Bear blew his cold breath through the woods
     until the forest was deep with snow, and the frosty air sparkled at
     night, and the frozen trees snapped with the cold. "Now I have
     frozen the Little Gray Mouse!" said the Great White Bear to
     himself, and he went back to his cave and slept until the woods
     were warm with the breath of the south wind, and King Robin was
     back in his tree.

     And that is the story of the first Winter, and we should never have
     had another were it not for the foolish Little Gray Mouse, who was
     hidden all winter under the snow. For if the Little Gray Mouse
     would but be content to stay well hidden from the Great White Bear,
     then we should have no more Winter, but in the Fall the foolish
     Little Gray Mouse runs through the corn stubble and the Great White
     Bear sees him. "There goes the Little Gray Mouse who tangled my
     tail fur!" roars the Great White Bear, and again he blows his cold
     breath through the woods, and over the country, and all the cold
     weather we have is on account of that foolish Little Gray Mouse who
     tangled the tail fur of the Great White Bear!

When Robert Robin had finished speaking, Mrs. Robin said, "Now,
children, you must all repeat what the Great White Bear told King
Robin,--'Across the lakes and over the mountains, and along the river to
the great bay.'" Then all the youngster robins repeated, "Across the
lakes and over the mountains, and along the river to the great bay," and
while they were talking, the cool wind began to blow from out the north,
and Mrs. Robin said, "Feel how cold that wind is getting! The Great
White Bear must have seen the Little Gray Mouse!"




CHAPTER IX

MISTER ROBERT ROBIN HAS A BATTLE WITH THE SPARROWS


One morning Mister Robert Robin was awake earlier than usual. The wind
was blowing cold and chilly, and the stars were shining out of a cold
sky. The faintest glow was to be seen in the east, but that was enough
to prove to Robert Robin that morning was about to break. Yet Robert
Robin did not sing his Hurry-up song.

It was so cold and chilly that he did not feel like singing, and
besides, he thought to himself, "Why should I awaken the birds and
squirrels on a cold morning like this? There is nothing for them to do,
so I will let them sleep!"

So Robert Robin took a little nap, and when he awoke the sun was just
coming up, and then Robert Robin could see the frost. The roofs of the
farmer's buildings were covered with it, and so were the fence rails,
and even the leaves of the big basswood were white in places.

Mister Tom Squirrel was running through the woods telling everyone that
there had been a frost, and that the chestnut burrs would soon be open.
Mister Tom Squirrel was very much pleased, but Robert Robin could not
help feeling sad. For he knew that Winter was coming, and that the Great
White Bear was blowing his cold breath through the woods.

That very day the leaves of the big basswood turned brown, and were
dead, but the leaves of the apple trees still shone with a glossy green.
The apple tree seemed to like the frost.

Robert Robin did not sing at all, he felt as if he had lost something.

In the afternoon Mrs. Robin said: "When do we go across the lakes, and
over the mountains, and along the river to the great bay?"

"We might start to-day," answered Robert Robin. "Let us call the
children and go at once. We should be able to get as far as Watkins
Glen, or Elmira."

"Then we could sleep in the Glen!" said Mrs. Robin.

"There are too many crows in the Glen!" said Robert Robin, "but if we
reached Elmira, we might stay with Cousin Phineas, who lives on the
Heights!"

"Let us call the children and start right away!" said Mrs. Robin.

All the youngster robins came hurrying at the call, except little
Sheldon. But little Sheldon could not be found, and though all the
robins searched and called he did not answer nor come in sight.

"Where _can_ that child be?" said Mrs. Robin. "We cannot go south and
leave him here all alone!"

"No!" said Robert Robin. "That would never do! The owls might get him!"

Jim Crow came flying along and asked, "What seems to be the trouble,
folks?"

"We have lost little Sheldon!" said Robert Robin.

"Where did you lose him?" asked Jim Crow.

"We lost him from where he isn't!" said Robert Robin.

"You keep on looking where he isn't, and I will go and look where he
is!" said Jim Crow, as he flew away.

"He may be playing with those Nuthatch boys!" said Mrs. Robin.

All the robins kept searching the woods for little Sheldon, but Mister
Jim Crow flew over to Brigg's Brambles, and in a very short time he came
hurrying back and called to Robert Robin:

"Little Sheldon is over in Brigg's Brambles playing I-spy with Billy
Nuthatch!"

"Thank you very much, Mister Crow!" said Robert Robin, as he sped over
to Brigg's Brambles to get little Sheldon.

Little Sheldon did not want to come away. He was playing I-spy with
Billy Nuthatch, and it was his turn to go and hide, so Robert Robin
said, "You may hide just this once, then we must go!"

Little Billy Nuthatch "blinded" behind a big stump, and little Sheldon
whispered, "Come on, Daddy!" to Robert Robin, and both of them flew away
as fast as they could. And that was the reason why little Billy Nuthatch
hunted all that Fall for little Sheldon Robin, and never found him.

Robert Robin and his family were now ready to start for the south.
"Across the lakes, and over the mountains, and along the river to the
great bay!" repeated Robert Robin, and all the rest of the robins
repeated it after him,--"Across the lakes, and over the mountains, and
along the river to the great bay!"

Over the little lakes they flew, higher and higher into the air, until
the mountains were crossed, and the river lay in the wide valley below
them. The river itself seemed a blue ribbon on a carpet of brown and
green. Hardly a sound came from below, but the noise of their own wing
pinions as they whistled through the air made a sound like the panting
of tiny engines,--"Swish-swish-swish-swish!" as Robert Robin led his
family towards the warm south.

"Isn't that Elmira?" asked Mrs. Robin.

"Yes, my dear!" answered Robert Robin, "and we will soon be with Cousin
Phineas."

In a few moments they were all perched in the tree where Cousin Phineas
had his nest. But Cousin Phineas was not at home. He had gone to Big
Flats after sweet corn; Mister Oliver Sparrow came fluttering into the
tree and asked:

"Hi sye, Old Top, don't you know that this is not a public camping spot?
We 'ave no accommodations for tourists! Better keep moving or Hi'll call
the force!" That made Robert Robin very angry, and he hopped very close
to where Mister Oliver Sparrow was sitting and said, "In the country
where I came from, we robins do not let an impudent little sparrow even
speak to us, but I will not pull the feathers out of your back this
time, if you will kindly tell me where my Cousin Phineas is to-day!"

"Hi! Hi! Fellows!" shouted Oliver Sparrow. "'Ere's a country robin what
is a cousin of Phin's! Come and 'elp me pick 'em!"

[Illustration: The sparrows came rushing at Robert Robin and his family.
(Page 105) (Exciting Adventures of Mr. Robert Robin)]

Screaming and shouting at the tops of their voices, scores of sparrows
came rushing straight at Robert Robin and his family. Robert Robin was
very angry, and the first sparrow that came within the reach of his
strong bill, he sent reeling to the ground. Robert Robin shook the
feathers from his bill and struck the next and the next. The air was
full of the wicked sparrows. They came from the alleys, and from the
parks, from behind the houses and stores, until a cloud of them hung
above the maple tree, and filled the air with their screams.

Mrs. Robin and the youngster robins stayed close to the trunk of the
maple, but Robert Robin scorned to seek shelter, and bravely fought
against the great odds. Sparrow after sparrow went fluttering to the
earth under the swift blows of Robert Robin's strong bill, but on they
came by scores, and Robert Robin was beginning to tire.

A woman was sitting in a rocking chair by her front porch window. She
was reading a book and she was not paying any attention to the birds.

Her husband was a night watch, and he slept during the day.

"What are those pesky sparrows making so much noise about?" he called
from his bedroom. "They keep me awake with their heckling!"

"They are fighting some robins in the maple tree!" said the woman.

"Let the cat out!" said the man.

The woman got up from her rocking chair and let her yellow cat out of
the back door.

The big yellow cat heard the sparrows screaming, and tiptoed around the
house until he came in sight of the maple tree. When the big yellow cat
saw the flock of sparrows in the maple tree, he said to himself, "I will
creep close to those birds, then I will pounce upon one and have it for
my supper!"

The big yellow cat crouched under the barberry hedge and crept towards
the sparrows.

Oliver Sparrow came flying straight at Robert Robin's red breast. Quick
as a flash Robert Robin struck with his strong bill, and Oliver Sparrow
fell towards the ground. It was then that the big yellow cat sprang from
under the hedge.

"A cat! A cat! A cat!" screamed all the sparrows, and away they flew
back to the alleys, and parks, and behind the houses and stores, leaving
Robert Robin, and Mrs. Robert Robin, and all their children very tired
but unharmed.

"Kitty! Kitty! Kitty! Kitty! Kitty!" called the woman, and the big
yellow cat went bounding across the lawn.

Just then Cousin Phineas came home.

"My stars! If there isn't Cousin Robert, and all his folks!" shouted
Cousin Phineas. "Welcome to our city!"

"Glad to see you again, Cousin Phineas!" said Robert Robin. "But I
cannot say that I like your neighbors!"

"Have those wicked sparrows been here again?" asked Cousin Phineas.

"I have just had a fine fight with more sparrows than I ever saw before
in all my life!" said Robert Robin.

"It must have been that Oliver Sparrow and his gang!" said Cousin
Phineas. "They are very bad birds! I hope they did not hurt you?"

"Not a scratch!" said Robert Robin, "but see the sparrow feathers on the
ground under this tree!"

"Well! Well!" said Cousin Phineas. "There are enough sparrow feathers to
make a nest!"

"I pulled one out!" shouted little Sheldon, and sure enough the bold
little robin was still holding a sparrow's feather in his bill.

"He is _so_ much like his father!" said Mrs. Robin, "and some day he
will be a great big man-robin and whip all the naughty sparrows, just
like Daddy does!"

"He makes me think of our young Timothy!" said Cousin Phineas. "I am
sorry he is not here! He is a very bright youngster! My folks have gone
south for the Winter, but you must stay overnight with me, just the
same."

"We just dropped in to make a call, but, as you say, it _is_ getting
rather late, so if it is not too much trouble, we will accept your
invitation to remain overnight!" said Robert Robin.

"Good! Then we will spend the night at the Reformatory!" said Cousin
Phineas, as he led the way over to the Reformatory trees.

Neither Cousin Phineas nor Robert Robin felt like singing a "Good-night"
song, so little Sheldon perched on the top of a tall elm and sang one
himself.

"Very good, Sheldon!" said Robert Robin.

"Very good, Sheldon!" said Cousin Phineas. "You have a very remarkable
youngster there, Cousin Robert! He can sing a song and knows neither the
tune nor the words! Very remarkable! Very remarkable!"




CHAPTER X

ROBERT ROBIN AND HIS FAMILY GO SOUTH


The next morning after Robert Robin and his family had stayed overnight
with Cousin Phineas, a heavy frost whitened the roofs of the buildings
and covered the fields with a carpet of frost diamonds. The white smoke
from the many chimneys of the city floated upward in great fluffy cones
until it seemed that the fluffy cones of snowy smoke were columns which
bound the city to the sky.

"What strange-looking clouds you have here in Elmira!" said Mrs. Robin
to Cousin Phineas.

"Yes! We have them go straight up so that we may fly between them!" said
Cousin Phineas. "But how about a little breakfast?"

"I was just thinking about the same thing!" said Robert Robin, "and
after our long trip, I am sure that we are hungry enough to eat almost
anything!"

"There are frozen apples in Arnot's orchard, frozen grapes on Sullivan
Hill, poison-ivy berries near Big Flats, and sumach bobs on the road to
Millport!" said Cousin Phineas. "So you may have your choice!"

"Let us try the sumach bobs!" said Mrs. Robin. "I have not tasted one
this season! They must be delicious after this hard frost!"

A railroad wound along the mountain side, and its right of way was lined
with sumach bushes whose upper twigs were red with the crimson bobs, and
it was here that Cousin Phineas brought Robert Robin's family.

"These are very fine sumach bobs!" said Robert Robin. "They are the
finest I ever tasted!"

"Their rich flavor comes from the engine smoke! This railroad has the
best smoke of any railroad in this part of the country! Nothing
improves the flavor of a sumach bob like nice black smoke!"

"I found a stone in my sumach bob!" shouted little Sheldon.

"Hush! Child! It is nothing but a cinder!" said Cousin Phineas. "And
cinders are good for coughs! But I would not eat too many of them. They
are hard to digest!"

When all the robins had eaten as many sumach bobs as they cared for,
Robert Robin said:

"Cousin Phineas, we have enjoyed our stay with you, but it is a long way
to the south, so we must hurry along!"

And Cousin Phineas said: "I wish that you had time to stay a week, but I
know that you must be in a hurry so I will not coax you to stay this
time, but now that you have found the way, you must come and see me
often. Be sure and stop when you come back in the Spring. You will find
me around here somewhere. I am planning to spend the winter in Elmira
and vicinity!"

"Good-by, Cousin Phineas!" said Robert Robin. "Good-by, Cousin
Phineas!" said all the rest, and away they flew into the sky, and soon
all that Cousin Phineas could see of them was ten tiny dots against a
high gray cloud.

"Swish! Swish! Swish!" went the sound of wings against the still, thin
air. Below Robert Robin and his family the valley of the river widened
into fertile farm lands. The glitter of the polished steel of the
railroad rails flashed to their eyes under the rays of the morning sun.

"This is going to be a fine day for our trip!" said Mrs. Robin.

"It couldn't be better!" said Robert Robin. "There is just enough breeze
to help in our flying; we should reach the great bay before night!"

The youngster robins were very much interested in seeing the new
country. The valley continued to widen beneath them, villages and cities
appeared, and great locomotives, puffing clouds of smoke, pulled long
trains, and pierced the air with screaming whistles; but what interested
the youngster robins still more were the other birds. Far above, and as
far as could be seen on either side, the air seemed alive with them.
There were crows, and thrushes, and flickers, and birds of many other
kinds. Large birds, small birds, big birds, and little birds. Black and
brown and gray and blue and yellow and red, and birds of all colors in
between.

Flying so high that they could not be seen from the earth, it looked to
the youngster robins as if all the birds in the world were going south
for the winter. Robins, robins, everywhere! Hundreds of them flying in
little family groups or mingled together in great flocks. Robert Robin
kept saying, "Kirk! Kirk!" so that none of the children would get lost.

"Keep close to your father, children!" said Mrs. Robin. "If you should
ever get lost in this crowd, we could no more find you again than we
could find Jim Crow on a dark night!"

A flock of wild geese called from overhead, and frightened little
Sheldon very much. They were such big birds; flying close together,
their powerful wings driving their heavy bodies swiftly through the air.
Their hoarse-voiced leader honked his loud calls as he led the line,
which, straight and true as a file of drilled soldiers, sweeping in
perfect formation a half mile on either side, was so different from
anything that little Sheldon had ever seen that the little robin
screamed, "Help! Help! Help! There comes a row of fat hawks!"

"Those are wild geese and they will not hurt you, child!" said Robert
Robin.

"What makes them fly so close together?" asked little Sheldon.

"They came from where the fog banks roll over the ice of the north!"
said Robert Robin, "and they have learned to fly closely together so
that they will not get lost from each other in the fogs."

The swift-winged geese were traveling much faster than the robins, and
soon they were far ahead of Robert Robin and his family.

"Why do they fly so fast?" asked Evelina.

"They have far to go!" answered Robert Robin, "and they must hurry or
they will be late in getting there!"

"There is our White Spring!" shouted Mrs. Robin. "Let us stop there a
while and get some new sand for our crops!"

So Robert Robin led his family down to the White Spring.

White Spring was a tiny little spring which gushed from the shady side
of a glen. There were no houses nor other buildings near, and very few
people knew that there was such a place as White Spring, but Robert
Robin's father had known of it and he had led Robert Robin to its tiny
basin, and Robert Robin had shown the spring to Mrs. Robin.

The tired robins were glad to drink of its clear cool water which gushed
out of the whitest sand.

"Fill your crops with this nice sharp sand, children!" said Mrs. Robin.
"You will need good sand in your crops to digest those Virginia bugs!"

So all the robins filled their crops with the fine white sand, then
Robert Robin sat down to rest.

"Do you remember the first time that I brought you to this spring?" he
asked Mrs. Robin.

"Oh, yes! Indeed I do!" said Mrs. Robin. "That was when we were on our
honeymoon!"

"There were many other robins around here then!" said Robert Robin. "Do
you remember that Miss Lena Robin you were so jealous of?" laughed
Robert Robin.

"I might have been jealous of her, but at least I was very polite to her
and was not rude like you were to that handsome young Mister Percival
Robin, whom you were so insanely jealous of! I remember your trying to
knock him into the spring, and raving around like mad! Why! You chased
him clear over that hill and you were simply too funny for anything, and
all because he was very polite to me and he _was_ rather good looking!"
said Mrs. Robin.

"Good looking?" said Robert Robin. "Good looking? Why! his head looked
like a woodpecker's, and his tail looked like a chickadee's, and his
legs were long enough for a killdeer!"

"That Miss Lena Robin, you were so infatuated with,----"

"Infatuated with?" screamed Robert Robin. "I barely remember how she
looked. But she was not so bad looking! She had pretty eyes, and a
charming manner, but what she could see about that long-legged Percival
is a mystery to me!"

"What he could see about her is a deeper mystery!" said Mrs. Robin, "but
let us not quarrel about those people,--they are nothing to me."

"Nor to me!" said Robert Robin. "Call the children and we will be on our
way!"

So Mrs. Robin called the youngster robins from the patch of bushes where
they had been playing I-spy, and all of them whirred away into the
higher air on their way to the warm south, and the sound of their wings
as they followed close behind Robert Robin went "Swish! Swish! Swish!"
like the panting of tiny engines.

THE END

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE SUNNYBROOK SERIES

By MRS. ELSIE M. ALEXANDER

Cloth Bound, 12 mo. Jackets in Full Color Illustrations in Color Colored
End Papers, Illus.

A remarkably well told, instructive series of stories of animals, their
characteristics and the exciting incidents in their lives. Young people
will find these tales of animal life filled with a true and intimate
knowledge of nature lore.

THE HAPPY FAMILY OF BEECHNUT GROVE (PETER GRAY SQUIRREL AND FAMILY)

BUSTER RABBIT, THE EXPLORER (THE BUNNY RABBIT FAMILY)

ADVENTURES OF TUDIE (THE FIELD MOUSE)

TABITHA DINGLE (THE FAMOUS CAT OF SUNNYBROOK MEADOW)

ROODY AND HIS UNDERGROUND PALACE (MR. WOODCHUCK IN HIS HAPPY HOME)

BUFF AND DUFF (CHILDREN OF MRS. WHITE-HEN)

A. L. BURT COMPANY, Publishers
114-120 EAST 23rd STREET NEW YORK

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BLUE DOMERS

By JEAN FINLEY

Cloth Bound, 12 mo. Illustrations in Color
Jackets in Full Color Colored End Papers, Illus.

Vivid, refreshing stories of children and animals are always enjoyed by
young readers. These informative tales, dealing with the activities of a
number of children, are told with an ease and simplicity of style. The
combined charm of magic and the great out-doors adds a delightful touch
to these distinctive stories.

THE BLUE DOMERS
THE BLUE DOMERS' ALPHABET ZOO
THE BLUE DOMERS IN THE DEEP WOODS
THE BLUE DOMERS AND THE WISHING TREE
THE BLUE DOMERS UNDER WINTER SKIES
THE BLUE DOMERS AND THE MAGIC FLUTE

A. L. BURT COMPANY, Publishers
114-120 EAST 23rd STREET NEW YORK





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Exciting Adventures of Mister Robert
Robin, by Ben Field

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROBERT ROBIN ***

***** This file should be named 20833.txt or 20833.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/8/3/20833/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
