The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Russia, by R. Van Bergen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of Russia

Author: R. Van Bergen

Release Date: March 23, 2007 [EBook #20880]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF RUSSIA ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Christine P.
Travers and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's note: Obvious printer's errors have been corrected,
all other inconsistencies are as in the original.
Author's spelling has been maintained.
Missing page numbers correspond to moved illustrations.]


[Illustration: Map]




                         THE STORY OF RUSSIA


                                  BY

                          R. VAN BERGEN, M.A.

                     AUTHOR OF "THE STORY OF JAPAN,"
                       "THE STORY OF CHINA," ETC.




                    NEW YORK-:-CINCINNATI-:-CHICAGO
                         AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY




                            Copyright, 1905,
                       By AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY

                  Entered at Stationers' Hall, London

                           STORY OF RUSSIA

                               W. P. 2.




To

HENRY MATHER LOWMAN

AMICUS CERTUS RE INCERTA CERNITUR.




PREFACE.


Recent events have drawn the attention upon Russia, a country of which
but little is known here, because the intercourse between it and the
United States has been limited. In my frequent journeys to the Far
East, I found it often difficult to comprehend events because, while I
could not help perceiving that the impulse leading to them came from
Russia, it was impossible to discover what prompted the government of
the czar. I felt the necessity to study the history of Russia, and
found it so fascinating, that I resolved to place it in a condensed
form before the students in our schools. They must be the judges of
how I have succeeded.

                                        R. VAN BERGEN.




CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER                                                     PAGE

      I. The Realm of the Czar                                  13

     II. Early Records of Russia                                23

    III. The Norsemen (or Varingians) in Russia                 29

     IV. Saint Vladimir and Iaroslaf the Great                  41

      V. A Russian Republic                                     49

     VI. Troublous Times                                        57

    VII. The Yellow Peril                                       63

   VIII. Russia Under the Mongol Yoke                           71

     IX. Lithuania and Moscow                                   79

      X. Decline of the Tartar Power. Dmitri Donskoi            87

     XI. Ivan III, the Great                                    97

    XII. Russia becomes an Autocracy                           106

   XIII. Ivan IV, the Terrible                                 111

    XIV. Russia Under Ivan the Terrible                        122

     XV. Feodor, the Last of Rurik's Descendants               129

    XVI. Michael Feodorovitch (Son of Theodore) the
         First Romanof                                         137

   XVII. Early Years of Peter the Great (Peter
         Alexievitch)                                          145

  XVIII. Peter the Great and His Reign                         153

    XIX. Peter the Great and His Time                          162

     XX. The Successors of Peter the Great                     173

    XXI. Russia Under Catherine II (the Great)                 183

   XXII. Russia During the Wars of Napoleon                    194

  XXIII. An Eventful Period                                    208

   XXIV. Alexander II, the Liberator                           219

    XXV. Great Events During Alexander's Reign
         Nihilism                                              229

   XXVI. Alexander III, the Peasants' Friend                   241

  XXVII. Russia Methods: The War with Japan                    251

 XXVIII. The Origin and Growth of The Asiatic Empire           259

   XXIX. Russian Methods. The War with Japan                   267

    XXX. Russia Loses her Prestige                             277




THE STORY OF RUSSIA.




I--THE REALM OF THE CZAR.                                          (p. 013)


When we think of our country, we feel proud of it for other and better
reasons than its great size. We know how its extent compares with that
of other nations; we know that the United States covers an area almost
equal to that of Europe, and, more favored than that Grand Division,
is situated on the two great highways of commerce, the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans. Europe is as far from the latter, as Asia is from the
former; and these highways, powerful means toward creating prosperity,
remain at the same time barriers whereby nations that find greater
delight in the arts of war than in those of peace, are restrained from
disturbing our national progress.

At the beginning of this twentieth century the nations upon which
depends the world's peace or war, happiness or misfortune, are the
United States, Great Britain, Germany, France, Austria-Hungary, Italy,
Russia, Japan, and in the near future China. Here we see that Europe,
although little larger in area than the United States, is represented
by seven nations, Asia by two, and the Western Hemisphere by one which
by its institutions stands for peace and progress, for law and     (p. 014)
order. Hence we, its citizens, are known all over the world as
Americans.

If we compare the area occupied by the several European powers with
that covered by the main body of our republic, that is, not including
Alaska and other outlying territories, we find that Austria-Hungary
has four thousand square miles less than Texas, while Germany lacks
forty thousand square miles in comparison with the Lone Star State.
France is four thousand square miles less than Germany, and Italy is
only a thousand square miles greater than Nevada. The British Kingdom
in Europe is about twice the area of Illinois. Among the great nations
of the world, aside from outlying possessions beyond the Grand
Division, our country stands third, and should occupy the second
place, because China, the next larger, owes its greater area to
territories over which she has little or no control, and which she
seems destined to lose.

The largest country is Russia, covering as it does one-sixth of all
the land on the earth. This empire, although inhabited by people
differing in race, religion, and customs, is one compact whole. It
embraces in Europe 2,113,000 square miles, or more than all other
European nations combined; its area in Asia is 6,672,000 square miles,
making a total of 8,785,000 square miles, or 2.8 times as many as the
main body of our country. All the people living in this immense
empire, whatever their race, religion, or language, obey the will of
_one man_. We, who dwell in our beloved country, yield obedience only
to the Law; but the laws are made by ourselves, and they allow us  (p. 015)
to do as we please, so long as we do not interfere with others who
have the same rights; and those laws are ever ready to protect us. In
Russia laws are made or unmade at the will of one person who is
himself above the laws. Every man, woman, or child, born and living in
that country, is at his mercy. Mere suspicion is sufficient to drag a
man from his family and home, perhaps to disappear without leaving a
trace. Such a government is called an autocracy, and the man who may
thus dispose of people's life and property, is known as an Autocrat.
Hence the title of the Emperor of Russia is: Autocrat of All the
Russias.

Why "All the Russias"? Look at the map of Eurasia, the continent
embracing the two Grand Divisions Europe and Asia. You will see that
the Russian Empire is bounded on the north by the Arctic Ocean; on the
east by the Bering Strait, the Bering Sea, the Sea of Okhotsk, and the
Japan Sea; on the south by China, Pamir, Afghanistan, Persia, Asiatic
Turkey, and the Black Sea; and on the west by Roumania,
Austria-Hungary, the German Empire, the Baltic Sea, Sweden, and
Norway. This immense empire is the growth of many centuries, and even
in Europe it has not yet been welded into one whole. When we read
Russian books, we learn about Great and Little Russia, White and Red
Russia, which shows that divisions of bygone years are still observed
by the people. Much has been done towards effacing those boundary
lines; but the fact that the czar, autocrat though he is, recognizes
and admits the division in his title, shows that even he is, to some
extent, subject to public opinion.

Russia in Europe, however, with the exception of Poland and        (p. 016)
Finland, is a country with one religion and one language; that is, the
czar and his government recognize and admit no other. That is the
cause of the persecution of the Jews, four fifths of whom dwell in the
southwest of Russia in an area covering 356,681 square miles, which is
sometimes mentioned as the Jewish territory. Every succeeding czar has
tried to make all his subjects think and act in the manner prescribed
by him. The process is known as "Russianizing," and goes on
incessantly in its different stages. Immediately after the conquest of
a country, its people are assured that their religion, institutions,
and language, shall be respected; the only difference is that the
native officials are displaced by Russians. This continues until
Russian rule is firmly established, and no one dreams of resisting the
czar. Then the Russian language displaces the native tongue, and if
disturbances occur, the military is called in to inflict a terrible
punishment. The loss of the native language carries with it that of
old institutions, and when the people have submitted to their fate, it
is the turn of their religion. The Russian is in no hurry; he has a
conviction that time has no changes in store for his empire, hence he
bides his time, and is likely to succeed in his purpose. This process
is now carried on in Central Asia where Russian power has found its
greatest expansion in modern times. It is but fair to admit that
Russian absorption there has been highly beneficial because robber
tribes were reduced to law and order.

[Illustration: Russia]

Before telling the Story of Russia, that is, of how the huge empire
was formed and grew to its present size, it is necessary to become (p. 018)
better acquainted with the aspect and nature of the country. Looking
at the map of the Eurasian continent, that is, the continent embracing
Europe and Asia, we cannot fail to notice that Russia is a country of
the plains. Its southern boundary seems to follow the mountain
barriers which divide Asia into two parts. Does it not seem as if long
billows of earth roll down toward the Arctic Ocean, where they rest
benumbed by the eternal cold? These mountains branch off toward the
south, east or west, but scorn to throw so much as a spur northward.
It is true that a solitary chain, the Urals, runs north and south, but
it stands by itself, and is nothing more than what the word Ural
signifies, a _belt_ or _girdle_ separating the European from his
Asiatic brother. These mountains do not form the backbone of a
country, nor do they serve as a watershed, like our Rocky Mountains or
the Andes of South America. Some of their peaks rise to a height of
6,000 feet above the level of the sea, but the chain, 1531 miles long,
seems destined only to keep the two races apart.

Beyond the Ural mountains, the plain resumes its sway. This extensive
flat could not fail to exert a noticeable influence upon the country
and its inhabitants. The dense forests in the north, while acting as a
screen, do not afford protection against the icy polar winds which
sweep with scarcely diminished force over the broad expanse, so that
the northern shores of the Black and Caspian Seas in January have
about the same temperature as Stockholm, the capital of Sweden. The
mountains of Western Europe shut off the aerial current of the Gulf
Stream which tempers the summer heat as well as the winter cold.   (p. 019)
Russia's climate, therefore, is one of extremes. In summer the
heat is very oppressive, owing to the absence of the sea breeze which
elsewhere affords so much relief; and when a wind does blow, it only
adds to the discomfort, because it has lost its moisture. That is the
reason why Russia suffers so often from drought. This is especially
the case in the south where no forests are found to attract rain.

Nature has provided a substitute in the splendid waterways. In about
the center of European Russia, rises the Valdai plateau to a height of
1,100 feet above the sea level. This is Russia's great watershed. Near
it, in Lake Volgo, rises the largest river of Europe, "Mother Volga,"
as the Russian ballad singers love to call it. Its entire length is
2,336 miles, or nearly the length of the Missouri; it has a basin of
590,000 square miles. Owing to the slight slope of the land, the great
river flows placidly in its bed, which is fortunate since its Waters
are swollen by several large rivers, so that there are points where it
is seventeen miles wide. The Kama, one of the tributaries of the
Volga, is 1,266 miles long; the Oka, another confluent, has a length
of 633 miles. At Kazan, the Volga is 4,953 feet wide, at Jaroslaf
2,106 feet, and at Samara, 2,446 feet. It empties into the Caspian
Sea, with a delta of more than seventy branches. The fish caught in
this river often grow to gigantic proportions; its sturgeons,
lampreys, and salmon, are highly prized. Since time immemorial, the
Volga has been a great highway of trade. Kostroma, Nishni Novgorod,
Kazan, Simbirsk, Saratof, and Astrakhan, are the most populous cities
on its banks.

Other large rivers rise on the Valdai plateau. The Dnieper runs    (p. 020)
south, passing by Kief, and empties in the Black Sea, near Odessa. The
Dwina runs northward, seeking the icy Arctic, which it enters by way
of the White Sea near Archangel. The Duena takes a westerly course
towards the Gulf of Riga where it empties near the city of that name.
Of greater importance are the small streams which feed Lakes Ladoga
and Onega, because they connect Central Russia with the Baltic Sea by
means of the Neva.

European Russia is usually divided into four zones or belts, from the
character of the soil and the nature of its productions; their general
direction is from southwest to northeast. In the north, as a screen
against the Arctic blast, is the _poliessa_ or forest region, densely
covered with lindens, birches, larches, and sycamores, with oaks on
the southern fringe. These forests are invaluable to Russia where, in
the absence of mountains, stone is scarce. The houses are built of
wood, and fires are of common occurrence. Both lumber and fuel are
supplied by these forests which originally extended to Novgorod,
Moscow, and Jaroslaf. The increase in population together with the
growing demand for lumber, have caused extensive clearings; but the
area covered by the forests is so large, that the supply is well-nigh
inexhaustible.

South of this zone are the black earth lands, extending down to the
Caucasus and across the Urals, and covering in Europe an area of one
hundred and fifty million acres,--equal to that of Texas. This zone
derives its name from an apparently inexhaustible bed of black     (p. 021)
mold, so rich that no manure is required to produce abundant crops.
Until late in the last century, and before the United States began to
export its surplus harvests, this region was considered the granary of
Europe. It was known in very old times since we read of it in the
Heroic Age of Ancient Greece, when Jason sailed in the Argo to bring
home the Golden Fleece.

Almost equal in extent is the zone of arable steppes, or prairies,
once the home of the Cossack, the nomad who led here the life of a
shepherd king, moving about as the condition of pasture and flock
required. Most of this land is now under cultivation, and with careful
farming produces good crops. These arable steppes cover an area equal
to that of Iowa, Kansas, and Nebraska.

The fourth and last zone is that of the barren steppes. There is ample
evidence that at some remote time these plains were covered with salt
water. The Caspian Sea has a level eighty feet below that of the Black
Sea, and it is therefore probable that here was a large inland sea of
which the Caspian and Aral Seas are the remains. These steppes are
unfit for farming. Here dwell the Kalmucks and Kirghizes, descendants
of the Tartars whose yoke once pressed heavily upon Russia.

[Illustration: Russian Peasants]                                   (p. 022)




II--EARLY RECORDS OF RUSSIA.                                       (p. 023)


At an early period in the history of Greece, we hear of colonies
established on the northern shore of the Pontus Euxinus or Hospitable
Sea, as they named the Black Sea. We may even now recognize some of
the names of those colonies, such as Odessos, at the mouth of the Bug,
Tyras, at that of the Dniester, and Pityas where Colchis, the object
of the search of Jason and his fellow Argonauts, is supposed to have
been. In the fourth century before our era, some of these colonies
united under a hereditary _archon_ or governor, probably for the
purpose of securing better protection against the barbarians who dwelt
further inland.

The Greeks mention these barbarians as the Scythians, and divided them
into three classes. The agricultural Scythians dwelt in the black
earth belt, near the Dnieper; the nomad Scythians lived at some
distance to the east of them, and the royal Scythians occupied the
land around the Sea of Azof.

Learned men of Russia have made many excavations on the spots where
the Greek settlements once stood, during the past century. They have
been rewarded by finding many works of art, illustrating the mode of
living of the Scythians. They have been placed, and may be seen    (p. 024)
in the Hermitage museum of St. Petersburg. Among these relics of the
past are two beautifully engraved vases, one of gold, the other of
silver. The Scythians on the silver vase wear long hair and beards,
and are dressed in gowns or tunics, and bear a close resemblance to
the Russians of our time. These vases and other ancient objects
confirm what is said about these people by Herodotus, a Greek
historian who lived in the fourth century before Christ.

We learn from him that the Scythians worshiped a sword stuck into the
ground, representing the god of war, and that they made human
sacrifices. They drank the blood of the first enemy killed in battle,
scalped their prisoners, and used their skulls as drinking cups. In
the course of time the Greek civilization exerted its influence, and
penetrated to tribes dwelling much further in the north, as is shown
by the antiquities found in the government of Ekaterinoslaf.

The _orbis terrarum_ or world so far as it was known to the Greeks,
was centered about the Mediterranean; hence the name of that sea,
meaning Middle of the Land or Middle of the Earth. Beyond that there
was an unknown region, supposed to be inhabited by people of whom many
wonderful stories were told. Thus they believed in the existence of
the Arimaspians, a race of one-eyed people; there are legends, too, of
the Agrippei who were described as bald and snub-nosed. The Greeks
also mention the Gryphons, who, they said, were guardians of immense
quantities of gold. The most wonderful people to the Greeks were the
Hyperboreans, or dwellers beyond the regions of the north wind,    (p. 025)
who were looked upon with awe and pity because it was said that
they lived in a country where snow fell summer and winter. These were
some of the races and tribes supposed to inhabit Russia, which goes
far to prove that the knowledge of that country, in those times, was
neither extensive nor very accurate.

The truth is that we know very little about the early inhabitants of
Russia; nor do they concern us greatly, because grave changes occurred
in the fourth century of our era. At that time several large and
warlike tribes of Central Asia moved westward compelling other tribes
on their route to join them or to move ahead. Thus they gathered
strength until it looked as if Asia was bent upon the conquest of
Europe. They poured in through the gap between the Ural mountains and
the Caspian Sea, and the civilized people of southeastern Europe were
unable to cope with the savage hordes. In the vanguard were the Goths,
who made an effort to settle, in Scythia, but they were forced to move
on when Attila, who is known as the Scourge of God, swooped down upon
them with his Huns. He was followed by a host of Finns, Bulgarians,
Magyars, and Slavs who, however, left his wake, scattered and settled
down. Soon after the Slavs became known to Greek authors and were
described by them. They were divided into a number of tribes, among
them the Russian Slavs who settled about the sources of the Volga and
the Oka, and were the founders of Novgorod, Pskof, and Izborsk.

They must have been a numerous people. We hear of another tribe
settling on the banks of the Vistula, and laying the foundation of (p. 026)
the future kingdom of Poland. They settled on the upper Elbe, and in
the north of Germany. It is believed that the Slavs are ancestors of
the people in Bohemia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Servia, and Dalmatia, and in
Prussia of those living in Pomerania and Brandenburg.

All these Slavs, although widely dispersed, practiced the same heathen
rites, spoke the same language, and nursed the same traditions, until
they fell under different influences. They were, however, not the sole
occupants of northeastern Europe. Other races had followed in Attila's
wake, and among them the Finns were the most numerous and most
warlike. They settled in the basin of the Dwina and the Kama and named
their new home Biarmaland, while the Russians called it Great Permia.
They also occupied what is now known as Finland, but which was then
known as Land of the Suomi. The Finns, more than any other tribe, bore
evidence of their Asiatic origin.

Thus the present European Russia was divided among a host of tribes,
belonging either to the Slav or Finn families, and each kept to a
great extent the superstitions and traditions of his race. Even in our
time the traces of these superstitions are plainly discernible in many
parts of Russia. When Christianity was introduced among these people,
the missionaries found many of the barbaric rites so strongly
implanted among the people that, instead of making vain efforts to
uproot them, they preferred to admit them under a Christian name.

The religion of the Slavs bore a great resemblance to that of the
Norsemen and of the Germanic races; that is, they worshiped nature (p. 027)
and its phenomena. Dagh Bog was the sungod; Perun, the Thor of
northern mythology, was the god of thunder; Stri Bog, the god of the
winds; Voloss, the protector of flocks. They had neither temples nor
regular priests, but worshiped the oak as the symbol of Perun, and
before it the leaders offered sacrifices. These ancient deities are
preserved under the names of St. John, who displaced Perun; Voloss who
became St. Vlaise, etc. When a chief died, the wife often refused to
survive her husband. The men-servants were summoned and asked which of
them would be buried with his master. When one of them came forward,
he was immediately strangled. Then the same question was put to the
women servants, and if one of them consented, she was feasted until
the day when the funeral pyre awaited the corpse. She was then killed
and her body burned with that of her master. There were, however, some
tribes that buried their dead.

The father was absolute master of his family, but his authority did
not descend to the eldest son, but to the oldest of the family, his
brothers, if any were living, according to their age. The Slavs kept
several wives, and were given to consume large quantities of a strong
drink called kvass. They were a people devoted to agriculture; the
land under cultivation was not owned by one person or a family, but by
all the members of a community, or _mir_. The heads of the families
composing the mir assembled in a council or _vetche_, which had
authority over the mir. Only the house and the _dvor_ or inclosure,
and his share in the harvest, were the property of each householder.
In the course of time, several of these rural communities united   (p. 028)
in a canton or county, called a _volost_, which was then governed by a
council composed of the elders of several communes. It happened
sometimes that one of these elders, who was considered unusually wise
or powerful, became chief of the volost, a dignity which might become
hereditary. This was probably the origin of the boyards or nobles. As
a rule, the volosts were proud of their independence; they disliked
entangling alliances, although in time of danger or necessity they
would enter into a confederacy of all the counties belonging to the
same tribe, which was then called _plemia_. But it was always
understood that such an arrangement was temporary. In most of the
volosts, there was at least one spot fortified by earthen walls and
wooden palisades, where the people might take refuge in case of an
attack.

We know that some of the Slav tribes attained some degree of
civilization as early as the seventh century of our era. Novgorod was
a town, large for that time, which carried on a brisk trade with Asia.
This is amply proved by the discovery of Asiatic coins belonging to
that period. Although the favorite occupation of the Slavs was
agriculture, the construction of the fortified places suggests that
they were not averse to increase their wealth by an occasional raid
upon their unprepared neighbors. There is other evidence that
Novgorod, grown into a wealthy city in the middle of the ninth
century, longed for peace. No wonder that such a community sought for
means of security for its commerce. But the manner in which it
accomplished this desire, decided the fate of Russia.




III--THE NORSEMEN (OR VARINGIANS) IN RUSSIA.                       (p. 029)


It would have been strange indeed, if the bold Norsemen, the bold
buccaneers who in their frail craft pillaged the west coasts of Europe
and extended their voyages into the Mediterranean, should have omitted
to pay a visit to the shores of the Baltic Sea. We know that they
settled in England and France, and it causes no surprise when we read
that the Slavs in the neighborhood of the Baltic paid tribute to them.
They must have been exacting tax collectors, because we read also
that, in 859, the Slavs rose and expelled their visitors. Three years
later they returned at the invitation of the people of Novgorod.

Nestor, the historian of the Slav race, who lived in the twelfth
century, and whose account is remarkably clear and trustworthy, wrote
that the inhabitants of Novgorod "said to the princes of Varingia,
'Our land is great and fertile, but it lacks order and justice; come,
take possession, and govern us.'"

The invitation was accepted. Three brothers, Rurik or the Peaceful,
Sineous or the Victorious, and Truvor or the Faithful, proceeded to
Russia with their families and fighting men. Rurik settled on the
south shore of Lake Ladoga, Sineous on the White Lake, and Truvor at
Izborsk. The two younger brothers died, and Rurik moved to         (p. 030)
Novgorod where he built a castle. At about the same time two other
Norsemen, Askold and Dir, landed in Russia, and went to Kief, then
also a flourishing city, where they were equally well received. They
persuaded its people to prepare an expedition against Czargrad, the
City of the Czar or Emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire, now known as
Constantinople, but at that time named Byzantium. The expedition of
Kief under Askold and Dir sailed down the Dnieper in a fleet of 200
large boats, entered the Golden Horn--or Bosphorus,--and began the
siege of Constantinople. The capital was saved by the Patriarch or
head of the Greek Church, who plunged a wonder-working robe into the
waves, whereupon a violent storm destroyed the Russian fleet.

The two chiefs, Askold and Dir, must have escaped, because they were
back at Kief when that city received a disagreeable visit. Upon
Rurik's death, he was succeeded, not by his son Igor, but by his
brother Oleg as the eldest of the family. The new prince or _kniaz_
did not approve of rival Norsemen in his neighborhood. With his own
men and a large number of Slavs and Finns, he marched upon Kief, and
on his way compelled Smolensk and Loubetch to submit to his authority.

When he arrived before Kief, he succeeded in capturing Askold and Dir
who were put to death "because," Oleg explained, "they were neither
princes themselves, nor of the blood of princes." Kief was taken, and
Oleg took up his residence in that city.

[Illustration: Norsemen]

It is at this time that the name Russia first appears. Its         (p. 032)
derivation is doubtful and is, besides, of no great importance. Oleg
ruled over Russia, that is, the plain extending from Kief to Novgorod.
There is a story that he was defeated by the Hungarians, who had
crossed the Dnieper, but it is doubtful, because in the year 907, we
find him preparing another expedition against Constantinople. On this
occasion the people of that capital forgot to bring out the robe, and
tried to poison the invaders, but their scheme was discovered in time;
they were forced to pay a heavy tribute and Oleg secured, besides, a
very advantageous commercial treaty.

One of the wizards at Oleg's court had warned him that his favorite
horse would be the cause of his death, and the animal was kept away
from him until it died. Oleg did not believe in wizards; he insisted
upon seeing the body and entered the stable. A snake came out of the
horse's skull and stung Oleg in the foot, and he died from the effect
of the poison.

Igor, Rurik's son, was the eldest, and succeeded his uncle. He led
another expedition against Constantinople, but it ended in disaster,
because the Russian fleet was destroyed by Greek fire. A large number
of Russians were captured but Igor escaped. This failure did not
prevent him from again attacking the Byzantine Empire, and this time
he was successful. The emperor agreed to pay tribute and signed
another commercial treaty.

Nestor, the Russian historian, tells us the story of Igor's death. "In
the year 945," he says, "the _drujina_" (that is, the body-guard,
composed of Norsemen or their descendants), "of Igor said to him, 'The
men of Sveneld are richly provided with weapons and garments, while
we go in rags; lead us, Prince, to collect the tribute so that     (p. 033)
thou and we may become rich.' Igor consented, and conducted them to
the Drevlians to raise the tribute. He increased the first imposts,
and did them violence, he and his men; after having taken all he
wanted, he returned to his city. While on the road he bethought
himself and said to his drujina, 'Go on with the tribute; I will go
back and try to get some more out of them.' Leaving the greater part
of his men to go on their way, he returned with only a few, to the end
that he might increase his riches. The Drevlians, when they learnt
that Igor was coming back, held council with Nal, their prince. 'When
the wolf enters the sheepfold he slays the whole flock, if the
shepherd does not slay him. Thus it is with us and Igor; if we do not
destroy him, we are lost.' Then they sent deputies who said to him,
'why dost thou come anew unto us? Hast thou not collected all the
tribute?' But Igor would not hear them, so the Drevlians came out of
the town of Korosthenes, and slew Igor and his men, for they were but
a few."

The drujina or body-guard of the duke was at the same time his
council. The men composing it were considered as members of his
family; they ate at his table and shared his amusements as well as his
toil. He did nothing without consulting them, and was really but the
first among his peers. They formed a court of justice, and it was from
among them that he appointed the voievods or governors of fortresses,
and possadniks or commandants of large towns. We have a description of
the courts of that time by an Arab writer named Ibn Dost. He says: (p. 034)
"When a Russian brings a complaint against another, he summons him
before the court of the prince where both state their case. When the
prince has pronounced his verdict, his orders are executed; but if
both parties are dissatisfied, the dispute must be decided by weapons.
He whose sword cuts sharper, gains his cause. At the time of the
fight, the relatives of the two adversaries appear armed, and surround
the space set apart. The combatants then come to blows, and the victor
may impose any terms he pleases."

The people of the country, the peasants, were not quite so free as
when Rurik landed. They began to be known as _moujik_, a contemptuous
diminutive of the word mouj or man, literally manikin. The merchants
or _gosti_ did not form a distinct class, but in larger cities, such
as Novgorod and Kief, they had a voice in the administration. These
cities had a vetche or municipal council which directed the city's
business without any direct interference from the prince. The
successors of Rurik attended to the defense of the country, the
administration of justice, and the collection of tribute and taxes,
which sources of revenue were appropriated by them and served for
their support and for that of the drujina.

The Slavs of that time exhibited many characteristics which we
recognize in the Russians of our time. Leo the Deacon, a noted writer
of that time, mentions that they fought in a compact body, and seemed
like a wall of iron, bristling with lances, glittering with shields,
whence rang a ceaseless clamor like the waves of the sea. A huge
shield covered them to their feet, and, when they fought in retreat,
they turned this enormous buckler on their backs and became        (p. 035)
invulnerable. The fury of the battle frenzied them. They were never
seen to surrender. When victory was lost they stabbed themselves, for
they believed that those who died by the hand of an enemy were
condemned to serve him in the life after death. The emperors of
Byzantium were glad to secure their services, and the _ross_, as they
called them, often formed the body-guard. In the Byzantine expedition
against Crete, 700 Russians served in the army.

The Norsemen readily adapted themselves to the habits, customs, and
language of the people among whom they settled. We find the Norse
names of Rurik, Oleg, and Igor, but after the last named their
descendants were Russians and bore Russian names.

At Igor's death his son Sviatoslaf was still a minor, whose mother,
Olga, became Regent. She was a woman of determination, whose first
thought was to avenge the death of her husband. The Drevlians, hearing
of her preparations, sent two deputations to appease her: not a man
returned. They were all put to death at her command. Nestor tells us
that Olga herself commanded her warriors at the siege of Korosthenes,
and that she offered to make peace on payment of a tribute of three
pigeons and three sparrows for every house. This was accepted and the
birds were delivered, when she ordered lighted tow to be fastened to
their tails, and when they flew back to the wooden town, they set fire
to the houses and barns. Korosthenes was then captured and a great
number of its inhabitants were slaughtered and the rest were made
slaves.

It seems strange that such a woman should have been the first of   (p. 036)
Rurik's house to embrace Christianity. There is no doubt that she
visited Constantinople where she astonished the emperor by the force
of her character. She was baptized and received the name of Helen. It
is quite possible that she came to Constantinople for that purpose,
because we read that she refused to be baptized at Kief "for fear of
the pagans." This confirms the Greek records in which it is stated
that a bishop was established in Russia, probably at Kief, in the time
of Oleg.

It is not strange that Christianity should have taken root in Russia
after the frequent wars with the Byzantine Empire, and considering the
commerce carried on between Kief and Constantinople. Missionaries
entered Russia at an early period. Two of them, Cyril and Methodius,
prepared a Slavonic alphabet, in which many Greek letters were used,
and the Bible was translated into that language. There is a tradition
that Askold was baptized after his defeat at Constantinople, and that
this is the reason why the people still worship at his tomb at Kief,
as of that of the first Christian prince. The Norsemen had no taste
for persecution on account of religious belief, but for themselves
they clung to the heathen deities. When Igor swore to observe the
treaty concluded with Emperor Leo VI, he went up to the hill of Perun
and used the ancient Slavonic rites; but the emperor's deputies went
to the church of St. Elias, and there laid their hands upon the Bible
as a token of good faith.

The drujina and warriors did not take kindly to Christianity. They, as
well as the peasants, preferred to worship Perun and Voloss. The same
thing happened elsewhere. Christianity made the greatest progress  (p. 037)
in cities, whereas the dwellers on the "heath" remained "heathen."
"When one of the warriors of the prince wished to become a convert,"
says Nestor, "he was not prevented; they simply laughed at him." When
Olga returned from Constantinople, she was anxious that her son, who
was of age and had succeeded to his father, should follow her example.
Sviatoslaf refused; "my men will laugh at me," was his usual answer.
Nestor mentions that he sometimes lost his temper. Christianity did
not make much progress during his reign.

He was a warrior, like his Norse ancestors. In the brief time of eight
years, 964-972, he found time to wage two wars. The first was with the
Khazar empire on the Don. Sviatoslaf captured its capital, the White
City, and received tribute from two tribes of the Caucasus. The second
war did not turn out so well.

From Nestor's account and that of Leo the Deacon, it appears that the
Byzantine emperor, wishing to make use of Sviatoslaf, decided to find
out what sort of man he was. He therefore sent him presents of gold
and fine clothes, but the grandson of Rurik would scarcely look at
them and told his warriors to take them away. When the emperor heard
this, he sent him a fine sword and other weapons; these were accepted
with every token of satisfaction by Sviatoslaf. When the emperor was
informed of the result, he exclaimed: "This must be a fierce man,
because he despises wealth and accepts a sword as tribute."

This did not prevent the emperor, who had a private quarrel with
Peter, Czar of Bulgaria, from urging Sviatoslaf to make war upon   (p. 038)
his enemy. The Russian gave a hearty consent, and in a very short time
he captured several fortresses and Pereiaslaf, the capital, fell into
his hands. He determined to transfer his capital there, and when he
returned to Kief, he told his mother of the city on the Danube. "The
place," he said, "is the central point of my territory, and abounds in
wealth. Precious goods, gold, wine, and all kinds of fruit, come from
Greece. Silver and horses are brought from the country of the Czechs
and Hungarians, and the Russians bring money, furs, wax, and slaves."

Meanwhile the emperor of Constantinople was dead; his successor, John
Zimisces was a very different man, who preferred having a weak
Bulgarian ruler as his neighbor, instead of an empire which, even at
that time, extended from Lakes Ladoga and Onega to the Balkans. He,
therefore, made up his mind to oust the Russians. Sviatoslaf had left
Bulgaria, but he returned and reconquered it, when he received a
demand from the new emperor to execute the treaty entered into with
his predecessor, that is, to leave Bulgaria. Sviatoslaf replied
proudly that he expected to visit the emperor at Constantinople before
long, but Zimisces, a brave and able man, took measures to prevent it.
Before Sviatoslaf expected him, Zimisces attacked and defeated the
Russians in the defiles of the Balkan, and soon after stormed and
captured Pereiaslaf. Eight thousand Russians withdrew into the castle,
which they defended heroically. They refused to surrender and, when
the castle was set on fire, they perished in the flames.

When Sviatoslaf heard of this disaster, he advanced against the    (p. 039)
emperor. The Greek historian says that the Russian army was 60,000 men
strong, but Nestor gives the number at 10,000. The two armies met and
both fought with desperate valor, but at last the Russians gave way
before the furious charges of the Greek cavalry--the Ironsides--and
withdrew to Dorostol. Zimisces started in pursuit, and laid siege to
the city where the same courage was displayed. After Sviatoslaf drew
his men up out of the city and prepared to give battle, Zimisces
proposed to him to decide the issue by a personal fight, but the offer
was declined. "I know better than my enemy what I have to do," said
Sviatoslaf. "If he is weary of life, there are a thousand ways by
which he can end his days." The battle ended in defeat for the
Russians who, Leo the Deacon tells us, left 15,500 dead, and 20,000
shields on the battlefield. Sviatoslaf was compelled to come to terms.
Zimisces permitted him and what remained of his army to return to
Russia, after he had sworn by Perun and Voloss that he would never
again invade the empire, but would help in defending it against its
enemies. If he broke his oath, he wished that he might "become as
yellow as gold, and perish by his own arms." Zimisces showed the
nobility of a brave man. He sent messengers to a warlike tribe
requesting a free passage for the Russians; but this tribe was anxious
to seize the opportunity. Sviatoslaf and his men were attacked near
the Cataracts of the Dnieper; he was killed, but most of his men
escaped. (A.D. 972.)

[Illustration: Vladimir]                                           (p. 040)




IV--SAINT VLADIMIR AND IAROSLAF THE GREAT.                         (p. 041)


Sviatoslaf had divided the empire among his three sons; he left
Novgorod to Vladimir, the eldest; Oleg, the second, was made prince of
the Drevlians, and the youngest, Iaropolk, received Kief. As happens
often, none of the three was satisfied with his share, and civil wars
followed. Oleg was killed by Iaropolk, whereupon the youngest son of
Sviatoslaf was slain by his brother Vladimir, who thus became the sole
heir and successor to his father. His first act was to make war upon
Poland. He compelled it to restore Red Russia or Old Gallicia, a
territory in our time divided into seven governments, or provinces. He
also reduced two revolted tribes, and forced the Lithuanians and
Livonians to pay tribute.

At the beginning of his reign, Vladimir showed an unusual devotion to
the old Slav gods. He erected idols on the sandy cliffs of Kief; that
of Perun had a head of silver and a beard of gold. It seems that after
some time he became displeased with this religion and, Nestor tells
us, he grew anxious to know what religion was the best. He, therefore,
sent deputies to Bulgaria to study the Moslem or Mohammedan creed, and
to the Khazars, who occupied the plain between the Bug and the     (p. 042)
Volga, to make inquiries about the Jewish faith. From the Poles and
Germans he wanted to know all about the Roman Catholic Church, and at
Constantinople he expected to learn of the Greek faith. When these
deputies returned and reported to him, Vladimir selected the Greek
Church, which choice was approved by his drujina; "if the Greek
religion had not been the best, your grandmother Olga, the wisest of
mortals, would not have adopted it," said they. Thus Vladimir became a
convert; but his method of showing it was rather peculiar.

He might have been baptized by the bishop of Kief; or, if he had
applied at Constantinople, the emperor would gladly have sent him a
high prelate to perform the service. Instead of this, Vladimir
collected an army and marched against Kherson,--the last city in
Russia held by the Byzantine. It was taken by means of treachery, and
from this city Vladimir sent to Constantinople to demand in marriage
the sister of the two emperors Basil and Constantine. Although the
emperors did not like the proposed connection, they consented because
they feared an invasion, but made it a condition that Vladimir should
be baptized. The ceremony was performed at Kherson; soon after the
bride arrived and the marriage took place in the same city. When he
returned to Kief, he carried with him the priests and sacred ornaments
taken from the churches of Kherson.

Upon his return to Kief, he began missionary work by his own peculiar
methods. His first orders were to pull down the idols; during the
execution the people wept, moaned, and wrung their hands. Perun's
image was handsomely flogged and thrown into the Dnieper. Since it (p. 043)
was made of wood, it soon came to the surface, which was looked upon
as a miracle by the people who rushed down to worship it. But
Vladimir's soldiers gave it another bath, and this time it was caught
by the current and drifted away. The cliff where it stood is still
known at Kief as "the devil's leap," and the spot where Perun floated
ashore, is shown to visitors.

After thus getting rid of the idols, Vladimir commanded the people of
Kief, men, women, and children, to plunge into the Dnieper, which had
been consecrated for the occasion, that they might be baptized. When
they had obeyed his order, the priests read the service, so that after
entering into the river as heathen, they left it as Christians. The
people of Novgorod were converted in the same swift and practical
manner, since no attention was paid to their objections.

Heathen temples were next converted into churches, which were
decorated by Greek artists. Vladimir erected at Kief the church of St.
Basil, on the place where Perun's image had stood. Numerous other
churches were built; he also founded schools where the Bible was
taught in the Slav language. At first the people objected to send
their children, because they looked upon reading and writing as magic.
But Vladimir had persuasive ways, and was not likely to be deterred by
such opposition. Nestor admired him very much. He says that Vladimir
was a different man after he had been converted; that he was so afraid
of committing a sin, that he hesitated to inflict capital punishment,
until the bishop reminded him that crime must be punished. He also
divided his income among the churches, and thus became the Saint   (p. 044)
Vladimir of Russia. Popular ballads keep alive the memory of the first
Christian prince. He is often mentioned in them as "The Beautiful Sun"
of Kief.

It cannot be supposed that the Russian people were converted at once
into good Christians by Vladimir's forceful method. Several centuries
were to pass away before the peasants could be induced to part with
their heathen customs. The priests preferred to let them remain under
a Christian name. There is something mystic in the Slav character. He
nurses the belief in magicians and sorcerers, which has never been
uprooted. It is seen at present in the worship of the _eikon_ or
saint's image.

Vladimir died in 1015. He, too, divided Russia among his numerous
sons. One of them, Iaroslaf, received Novgorod, where he began to
interfere with the rights of the people. A deputation of leading
citizens came to him with a protest. He ordered their arrest and
condemned them to death. Meanwhile Vladimir's other heirs had indulged
in the usual quarrels and wars, until it seemed as if Sviatopolk, a
nephew, would become the sole ruler. Iaroslaf then called the
principal people of Novgorod together, and threw himself upon their
generosity. They forgave him and promised their support. They kept
their word, and after a long and bloody war he entered Kief as his
father's successor.

Iaroslaf was unfortunate in a war with the Byzantine Empire. The
Russian fleet was badly defeated in the Bosphorus; 8,000 men were
killed, and 800 prisoners were taken to Constantinople.

Of greater importance was Iaroslaf's work at home. He built        (p. 045)
churches and monasteries; St. Sophia church was the pride of Kief; the
monastery of The Catacombs still draws pilgrims from all parts of
Russia. Kief became known as "the city of four hundred churches." He
also founded a school for three hundred boys at Novgorod, thereby
showing that Russia at that time was second to no European nation.

Kief, under his reign, was one of the most prosperous cities. This was
due to her situation on the Dnieper and her trade with the Byzantine
Empire, to the great fertility of the Black Earth land, and to
Iaroslaf's connection by marriage with the reigning families of
Europe. Of his daughters Elizabeth was the wife of the King of Norway,
Anne of the King of France, and Anastasia of the King of Hungary; his
sister Mary was married to the King of Poland, and his sons had
married into royal families. Merchants from Holland, Germany, Hungary,
and Scandinavia were established at Kief. The Dnieper was alive with
merchant vessels, and she counted eight markets. It is evident that
Iaroslaf took pains to protect and advance commerce. He had coins
minted with his Slav name on one side, and his Christian name Ioury
(George), on the other.

Perhaps his greatest work is the code of laws established by him,
known as the _Russkaia Pravda_ or Russian Right. Though necessarily
primitive, it was a long step in advance of that time. It followed
chiefly the ideas of right and wrong according to the conceptions of
the Scandinavians.

At this time, although the dignity of _kniaz_, duke or prince, was (p. 046)
hereditary in the family of Rurik, it was understood by all parties
that the reign of the prince depended upon the consent of his
subjects, and perhaps more still upon that of his drujina. A story is
told that in Vladimir's time the drujina complained that they were
made to eat from wooden bowls, whereupon he gave them silver ones,
saying: I could not buy myself a drujina with gold and silver; but
with a drujina, I can acquire gold and silver, as did my father and my
grandfather.

Ever since Kief had been the residence of Rurik's descendants, they
had been recognized as Grand Dukes, because they represented the
eldest of the descendants. They did not, as a rule, interfere with the
administration, but were the dukes, the commanders of the armies. Many
districts had such a duke, who was, however, invariably of the blood
of Rurik, and recognized the superior authority as the eldest of the
blood. When the Grand Duke of Kief died, he was not succeeded by his
son, unless he had neither uncle nor brother living; but it was within
the power of the grand duke to leave one or more districts to his
sons.

The descendants of the Norsemen were, therefore, the defenders of the
districts which they ruled as dukes. Novgorod and Pskof were republics
on the northwest frontier, and usually had the same duke. Smolensk was
an important dukedom, because it contained the sources of the Volga,
the Dnieper, and the Dwina, and embraced the ancient forest of Okof.
Not far from it was the dukedom of Toropetz. On the Upper Oka was
Tchernigof--a rival of Kief; further to the south was Novgorod-Swerki,
and east of the Upper Don, extending as far as the Oka, were       (p. 047)
Riazan and Mourom. The dukedom of Souzdal, inhabited by a mixture of
Finns and Slavs, was in the north, the soil still covered by forests.
Southeast Russia embraced Red Russia, that is Volhynia and Gallicia
Proper.

The introduction of the Greek Church caused important changes. The
Greek Priests could not comprehend the relation between the people and
its defenders. To them the duke was not a _dux_ (leader), but a Caesar,
Kaiser, or Czar, ruling, not with the consent of the governed, but by
the grace of God, as did the emperors at Constantinople. This idea
gradually penetrated into the minds of the several dukes, until it was
accepted and enforced by them.

Another very important change was effected by the Greek religion. We
have seen that according to the old Slav customs, it was not the son
who succeeded as the head of the family, but its eldest member. It
appears that the same custom prevailed among the Norsemen, as we have
seen that it was Rurik's brother, and not his son who succeeded him.
In the Byzantine Empire, the oldest son was the heir, and the priests
tried to introduce this as a law.

As the descendants of Rurik increased in number, it was not always
easy to determine who was entitled to the succession. Hence there were
often several claimants, and as a result, civil wars followed. These
wars, strange as it may appear, served to bind the dukedoms together,
because most of them were waged for the purpose of establishing the
claim of a duke upon the possession of Kief.

Iaroslaf died in 1054, and was buried in the church of St. Sophia  (p. 048)
at Kief. In his will we see the effect of the Greek Church, for he
specially appointed his eldest son Isiaslaf as his successor. A
younger brother, Sviatoslaf, took up arms, and expelled him in 1073.
Upon his death in 1076, Isiaslaf returned to Kief, where he lived two
years. He died in 1078, and was succeeded by his brother Vsevolod, who
was grand duke until 1093, when he was succeeded by Sviatopolk, the
son of Isiaslaf, as the eldest of the family. He was not opposed by
Vsevolod's famous son Vladimir Monomachus, who admitted that
Sviatopolk's "father was older than mine, and reigned first in Kief."




V--A RUSSIAN REPUBLIC.                                             (p. 049)


Sviatopolk reigned from 1093 to 1113. It was at this time that Russia
was disturbed by two civil wars. At the instance of Vladimir
Monomachus a congress of dukes met in 1097, at Loubetch on the Dnieper
to discuss the folly of civil wars which placed the country at the
mercy of its enemies. An agreement was concluded, wherein the dukes
swore upon the Cross that "henceforth the Russian land shall be
considered the country of us all, and whoso shall dare arm himself
against his brother, shall be our common enemy."

Soon after this a quarrel broke out about the succession of Volhynia,
and again the country was plunged into civil strife, which lasted two
years. In 1100 another congress was held at Vititchevo, on the left
bank of the Dnieper, where the dispute was settled, and it was
resolved to unite in a war with a powerful nomad people. The Russians
under Vladimir Monomachus gained a brilliant victory; the nomads had
seventeen khans killed on the battlefield.

When Sviatopolk died, the people of Kief declared that they would have
no grand duke except Vladimir. He declined saying that there were
elder heirs entitled to the succession; but when troubles broke out in
the city, he gave his consent. During his reign of twelve years,   (p. 050)
from 1113 to 1125, Kief reached the height of prosperity and power. He
reduced Souzdal, in the north, to submission, and made many
improvements. His memory is cherished in Russia. He compiled a set of
instructions for his sons, from which we may judge of his character.
Among other remarks, he says: "It is neither by fasting, nor solitude,
nor the life in a cloister that will procure for you the life
eternal,--it is doing good. Do not forget the poor but feed them. Do
not bury your wealth in the bosom of the earth, for that is contrary
to the precepts of Christianity. Be a father to orphans, judge the
cause of widows yourself." "Put to death no one be he innocent or
guilty, for nothing is more precious than the soul of a Christian."
"When you have learned anything useful, try to preserve it in your
memory, and strive ceaselessly to acquire knowledge. Without ever
leaving his palace, my father spoke five languages, _a thing that
foreigners admire in us_."

There are in the museum at Moscow, a throne and crown, supposed to
have belonged to this noble and patriotic duke; unfortunately it has
been shown that they were never in his possession.

In his will, Vladimir gave the dukedom of Souzdal to his son George
Dolgorouki, and another son, Mstislaf, succeeded as grand duke at
Kief. When the latter died in 1146, leaving the grand dukedom to his
son Isiaslaf, George Dolgorouki claimed the succession as the eldest
of the family. Both sides were supported by their friends, and some
fierce battles were fought, but Isiaslaf maintained himself until
his death in 1157. After his reign, Kief's importance began to     (p. 051)
decrease. Twelve years later, in 1169, it was captured by the Russians
of the north. A native historian[1] says of this event: "This mother
of Russian cities had been many times besieged and oppressed. She had
often opened her Golden Gate to her enemies, but none had ever yet
entered by force. To their eternal shame, the victors forgot that
they, too, were Russians! During three days not only the houses, but
the cloisters, churches, and even the temples of St. Sophia and the
Dime, were given over to pillage. The precious images, the sacerdotal
ornaments, the books, and the bells,--all were carried off."

                   [Footnote 1: Karamsin.]

With the fall of Kief, the scene of Russian activity shifts to the
north. There, in the dukedom of Souzdal, George Dolgorouki laid, in
1147, the foundation of a town, Moscow, on a height overlooking the
Moscowa. For many years it remained an obscure village, and gave no
sign of its future greatness.

The chief interest at this time centers about the Russian republics,
Novgorod, Pskof, and Viatka. Although Novgorod did not possess the
advantages of Kief, since its soil was sandy, marshy, and
unproductive, the enterprise of its people made it the wealthiest and
most populous city of Russia. It is recorded that it counted 100,000
inhabitants, when Rurik arrived in Russia. He and his immediate
successors were satisfied with the position of Defender, which suited
their warlike and blunt character, and with the revenues assigned to
them, which with the spoils taken from the enemy, were ample for their
wants. These republics were administered by a vetche or municipal  (p. 052)
council, with a possadnik or burgomaster, whose duty it was to see
that the city's privileges were preserved, and who distributed the
taxes. He shared with the duke in the administration of justice. There
was a militia for the defense of the people's rights, commanded by a
_tysatski_. Every ward of the city had a _starost_, charged with
preserving the peace. It is said that a written constitution,
partaking of the nature of the Magna Charta, was granted to Novgorod
by Iaroslaf the Great. The duke's rights and privileges, his duties
and his revenues, were carefully set down. He was entitled to the
tribute of some of the volosts,--cantons or counties,--and to certain
fines; he could gather in his harvests at stated times, and was not
permitted to hunt in the forest except in the autumn. He could neither
execute nor annul a judgment without the approval of the possadnik,
and he was expressly forbidden to carry a lawsuit beyond Novgorod.
Every duke, before he entered upon his office, was compelled to take
an oath to this constitution.

The members of the vetche were elected by a unanimous vote, instead of
by a majority. This gave rise to frequent, and sometimes very serious
disorder, because if a minority did not approve of the candidate, they
were apt to be ill-treated. There were occasions when two rival
vetches were elected, and when this happened in the two parts of the
city divided by the river Volkhof, the bridge between them was often
the scene of a free fight. Owing to the extensive trade connections,
the merchants trading with western Europe by way of the Baltic sought
to promote friendly relations with the dukes of the west, who had  (p. 053)
it in their power to promote or obstruct their trade; but the
merchants dealing with Asia, and those who connected with
Constantinople had other interests to consider and to guard. Thus
there were often three parties, each concerned with its own interests,
and forgetting that their prosperity was first and chiefly dependent
upon the power of the republic, they rendered it an easy prey for an
ambitious duke. The people, however, boasted of their patriotism, and
during the early period they were strong enough to defy the duke. On
some occasions, he and his drujina were expelled, or, as they
expressed it, "the people made him a reverence, and showed him a way
to leave." Sometimes, too, it happened that the duke was made a
prisoner, and confined in the Archbishop's palace. When Sviatopolk was
Grand Duke of Kief (1093-1113), he wished to force one of his sons
upon the people of Novgorod. "Send him along," said they, "if he has a
head to spare!" Usually the duke was glad to leave Novgorod, if he
could secure another dukedom. In 1132, Vsevolod Gabriel left Novgorod
to become Duke of Pereiaslaf, hoping to succeed as Grand Duke of Kief.
Seeing no way to attain the coveted dignity, he signified his wish to
return to the people of Novgorod. "You have forgotten your oath to die
with us," they replied; "you have sought another dukedom; now you may
go where you please." In this case, however, the people changed their
mind, and did take him back; but four years afterwards they expelled
him, declaring that "he took no care of the poor people; he desired to
establish himself at Pereiaslaf; at the battle of Mount Idanof against
the men of Souzdal, he and his drujina were the first to leave the (p. 054)
battlefield; he was fickle in the quarrels of the dukes, sometimes
joining one party and sometimes the other."

So long as the descendants of Rurik remained satisfied with their
position, Novgorod had enough men and resources to maintain its
independence; but more than that was required after the dukes had
tasted of the sweets of unlimited power.

George Dolgorouki had established colonies in Souzdal. The land was
his, the colonists were his subjects. He was no longer merely the
defender, he was the owner, not the duke, but the prince. There was no
vetche or popular assembly in his possessions. His son, Andrew
Bogolioubski, was brought up and educated amid these conditions, more
in conformity with those prevailing in Greece and other parts of
Europe, where the people were supposed to exist for the sole benefit
of their prince. It was he who ruined Kief, and the fall of that city
foretold the doom of Novgorod. "The fall of Kief," says a Russian
author,[2] "seemed to foreshadow the loss of Novgorod liberty; it was
the same army, and it was the same prince who commanded it. But the
people of Kief, accustomed to change their masters,--to sacrifice the
vanquished to the victors,--only fought for the honor of their dukes,
while those of Novgorod were to shed their blood for the defense of
the laws and institutions established by their ancestors."

                   [Footnote 2: Karamsin.]

During his father's life, Andrew left his castle on the Dnieper, and
moved northward to Vladimir which town he enlarged, and where he founded
a quarter named Bogolioubovo, whence his name of Bogolioubski.     (p. 055)
After the death of George Dolgorouki, Andrew first made a successful
campaign against the Bulgarians, and then, after sacking Kief, he
turned his attention toward Novgorod, where he had established one of
his nephews. The cause of the quarrel is not known, but Andrew began
by compelling the neighboring dukes to join him, and overran the
territory of the republic with fire and sword. The people of Novgorod,
remembering the fate of Kief, were prepared to die in the defense of
the city. The siege commenced. One day the Archbishop took the
eikon--image--of the Virgin, which was carried around in solemn
procession. It was struck by an arrow shot by a Souzdalian soldier,
when miraculous tears appeared upon its face. The besiegers were
struck by a panic, and the people of Novgorod sallied out, killed a
number of the enemy, and took so many prisoners that "you could get
six Souzdalians for a grivna." Whatever may have been the value of
that coin, the market was evidently overstocked with Souzdalians.

Foiled in this attempt, Andrew tried other means. He prohibited the
sale of grain to the people of Novgorod, who were thereby compelled to
make peace. They did not surrender any of their privileges but
accepted as their duke the prince selected by Andrew.

His next war was with Mstislaf the Brave, Duke of Smolensk, who, aided
by his brothers, had taken Kief. Andrew sent a herald to him demanding
the evacuation of Kief, and imposing a fine upon each brother.
Mstislaf who, the Russians say, "feared none but God," gave orders to
have the herald's head and beard shaved,--a gross insult at that   (p. 056)
time,--and then dismissed him, saying: "Go and repeat these words unto
your master,--'Up to this time we have respected you like a father,
but since you do not blush to treat us as your vassals and common
people, since you have forgotten that you speak to princes, we laugh
at your threats. Execute them!--we appeal to the judgment of God.'"
The challenge was accepted, and Andrew was defeated.

The Duke of Souzdal did not relax in his attempts to established
absolute government. It was with this purpose in view that he expelled
his three brothers, and made friends of the priests. Kief was still
the residence of the _Metropolitan_ or head of the Greek Church in
Russia, and Andrew was anxious that he should transfer his residence
to Vladimir so as to make that city the religious center of Russia.
His wish was not gratified. He failed in everything, except in making
enemies by his disregard of law. He was murdered in 1174 in his
favorite palace at Bogolioubovo, by his own _boyards_ or nobles.




VI--TROUBLOUS TIMES.                                               (p. 057)


The death of Andrew was a welcome relief for the people of Novgorod.
They celebrated it by attacking the houses of the rich, and committed
so many excesses that the priests made a procession with the eikons.
In Souzdal there was trouble about the succession. Two of Andrew's
brothers returned from exile, and claimed the dukedom, and the city of
Vladimir gave them its support. That was enough for Souzdal and Rostof
to recognize another claimant, one of Andrew's nephews. Vladimir was
victorious in the contest, and Andrew's brother, Michael, became Grand
Duke of Souzdal. He died two years afterwards, and the people of
Souzdal once more refused to recognize Vladimir's candidate, Andrew's
other brother Vsevolod, surnamed the Big Nest on account of his
numerous family. Vladimir defeated Souzdal and Vsevolod was its grand
duke from 1176 to 1212. The people of Novgorod thought best to pacify
him. They sent a deputation to Vladimir, to tell Vsevolod, "Lord and
Grand Duke, our country is your patrimony; we entreat you to send us
the grandson of George Dolgorouki, the great-grandson of Monomachus,
to govern us." The request was granted, and Vsevolod's eldest son
Constantine came to Novgorod. The grand duke, however, was soon    (p. 058)
displeased with him and displaced him by a younger son, Iaroslaf. Soon
there were quarrels between him and the people, whereupon Iaroslaf
moved to Torjok, a town within Novgorod territory, and from there
stopped all supplies. Famine appeared in the city, and at last envoys
were sent to the duke, who had them arrested. Nothing except absolute
submission would satisfy him. In this dire need help came from an
unexpected quarter. Mstislaf the Bold, son of Mstislaf the Brave, Duke
of Smolensk, heard of Novgorod's plight and sent word to the city,
"Torjok shall not hold itself higher than Novgorod. I will deliver
your lands and citizens, or leave my bones among you." He was as good
as his word. There was a great war between Souzdal and Smolensk; no
quarter was asked or given. In 1216, Vsevolod's sons were attacked at
Lipetsk by the troops of Novgorod and Smolensk, with such fury that
they were routed, and 9,000 were killed whereas only 60 were taken
prisoners. Iaroslaf renounced Novgorod and released the citizens
arrested by him.

Constantine succeeded his father Vsevolod, but died in 1217, and
another brother, George, became Grand Duke of Souzdal. This prince
made an expedition down the Volga, levying tribute as he proceeded. In
1220, he laid the foundation of Nishni Novgorod, and of several
villages in what was then Moravian territory.

Meanwhile Mstislaf the Bold resigned as Grand Duke of Novgorod in an
assembly of the people, saying, "I salute St. Sophia, the tomb of my
father,[3] and you. People of Novgorod, I am going to reconquer
Galitch from the strangers, but I shall never forget you. I hope   (p. 059)
I may lie by the tomb of my father in St. Sophia." The people implored
him to remain; but he had made up his mind, and in 1218 he left for
the southwest, where he did succeed in conquering Galitch, that is the
name given to southwestern Russia at that time.

                   [Footnote 3: Mstislaf the Brave was buried in the
                   church of St. Sophia.]

After his departure the people of Novgorod called his nephew
Sviatoslaf as their grand duke, but soon there was a quarrel. The
possadnik Tferdislaf caused the arrest of one of the wealthy citizens,
whose friends rose to set him free. Then the burgomaster's friends
came and there was a fight in which ten men were killed. The grand
duke then demanded the dismissal of the burgomaster, and the vetche
assembled to hear both sides. The grand duke was asked what crime the
possadnik had committed.

"None," he replied, "but it is my will that he be dismissed."

The burgomaster then said: "I am satisfied, because I am not accused
of any fault; as for you, my brothers, you can dismiss alike
possadniks and dukes."

The vetche consulted, and announced its decision:

"Prince, since you do not accuse the possadnik of any fault, remember
that you have sworn to depose no magistrate without trial. Tferdislaf
will remain our possadnik,--we will not deliver him to you."

Sviatoslaf was very much displeased and resigned, and one of his
brothers, Vsevolod, was appointed in his place. This was in 1219; two
years later, in 1221, Vsevolod was expelled, and the people called
back that same Iaroslaf from whom they had been rescued by Mstislaf
the Bold. Soon there was another dispute and _he_ was sent about   (p. 060)
his business. Vsevolod of Smolensk was again made duke, but the people
soon grew tired of him. At this time the Grand Duke of Souzdal
interfered; he made Novgorod pay him tribute, and appointed a prince
of Tchernigof as its duke; but he did not like the place and resigned.
Then the city suffered from a famine, when 42,000 citizens perished
and a fire destroyed a whole quarter of the city. Iaroslaf was made
duke for the fourth time; the spirit of the people was broken, and he
was permitted to rule over them as he pleased. He succeeded as grand
duke in 1236, when he left his son Alexander Nevski as duke in
Novgorod.

The east coast of the Baltic was considered tributary to Novgorod.
Several colonies had been established on the Duena and south of that
river, but in the 12th and 13th centuries missionaries and merchants
from Germany appeared and gradually penetrated as far as the Duena
where Bishop Meinhard, in 1187, built a Roman Catholic Church and a
fortress. The Livonians were converted much as St. Vladimir had made
Christians of the people of Kief; but in this case, the people of
Livonia revolted; in 1198 the second bishop was killed in battle, and
the natives returned to the heathen gods. Pope Innocent III ordered a
crusade against them. Another bishop sailed up the Duena with a fleet
of twenty-three ships, and in 1200 founded Riga. The year after a
religious society, the Sword-bearers, resembling the Templars, was
installed in Livonia, and the natives appealed to the Duke of Polotsk
for help. They marched upon Riga and were defeated in 1206.

German colonization proceeded actively under the Sword-bearers.    (p. 061)
Several cities were founded, and the country was divided into fiefs,
according to the feudal system of Western Europe. The towns were
modeled after Hamburg, Bremen, and Luebeck. Riga grew into a large and
powerful city.

In 1225, another religious-brotherhood, the Teutonic Order, entered
into Lithuania, and twelve years later the two orders united. The
introduction of the Roman Catholic religion carried with it the
elements of Roman civilization, and did much toward estranging the
natives of the Baltic provinces from the Russians of the east.

Southwestern Russia, or Galitch, had, more than any other section,
preserved the old Slav character. "The duke was a prince of the old
Slavonic type. He was elected by a popular assembly, and kept his seat
by its consent."[4] The assembly was composed of boyards or nobles,
and sometimes disputes occurred between them and the duke, which ended
in more or less serious disorders. In 1188, the position was offered
to Roman, Duke of Volhynia. He accepted, but before he could enter the
capital, a duke who had been expelled was reinstalled. After his
death, Roman entered the territory of Galitch, not as an elected duke,
but as a conqueror at the head of an army, and treated the dukedom as
a conquest. He was especially cruel to the boyards, treating their
rights and privileges with scorn. Russian authors praise him; one of
them says that he "walked in the ways of God, exterminated the
heathen, flung himself like a lion upon the infidels, _was savage as a
wild cat, deadly as a crocodile_, swooped down on his prey like an (p. 062)
eagle," which seem strange qualities for praise. Roman died in battle,
in 1205. Mstislaf the Bold conquered Galitch and at his death, in
1228, his son-in-law Daniel became duke.

                   [Footnote 4: Kostomarof.]

We have seen that, in the 13th century, Russia was divided into a
number of small states, most of them under a duke, but all possessing
some degree of liberty, except in the north where the duke was being
changed into an hereditary monarch. We have also seen that Russia was
part of Europe, and that commercial relations were maintained. At the
same time, just as there had been an invisible but none the less real
dividing line between the Eastern Roman, or Byzantine, Empire and the
west of Europe, so with the adoption of the Greek Church, Russia
inherited the oriental type and principles which separated that form
of Christianity from that of Rome. Thus the slight split grew
gradually into a schism, as Western Europe progressed with every
evolution of the Roman Church, whereas Russia remained stationary.

Byzantium or Constantinople, situated at the easternmost edge of
Europe, owing to its intimate association with the Persians who, at
the time represented the Oriental character, was more of an oriental
than a western city; its sympathies were also with its neighbors of
the east. There was thus an oriental tendency in Russia as well as in
the Byzantine Empire, and this vague sentiment enabled Russia to bend
before a blast, which would have withered any nation of a more
pronounced occidental character.




VII--THE YELLOW PERIL.                                             (p. 063)


On the borders of the Chinese Empire, in the northeast of Asia, roamed
a Mongol tribe, known as the Tartars or Tatars. A Chinese author of
that time, described them as follows: "The Ta-tzis[5] or Das occupy
themselves exclusively with their flocks; they go wandering ceaselessly
from pasture to pasture, from river to river. They are ignorant of the
nature of a town or a wall. They are ignorant of writing and books;
their treaties are concluded orally. From infancy they are accustomed
to ride, to aim their arrows at rats and birds, and thus acquire the
courage essential to their life of wars and destruction. They have
neither religious ceremonies nor judicial institutions. From the
prince to the lowest among the people, all are fed by the flesh of the
animals whose skin they use for clothing. The strongest among them
have the largest and fattest morsels at feasts; the old men are put
off with the fragments that are left. They respect nothing but
strength and courage; age and weakness are condemned."

                   [Footnote 5: Ta, great; hence: the Great Tzis.]

The people were, therefore, nomads, moving their flocks as necessity
required, and occasionally making a raid upon a neighboring town.
"They move on horseback;" says the Chinese author; "when they wish to
capture a town, they fall on the suburban villages. Each leader    (p. 064)
seizes ten men, and every prisoner is forced to carry a certain
quantity of wood, stones, and other material. They use these for
filling up moats or to dig trenches. In the capture of a town the loss
of a myriad men was thought nothing. No place could resist them. After
a siege, the entire population was massacred, without distinction of
old or young, rich or poor, beautiful or ugly, those who resisted or
those who yielded; no distinguished person escaped death, if a defense
was attempted."

These nomad Tartars were united by and under Genghis Khan (1154-1227),
one of their chiefs or khans. He summoned all the khans of the several
tribes, and before them took the title of emperor over all, declaring
that, as there was only one sun in heaven, so there should be but one
emperor on earth. At the head of his tribes, Genghis conquered
Manchuria and North China; then he moved west. He himself remained in
Asia, but two of his lieutenants proceeded in that direction, subduing
the tribes on their way, and often joined by them. The long march had
rendered the Tartars inured to hardship and wholly indifferent to
danger. At last they passed by the southern shore of the Caspian Sea,
and, crossing the Caucasus, commenced the invasion of Europe.

The march of such a host could not be kept secret. When the Polovtsi,
the old enemies of Russia, heard of the approach, they sent for help
to the Christian dukes. "When they have taken our country, they will
take yours," they said. Mstislaf the Bold of Galitch, urged that the
assistance be granted, and the chief of the Polovtsi agreed to     (p. 065)
enter the Greek Church. The Russians assembled on the lower Dnieper,
where they were approached by some Tatar envoys who told them that
they had "come by God's command against our slaves and grooms, the
accursed Polovtsi. Be at peace with us; we have no quarrel with you."
The envoys were arrested and put to death. The Russian army then moved
eastward, and met the Tartar host at the Kalka, a small river running
into the Sea of Azof. Instead of waiting for the troops still on the
way, Mstislaf the Bold and his friends began the battle. While it was
at its height, the Polovtsi were seized by a panic and, falling back,
threw the Russians into disorder. The Russian army was routed; six
dukes and seventy high boyards were left dead on the battlefield, and
hardly a tenth of the army escaped. The Grand Duke of Kief still
occupied a fortified camp on the Kalka. The Tartars offered to allow
him and his drujina to retire upon payment of a ransom. He accepted,
and was attacked by the Tartars after he had left his fortifications.
He and his two sons were stifled under boards, and his guard was
massacred.

The Tartars at this time needed all their men to complete the conquest
of China, and therefore the armies invading Europe were recalled,
after southern Russia was at their mercy. The Russians did not inquire
into the cause of this relief, but resumed their old life, confident
that all danger was past.

When the Tartars had made themselves masters of China, Bati, a nephew
of Genghis, was dispatched westward to mark further conquests. He did
not follow the same route but passed south of the Ural Mountains.
Thirteen years after the battle of the Kalka, Bati besieged and    (p. 066)
took the capital of the Bulgars, east of the grand dukedom of Souzdal
(1237). As soon as the dukes of Central Russia heard this, they united
against the Tartars, but the Grand Duke of Souzdal refused to join
them. The Tartars sent envoys to the allied dukes. "If you want
peace," they said, "give us the tenth of your goods." "When we are
dead," was the proud reply, "you can have the whole." A battle was
fought in which the Russians were crushed. Nearly all the dukes died
on the battlefield; Riazan was stormed, sacked, and burned, and the
other towns of that dukedom met the same fate.

It was now the turn of Souzdal. The army of the grand duke was
defeated on the Oka; Moscow was burned and Vladimir besieged. After an
heroic defense, the Tartars took the city by assault, and many
Russians were burned in the cathedral which was set on fire. Leaving
ruin in their wake, the Tartars went in search of the grand duke who
had taken a position on the Sit, near the frontiers of Novgorod. Here
another battle was fought ending in disaster for the Russians. The
headless corpse of the grand duke was found by the Bishop of Rostof.
On swept the Asiatic hoards, as if nothing would stop them. At Torjok,
"Russian heads fell beneath the sword of the Tartars as grass beneath
the scythe." Leaving Souzdal behind, they entered the territory of
Novgorod; but the dense forests and swollen rivers delayed them, and
when within fifty miles of the city, they turned southeast. The little
town of Kozelsk[6] did not surrender but inflicted such a loss upon
the invaders that they mentioned it as "the wicked city." When it  (p. 067)
was captured, every man, woman, and child, was butchered.

                   [Footnote 6: Where Kalouga now stands.]

The years 1239 and 1240 were spent in ravaging southern Russia.
Pereiaslaf and Tchernigof, after a desperate defense, were burned, and
the Tartars under command of Genghis's grandson Mangou, marched upon
Kief. Mangou offered terms, but Kief, knowing the fate of other
cities, executed Mangou's envoys. The grand duke and his rival, Daniel
of Galitch, fled from the city, but the people fought for their lives.
Mangou was reenforced by Bati's army and the siege began. The walls
were knocked to pieces by battering rams. "The people of Kief, led by
the brave Dmitri, a Gallician boyard, defended the battered ramparts
till the end of the day, and then retreated to the Church of the Dime,
which they surrounded by a palisade. The last defenders of Kief were
grouped round the tomb of Iaroslaf. The next day they perished. Mangou
gave the boyard his life, but the Mother of Russian Cities was sacked.
This third pillage was the most terrible; even the tombs were not
respected. All that remains of the Church of the Dime is only a few
fragments of mosaic in the museum at Kief. Saint Sophia and the
Monastery of the Catacombs were delivered up to be plundered." Kief
fell in 1240.

There remained only Volhynia and Gallicia, which also bowed under the
Tartar yoke. With the exception of Novgorod and the northwest, Russia
was in possession of the Yellow race. The Russian dukes who had
escaped carried the tale to Western Europe which was soon in a state
of alarm. The Emperor of Germany wrote to the other monarchs:      (p. 068)
"This is the moment to open the eyes of body and soul, now
that the brave princes on whom we depended are dead or in slavery."
The Pope called upon the Christian princes to take up arms. Meanwhile
Bati continued his westward march and penetrated as far as Moravia,
when he was recalled by the death of the second Tartar emperor. He
withdrew to Russia and on the Volga built a city which he named
Sarai--the Castle,--which became the capital of a Tartar empire
extending from the Ural river and Caspian Sea to the mouth of the
Danube, and is known as the Golden Horde.

The first three successors of Genghis Khan are known as the Great
Khans, and ruled over all the Tartars; but after Kublai Khan
established himself in China, in 1260, the Golden Horde declared its
independence. So long as Bati lived, this khanate was united and
powerful, but after his death, in 1257, it gradually lost strength. In
1272, these Tartars became Mahomedans and spread that faith. The
Golden Horde enjoyed another period of prosperity under the Khan
Uzbeck.

How did the Russians bear this blow? We have seen that Iaroslaf, the
duke who had been expelled so many times from Novgorod, became Grand
Duke of Souzdal. He found the country in Souzdal in ruins. Nothing was
left of the towns and villages but charred remains; the inhabitants
who had survived the Tartar massacres had fled into the forests.
Iaroslaf's first work was to induce them to return and rebuild their
homes. The Tartar general Bati heard of this and sent word to Iaroslaf
to come to him. The grand duke dared not refuse. He went to Sarai  (p. 069)
on the Volga where Bati told him that he might continue as grand duke,
but that it would be best for him to pay a visit to the great khan,
who was then on the Amoor in the far eastern part of Asia. Iaroslaf
agreed; he started on his long journey, and after many months of
travel through deserts and wastes, he arrived at the headquarters of
the Tartars. There he was compelled to kneel before Oktai, the
successor of Genghis. It appears that some Russian boyards had
preceded Iaroslaf hoping to secure favors from the khan, and that they
accused the grand duke, but Oktai refused to listen to them. After
some delay Iaroslaf was confirmed as grand duke, and permitted to
return, but he died from exhaustion in the desert, in 1246. His
remains were brought to Vladimir.

Iaroslaf left two sons, Andrew, who succeeded him in Souzdal, and
Alexander who was duke at Novgorod. This younger son was an able as
well as a brave man. On one occasion, when the Scandinavians had
invaded Novgorod's territory aided by the Catholic Orders, Alexander
had gained a great victory on the Neva, from which he is known in
history as Alexander Nevski (1240). Upon his return to Novgorod he had
a dispute with the vetche, and he left the city. After his departure
the territory of the Republic was invaded by the German Sword-bearers
who erected a fort on the Neva, captured Pskof, Novgorod's ally, and
plundered merchants within a short distance of the walls. The people
sent to Alexander Nevski, begging him to come to their rescue, and
after several refusals he consented. Alexander collected an army,
drove the Germans out of Pskof and their new fort, and at last     (p. 070)
defeated them on the ice of Lake Peipus in 1242. This is known as the
Battle on the Ice. Alexander then returned to Novgorod where he was
received with honor and joy.

Andrew, the Grand Duke of Souzdal, Alexander's brother, refused to
recognize Bati's authority, whereupon a Tartar army ravaged his
territory for the second time. Novgorod, as we have seen, had escaped
the Tartar invasion, but when Alexander Nevski received a letter from
Bati, in which the khan said, "God has subjected many peoples to me,
will you alone refuse to recognize my power? If you wish to keep your
land, come to me; you will see the splendor and the glory of my
government." The duke thought it prudent to comply. He and his brother
Andrew went to Sarai, where honors were showered upon the hero of the
Neva. The two brothers were directed to visit the great khan, as their
father Iaroslaf had done. They did so; and the Mongol emperor
confirmed Andrew as Duke of Souzdal, but to Alexander's dukedom, he
added Kief and South Russia. They returned from the Far East in 1257.




VIII--RUSSIA UNDER THE MONGOL YOKE.                                (p. 071)


The Tartars did not interfere with the people, their institutions, or
religion, but they demanded tribute in the form of an annual poll-tax.
Officers called baskaks went from house to house to collect it, either
in money or in furs, and those who could not pay were sold as slaves.
Sometimes this collection caused disturbances. It was some time before
the people of Novgorod would submit. When Bati sent his collectors to
the Republic, the question was brought before the vetche where the
possadnik urged the wisdom of paying the tax, but the people would not
hear of it and promptly murdered the unfortunate burgomaster.
Alexander, too, advised to avoid trouble, but the people refused and
several boyards, including Alexander's son Vassili urged resistance.
The duke acted vigorously. He ordered the arrest of his son, and had
the boyards punished; but it was not before the people heard of the
approach of a Tartar army, that they submitted. Still such was their
resentment that Alexander had the baskaks guarded night and day. At
last Alexander threatened to leave Novgorod with his drujina; then the
people offered no further opposition to the collection of the hated
poll-tax (1260). Two years later the people of Souzdal, Vladimir, and
Rostof rose against the baskaks and killed one of them, a Russian  (p. 072)
who had become a Mahomedan. Alexander, who had succeeded his brother
Andrew as Grand Duke, decided to attempt to appease the khan by going
himself to Sarai with presents; he also wished to be excused from
furnishing a body of Russians to serve in the Tartar army. He
succeeded, but was kept at the court of the khan for a year. His
health broke down and he died on his return journey in 1263. The news
of his death was brought to Novgorod, as mass was being said in the
cathedral. The Metropolitan who was reading the service, interrupted
it, and said, "Learn, my dear children, that the Sun of Russia has
set,--is dead," and the people cried, "We are lost." The death of
Alexander Nevski was a heavy blow to Russia.

The Russians, that is the people of Russia whose story we are reading,
did not mingle with any Tartar except the tax collector whom they did
not like. The victors were nomads, who did not care to occupy the land
they had conquered. When they did settle at Sarai on the Lower Volga,
they absorbed the tribes who had lived there before the invasion, and
who were not Russians, but nomads. The Russian _people_ did not
associate with the conquerors. It was at this time that the word
_Krestianine_ or "true Christian" was applied to the peasant, instead
of the contemptuous term moujik.

Whatever Asiatic characteristics were grafted upon the Russians, came
to them through their kniazes and boyards. The dukes soon showed that
all they cared for, was to hold their positions. After Alexander
Nevski, there is not a single instance of a desire to relieve the
people; and the victors on their part never interfered so long as  (p. 073)
the tribute was paid regularly. The descendants of Andrew Bogolioubski
were not disturbed in Souzdal; those of Roman continued to hold
Galitch and Volhynia, and Oleg's house remained in possession of
Tchernigof. The dukes might fight about Kief; Novgorod might appoint
or expel its dukes,--the Tartars did not mind. But the khan did insist
that the dukes should visit him and pay him homage. He also reserved
the right of approving the succession of a duke, who was compelled to
apply for a written consent, called an _iarlikh_. On one occasion when
the people of Novgorod elected Duke Michael, they afterwards refused
to recognize him, asserting that "it is true we have chosen Michael,
but on condition that he should show us the iarlikh."

The dukes, holding their possessions by favor of the khan, tried to
gain his good-will and favor. Gleb, duke of Bielozersk married in the
khan's family about 1272; Feodor of Riazan was the son-in-law of the
khan of the Nogais. In 1318, the Grand Duke George married Kontchaka,
sister of the Khan Uzbeck. It was the rulers, and not the people of
Russia, that quietly submitted to the _Tartartchina_ or Mongol yoke.

The khans, while they did not care about the people took care that the
dukes should show them slavish respect. In 1303, the dukes were
convoked, and when they were assembled a letter from the khan was
read, in which they were commanded to stop fighting because the great
khan desired to see peace established. Whenever such a letter was
brought, the dukes were directed to meet the envoys on foot, prostrate
themselves, spread fine carpets under their feet, present them     (p. 074)
with a cup filled with gold pieces, and listen, kneeling, while the
letter was read.

Children of the prairie and the desert, the Tartars had neither a
religion nor a civilization to impose upon the Russian people. The
khans were tolerant because they did not care. Koiyuk had a Christian
chapel near his residence. In 1261, the Khan of Sarai gave permission
for the erection of a Greek church in his capital, and he allowed a
bishop to reside there. Mangou gave equal privileges to Christians,
Jews, and Mahomedans.

The dukes and boyards, paying court to the Tartars, gradually adopted
their mode of dressing and, as they became Asiatic in appearance, they
came under the influence of Asiatic thought. They dressed in a long
caftan or flowing robe, wore a sort of turban on the head, swords and
daggers in their belts, and when on horseback, sat in very high
saddles with short stirrups. Dukes and boyards thus became
semi-Asiatic, and drifted away from the people among whom the national
principle was kept alive.

Every succeeding visit to the khan served to increase the intimacy of
the dukes and their Asiatic masters. It was not many years before the
relation with the great khan was severed, but that with the Golden
Horde was kept alive. A writer[7] living at that time, who visited
Sarai during Bati's life, gives the following description: "It (the
court) is crowded and brilliant. His army consists of 600,000 men,
150,000 of whom are Tartars, and 450,000 strangers, Christians as well
as infidels. On Good Friday we were conducted to his tent, between
two fires, because the Tartars believe that a fire purifies        (p. 075)
everything, and robs even poison of its danger. _We had to make many
prostrations_, and enter the tent without touching the threshold. Bati
was on his throne with one of his wives; his brothers, his children,
and the Tartar lords were seated on benches; the rest of the assembly
were on the ground, the men on the right, the women on the left....
The khan and the lords of the court emptied from time to time cups of
gold and silver, while the musicians made the air ring with their
melodies. Bati has a bright complexion; he is affable with his men,
but inspires general terror." The same writer visited the court of the
great khan, and in his description dwells upon the fact that it was
not the Tartars who were most terrible, but the Russian dukes and
nobles who accused one another and who sought to destroy their own
countrymen by bribing the favorites. It was thus that Duke Michael of
Tchernigof was murdered in 1246, and Duke Michael of Tver in 1319, by
a Russian hireling of the Grand Duke of Moscow who was present when
the foul deed was committed. Servile submission to the khans, a
haughty demeanor towards their own people, became the characteristics
of the dukes. "The dukes of Moscow," says a Russian author,[8] "took
the humble title of servants of the khan, and it was by this means
that they became powerful monarchs." An English writer[9] comes to the
following evident conclusion: "The first czars of Muscovy were the
political descendants, not of the Russian dukes, but of the Tartar
khans."

                   [Footnote 7: Planus Corpinius.]

                   [Footnote 8: Karamsin.]

                   [Footnote 9: Wallace.]

A gradual change came over the Golden Horde after the Tartars      (p. 076)
departed from their nomadic life and settled in and about Sarai. They
lost their warlike habits, and with them much of their vigor. They
began to farm out the poll-tax, that is, they sold the right to
collect the tax to merchants of Khiva, whose oppression was so great
that the people of Souzdal revolted in 1262, Koursk in 1284, Kolomna
in 1318, and Tver in 1327. But the oppression was greater when the
dukes of Moscow farmed this tax, not only from their own subjects, but
also from neighboring dukedoms. They were absolutely pitiless in
collecting from the poor people as much as they could extort, and this
was the disgraceful foundation of their wealth and power. The
poll-tax, thereafter, was always a favorite source of revenue in
Russia.

Besides this tribute, the dukes were compelled to furnish soldiers to
their masters. Soon after the conquest, we read of Russian dukes
marching with the Tartars at the head of their drujinas, and of
supplying them with infantry. In 1276 Boris of Rostof and others,
followed Mangou Khan in the war against the tribes of the Caucasus,
and helped to sack the town of Dediakof in Daghestan. This was
excusable, because the enemy was an alien; but what can be thought of
Prince Andrew, the unworthy son of Alexander Nevski, who, in 1281,
induced the Tartars to aid him in pillaging Vladimir, Souzdal, Mourom,
Moscow, and Pereiaslaf, and led in profaning churches and convents? In
1284, when two descendants of Oleg were dukes of Koursk, one of them
put his brother to death for having insulted the khan, and Russian
historians blame not the murderer, but the victim, because he had
aroused the khan's anger! In 1327, the dukes of Moscow and Souzdal (p. 077)
marched against Tver at the command of their Asiatic master. Such was
the influence of the Tartar yoke.

The Russian dukes and their nobles lost not only the principle of
patriotism, but also that of personal honor. The unfortunate Russians
henceforth were to them, not fellow-countrymen but "_tcherne_" "black
people." The khans, with true political instinct looking to the
perpetuation of this condition, gained the friendship of the Church,
as they had that of the dukes. In 1313, the Khan Uzbeck, at the
request of the Metropolitan or head of the Church of Moscow, ordered
that the Church should retain its privileges, and that it should not
be deprived of its property, because, he says, "these possessions are
sacred, as they belong to men whose prayers preserve our lives and
strengthen our armies." The churches and convents grew enormously
rich. They received gifts of land, and the priests, so bribed, allied
themselves with the heathen masters, and aided further in oppressing
the people.

The descendants of the dukes and drujinas lost the large and generous
impulses of the old Norsemen, to make way for the Asiatic deformities
of treachery, cruelty, cunning, and disregard of honor. Whatever came
in the way of their own interests, was trampled under foot by fair
means or foul. The boyards, too, were tainted by the example of the
chiefs. The vast extent of the country, the sparsity of the
population, the difficulties in the way of communication, and above
all the general ignorance, prevented the appearance of a patriot who
might have raised a truly national banner, and shaken off the yoke of
the servile lackeys of the Tartars.

[Illustration: Moscow]                                             (p. 078)




IX--LITHUANIA AND MOSCOW.                                          (p. 079)


We have seen that the Tartar invasion stopped short of Novgorod, and
turned southeast, thus leaving northwest Russia free. What are now
known as the Baltic Provinces, was at that time covered with dense
forests, inhabited by the Finns or Suomi, the Tchouds, Jmouds, and
Lithuanians, all of the same race and speaking the same language, but
constantly at war with one another. In the 13th century a chief named
Mindvog, after killing his brothers and sons, united the tribes, and
made himself master of Lithuania. He then invaded Russia whose dukes,
suffering under the Tartar yoke, were unable to withstand him. He
captured Grodno and Novogredek, when he was confronted by Alexander
Nevsky and Daniel of Volhynia in front, and by the Knights of Livonia
in his rear. In this extremity Mindvog sent to the Pope promising that
he would be converted in return for his good services. Pope Innocent
IV replied by sending a papal legate to Grodno, where Mindvog and his
wife were baptized, and he was made King of Lithuania (1252). Soon
after he had a dispute with the Livonian Knights to whom he was forced
to cede the country of the Jmouds. He again became a pagan and, marching
against the Knights, defeated them. Upon his return from this      (p. 080)
expedition, he was murdered by a chief named Dovmont whom he had
injured. Lithuania again fell into anarchy until another enterprising
chief named Gedimin restored order in 1315.

Gedimin invaded Russia, defeated a Russo-Tartar army in 1321, and took
Tchernigof and Vladimir. He then went south, where the Russian cities
readily opened their gates to him, hoping for relief from the Mongol
yoke. He took the old capital Kief, and there had his sons baptized in
the Greek church and tried to marry them into the families of Russian
dukes. He established his capital at Wilna where he attracted many
German artists and mechanics by granting them special privileges. He
died a pagan, in 1340, dividing his country among his sons and his
brother.

One of his sons, Olgerd, succeeded in getting possession of the whole,
and then started upon a career of conquest. He first attacked
Novgorod, where one of his brothers had taken refuge, and made
conquests east and south, until he reached the Black Sea. Although he
was a pagan, Simeon the Proud, Grand Duke of Moscow, gave him his
daughter; but this did not prevent Olgerd from waging war with
Simeon's successors. In 1368, he defeated the Tartars of the Lower
Dnieper, and destroyed Cherson in the Crimea.

When he died he followed Gedimin's example by dividing his territories
among his sons, but one of them, Jagellon, became sole ruler by
putting his brothers to flight and his uncle to death. At this time
the Russian language was adopted and with it the Greek Church,
although Jagellon was still a pagan. When he married Hedwiga, the  (p. 081)
heiress to the Kingdom of Poland, he embraced the Roman Catholic
church; in 1386, he went to Cracow, where he was crowned King of
Poland, and soon after gave orders that his people must join the same
church, converting them as Vladimir had introduced Christianity among
the people of Kief. Jagellon made Cracow his capital. Some time
afterwards one of his cousins, Vitovt, raised a revolt against him in
Lithuania, and Jagellon was compelled to cede that territory to him.
Thus Vitovt became Grand Duke of Lithuania.

Vitovt married the sister of Vassili, Grand Duke of Moscow, and
extended his domain toward the east. He invaded Smolensk, whose Grand
Duke Sviatoslaf, when fighting in Russia, had taken a delight in
impaling and burning alive Russian women and children. That savage had
been killed in 1387, in a battle with the Lithuanians, and his son had
succeeded him. Vitovt, before Smolensk, invited this prince and his
brothers to visit him in his tent. They accepted and were warmly
received, but when they were ready to depart, they were told that they
were prisoners of war. Smolensk was taken by surprise, and pillaged.

Vitovt contemplated the conquest of Russia. His territory bordered in
the east on Souzdal and Riazan. He had defeated an army of Tartars in
the south, and was making preparations for a bold stroke. Collecting
an army of Lithuanians, Poles, Russians, and five hundred Knights of
the Teutonic Order, he set out from Kief and came upon the Tartar army
near Pultowa where, in 1399, he suffered a serious defeat. He
recovered from this blow, and after some time began a war with the
Teutonic Order which he defeated in 1410, at the battle of the     (p. 082)
Tannenberg. He thereupon re-annexed the Jmoud country.

Vitovt had given up his designs upon Russia; he planned to raise
Lithuania into a kingdom, and to have a Metropolitan of its own,
instead of being dependent upon the head of the Greek Church at
Moscow. He succeeded in the last-named object, but met with a check in
the former, and, as he was eighty years old, the disappointment caused
an illness from which he died, in 1430. After his death, Lithuania had
no more influence upon Russia. Sometimes it had a grand duke of its
own, at other times it was united with Poland. In 1501, it became the
property of the King of Poland, who added to his title that of Grand
Duke of Lithuania. Its nobles spoke the Polish language.

It was necessary to sketch in a few words the history of Lithuania,
not only because it is part of Russia to-day, but because it has
always been claimed by Russia. The history of that country, however,
from the beginning of the 14th century, is centered about Muscovia,
the territory of the Grand Duke of Moscow. At the time of the
Lithuanian conquest, Muscovia was bounded on the north by Tver, on the
east by Souzdal, on the south by Riazan, and on the west by Lithuania.
It belonged to Alexander Nevski, who at his death left it to his son
Daniel. Its area was increased by him by the towns of Pereiaslaf,
Zabiesski and Kolomna. Daniel died in 1303, and was buried in the
church of St. Michael the Archangel, which remained the burial place
of the Muscovite princes until the time of Peter the Great.

The next grand duke was Daniel's son George, whose first act was   (p. 083)
to capture the Duke of Smolensk from whom he took the town of Mojaisk.
In 1304 the Grand Duke of Souzdal died. Michael of Tver claimed the
succession as the eldest of the family, but George of Moscow contested
it. Michael was supported by the boyards of Vladimir and the people of
Novgorod; the khan at Sarai also declared in his favor, and Michael
was installed. George, however, was not satisfied and began a war; he
was defeated in battle, and twice besieged in Moscow. Suddenly he
heard that the khan was dead; he hastened to Sarai, and there made
friends with the new Khan Uzbeck, who gave him his sister Kontchaka in
marriage, and ordered that George should have possession of Souzdal.
He returned to Moscow with a Tartar army and Michael, considering the
odds, proposed to cede Vladimir on condition that his own patrimony of
Tver should remain intact. George refused, and the war broke out anew.
Michael defeated him and captured Kontchaka and the Tartar general,
but he released his prisoners, and the dispute was again brought
before the khan. George took good care to be at Sarai, and having
ample means at his disposal from his poll-tax collecting, distributed
bribes right and left. Michael, confident in the justice of his cause,
committed the mistake of sending his twelve-year-old son in charge of
high boyards, to represent him; but when he was informed of George's
methods, he, too, proceeded to Sarai, after making his will. Upon his
arrival, he was accused of having drawn his sword upon the Khan's
envoy, and of having poisoned Kontchaka. Uzbeck would not even listen
to such absurd complaints, but George invented other falsehoods,   (p. 084)
and at last Michael was arrested. The khan went on a hunting trip in
the Caucasus, and the wretched Duke of Tver was dragged after him in
chains. One day he was put in the pillory in the market of a populous
town, where the people crowded around him to look at the man who, a
short time before, was a powerful prince in his own country. Michael's
boyards urged him to escape, but he dreaded the khan's vengeance upon
his family and people. George increased his bribes, and thus secured
the order that Michael should be put to death.

One of Michael's pages came to the tent occupied by him, and told him
that George and a Tartar general were approaching. "I know what their
object is," said the unfortunate duke. He at once sent his young son
to one of the khan's wives, who had promised to protect the child. The
two men came to the tent and ordered the Tver boyards to leave. Hired
assassins were called in, and a Russian ruffian named Romanetz stabbed
the unfortunate duke. When George and the Tartar entered, they saw the
nude corpse; it had been despoiled. The Tartar was shocked. "What!" he
cried, "Will you allow the body of your uncle to be outraged!" George
only smiled; but one of his attendants threw a cloak over the murdered
man.

When Michael's children grew up, one of his sons, Dmitri of the
Terrible Eyes, secured some friends at the khan's court. He obtained
the title of grand duke, and a baskak received orders to install him.
When George heard this, he hurried to Sarai; there the two men met, and
Dmitri, drawing his sword, killed his father's murderer (1325).    (p. 085)
Dmitri was arrested and put to death by order of the khan, but his
brother Alexander was permitted to succeed him at Tver.

This duke was in sympathy with the people. Suffering under the
oppression of the Tartar tax collectors, the people revolted under the
leadership of Alexander. The palace of the baskak was attacked, and he
and his attendants were killed. Uzbeck, incited by Ivan Kalita,
George's brother and successor at Moscow, prepared to take revenge,
when Ivan volunteered to punish Tver, as well as Riazan and Novgorod
which had given evidence of sympathy. The offer was accepted, and Ivan
at the head of a Muscovite army reenforced by 50,000 Tartars marched
upon the doomed city. Alexander and his brothers fled. Tver and two
other cities were sacked, the Duke of Riazan was put to death, and
Novgorod had to pay a heavy fine. Ivan thought that his services would
procure him Tver and Riazan, but Uzbeck did not intend to extend the
power of the treacherous family, and Constantine, another son of
Michael, was made Duke of Tver. He and Ivan went to Sarai, where the
latter was ordered to bring Alexander before the khan. The prince had
found an asylum in Pskof, where Ivan's messengers appeared to demand
his surrender. The envoys urged him to give himself up under the plea
"not to expose a Christian people to the wrath of the infidels." The
people of Pskof thought otherwise. "Do not go to the Horde, my lord,"
said they; "whatever happens, we will die with you." Alexander refused
to obey the summons, and the people of Pskof began to construct a
new fort. Ivan Kalita, the Grand Duke of Moscow, persuaded the     (p. 086)
Metropolitan to place Alexander and Pskof under the ban of the Church,
which was done. We see here a Christian prince persecuting a relative,
and a Christian priest excommunicating a Christian people,--all to
please an infidel conqueror! Still the people of Pskof refused to
yield, but Alexander left the city and took refuge in Lithuania. Then
Pskof informed Ivan of his departure, saying, "Alexander is gone; all
Pskof swears it, from the smallest to the greatest, popes,[10] monks,
nuns, orphans, women, and children." (1329.)

                   [Footnote 10: Priests.]

Some years afterwards an attempt was made by Alexander to recover
Tver. He went to Sarai with some of his boyards. There he made
submission. "Lord, all-powerful Czar," he said, "if I have done
anything against you, I have come hither to receive of you life or
death. Do as God inspires you; I am ready for either." Uzbeck pardoned
him and Alexander returned to Tver. This did not please Ivan Kalita,
who knew that he was hated everywhere, and that his enemies only
needed a leader. He went to Sarai where he told Uzbeck that Alexander
was a very dangerous enemy to the Tartars. Alexander was summoned to
appear and when he complied, he was arrested, condemned to death, and
beheaded.




X--DECLINE OF THE TARTAR POWER.                                    (p. 087)

DMITRI DONSKOI.


Crafty and unscrupulous, the grand dukes of Moscow were feared by
their neighbors. Ivan Kalita, as farmer of the poll-tax, grew
immensely wealthy. He collected a double tax from Novgorod, which the
republic, although allied with Lithuania, dared not refuse. He bought
several towns, besides land in the neighborhood of Vladimir, Rostof,
and Kostroma. His title was still Grand Duke of Vladimir, but Moscow
was the real capital. Ivan took very good care to stand well with the
Church. He built convents and churches, and never went out without an
alms-bag or _kalita_ to give money to the poor; hence his surname. The
seat of the Metropolitan was still at Vladimir, but he often came to
Moscow, and finally moved there; so that it became also the capital of
the Church. It is reported that the Metropolitan said to Ivan, "God
will bless you and raise you above all other dukes, and this city
above all other cities. Your house will reign in this place during
many centuries; their hands will conquer all their enemies; the saints
will make their dwelling here, and here my bones shall rest."

When Ivan with the Alms-bag died in 1341, he left the bulk of his  (p. 088)
possessions to his eldest son Simeon, and gave only small estates to
his other children; he also forbade that Moscow's territory should be
divided. His body was scarcely in the grave before the dukes of Tver
and Souzdal were on the way to Sarai to claim the grand dukedom of
Vladimir; they were supported by other dukes who disliked and dreaded
the Muscovite family. Simeon hurried after them, well provided with
some of his father's treasure. He used it so well, that he received
the iarlikh, and was installed at Vladimir. Servile toward the khan,
he was overbearing toward the other Russian dukes, which procured for
him the surname of the Proud. He was the first to assume the title of
Grand Duke of all the Russias; and, acting in that capacity, he
graciously confirmed the charter of Novgorod, for which he demanded
and obtained payment. Simeon died in 1353 of the "black death," a
pestilence which was imported from Asia.

Great changes were taking place at Sarai, in the Khan of the Golden
Horde. Its power was broken by internal discord, when Mourout, the
legal heir of Bati, was attacked by a rival Mamai, who succeeded in
establishing himself at Sarai. Simeon was succeeded by his brother,
Ivan II, an easy-going, good-natured man whose reign of six years did
not increase the influence of Moscow. At his death, in 1359, he left
several minor children, the oldest of whom was Dmitri, a boy of
twelve. Dmitri of Souzdal went to Sarai--and secured the iarlikh,
which made him Grand Duke of Vladimir, but Alexis, the Metropolitan,
was loyal to Ivan's children, and appealed to the khan in the name of
his young ward. Mourout, the heir of Bati, declared in his favor,  (p. 090)
and young Dmitri was taken to Vladimir escorted by an army, and
installed. (1363.)

[Illustration: Dmitri Donskoi]

The appointment was disputed by the dukes of Tver, Souzdal, and
Riazan. Dmitri of Souzdal held an iarlikh from Mourout's opponent, and
tried to enter in Vladimir, but was expelled. The Metropolitan
excommunicated the opponents of Ivan's son, who held the fort as Grand
Duke. Young Dmitri made war upon the Duke of Tver, and after a seven
years' struggle (1368-1375), compelled him to renounce his claims.

Dmitri was summoned before the Khan, in 1371. He went but what he saw
at Sarai convinced him that the Tartars were no longer able to uphold
their authority. He did not hesitate to engage in a struggle with
Riazan, although it was supported by a Tartar army. Thereafter, when
orders arrived from the khan, Dmitri ignored them. In 1376, he sent a
large army to Kazan on the Volga, and forced two Mongol chiefs to pay
tribute. Two years later, in 1378, a battle was fought between Dmitri
and one of Mamai's generals in Riazan, when the Tartars were defeated,
which made the grand duke exclaim: "Their time is come, and God is
with us!" The khan sent an army to ravage Riazan, and made
preparations to reestablish his authority at Moscow.

To make sure of success, Mamai took two years to collect an immense
army and to mature his plans. This could not remain secret to the
Russians, who, aroused by Dmitri, laid aside their private feuds to
make common cause against the infidels. A large number of dukes
assembled at Moscow, and even the Lithuanians promised to send     (p. 091)
troops to Kostroma where the Russian army was gathering. The
Metropolitan assured Dmitri of the victory, and sent two monks to go
with the troops. Making the sign of the Cross on their cowls, he said,
"Behold a weapon which faileth never!"

Russia was united against the Mongol; all the dukes, with the
exception of those of Tver and Riazan, lent their aid. These two
dreaded Moscow's power, and the Duke of Riazan tried to conclude an
alliance with Jagellon of Lithuania and Mamai.

Dmitri, at the head of an army estimated at 150,000 men, marched
through Riazan to the Don where the Tartars were drawn up, awaiting
the reinforcements of their ally Jagellon, who was still fifteen
leagues distant. Dmitri resolved to fight the Tartars before a
junction could be effected. He crossed the Don and met the enemy on
the plain of Koulikovo,--the Field of the Woodcocks,--where a furious
battle was fought. It was decided by a sudden attack upon the Tartars
from an ambush, which threw them into a panic. The Tartars were
routed; Mamai's camp, his chariots and camels, were all captured.
Dmitri was found in a swoon from loss of blood. He was surnamed
Donskoi, in honor of this victory. (1380.)

It seemed as if the end of the Mongol yoke had come, when another
great leader appeared among them. Tamerlane, after conquering Bokhara,
Hindostan, Iran, and Asia Minor, entered Europe, and ordered Mamai to
be put to death. He summoned Dmitri Donskoi to appear before him, and
received a curt refusal. Tamerlane sent one of his generals with
an immense army to Moscow, and Dmitri, not finding the former      (p. 092)
support, went to Kostroma to collect troops. The Tartars appeared
before Moscow, which they tried to carry by assault but failed. They
pretended to enter into negotiations, when they surprised the gates
and Moscow was delivered up to fire and sword. It is said that 24,000
inhabitants were slaughtered. Vladimir and other towns suffered the
same fate.

It is told that Dmitri wept when he saw the charred remains of his
capital after the Tartars had withdrawn. There was nothing for it but
to make peace with the khan, and once more the Tartar tax gatherers
went their rounds. But Dmitri's heart was sore against the Dukes of
Tver and Riazan who had abetted Mamai, and Novgorod, which had used
the opportunity of Moscow's distress to plunder some of its towns.
After the country had sufficiently recovered, he compelled the Duke of
Riazan to conclude "a perpetual peace," and Novgorod paid an indemnity
besides agreeing to an annual tribute.

When Dmitri died in 1389, he left Moscow the most powerful of Russian
dukedoms. He was succeeded by his eldest son Vassili, with the consent
of his cousin Vladimir, who was the eldest of the family. Vassili
mentioned Novgorod as "his patrimony," and acted as if the republic
was his private property. He visited Sarai in 1392, and while there
bought an iarlikh, which placed him in possession of Souzdal, Nishni
Novgorod, and Mourom. In 1393, the people of Novgorod revolted, but
Vassili's army convinced them that the republic was fast losing its
former power.

At this time Tamerlane, dissatisfied with his generals, arrived in
Europe and after pillaging the Golden Horde, moved westward,       (p. 093)
spreading ruin and desolation. He drew near to Moscow, where the
famous eikon of the Virgin was taken in solemn procession, when the
Tartar army stopped and turned to the south, where Azof, Astrakhan,
and Sarai, were plundered and destroyed. (1395.) After Tamerlane's
withdrawal, Vassili pretended not to know to whom to pay the
tribute,--and so paid none at all. The Tartars under Ediger marched
upon Moscow to collect it, but the city was bravely defended and
Ediger, fearing an invasion from Asia, agreed to accept a ransom of
3000 rubles, which was paid by the boyards.

More dangerous were the attacks of Vitovt of Lithuania, Vassili's
father-in-law, who marched three times against Moscow. Both Vitovt and
Vassili were indisposed to risk a decisive battle, fearing that, if
defeated, their enemies would despoil them. In 1408 a treaty was
signed whereby the Ouger was made the frontier between them. This gave
Smolensk to Lithuania, and Kozelsk to Moscow.

Vassili extended his territory, and with it his name; one of his
daughters married the Byzantine Emperor, John Palaeologus. At his
death, in 1425, he left his territory to his son Vassili, the Blind,
whose title was contested by his uncle George, on the ground of being
the eldest of the family. The dispute was submitted to the khan, in
1431. Both sides humbled themselves, but the argument of Vassili's
boyards prevailed. "My Lord Czar," they said to the khan, "let us
speak,--us, the slaves of the grand duke. Our master, the grand duke,
prays for the throne of the grand dukedom, which is your property, (p. 094)
having no other title but your protection, your investiture, and your
iarlikh. You are master and can dispose of it according to your good
pleasure. My Lord, the Duke George, his uncle, claims the grand
dukedom by the act and will of his father, but not as a favor from the
all-powerful." Vassili the Blind, was the first grand duke to be
crowned at Moscow instead of at Vladimir.

His reign was disturbed by constant wars with his uncle, and
afterwards with his cousins. In 1446 he was taken prisoner by one of
the latter, who ordered his eyes to be put out. In 1450, peace was
restored when the second son of George died of poison. Notwithstanding
the loss of his sight Vassili displayed considerable energy in
reestablishing his authority. Novgorod was forced to pay another
indemnity, and to give a written promise that in future all deeds
would be void unless stamped with the seal of the grand duke.

The most remarkable incident of Vassili's reign was the Council at
Florence, Italy, in 1449, where delegates of the Roman and Greek
Churches tried to effect a union. There were seventeen Metropolitans,
among them Isidore of Moscow, who signed the Act of Union. When
Isodore returned and declared what he had done, a great opposition
appeared. Vassili himself insulted the Metropolitan, who fled to Rome.
In 1453, Mahomet II captured Constantinople when a host of priests,
monks, artists, and learned men fled from the extinct Byzantine
Empire, to find an asylum in Russia.

While nothing resulted from the Council of Florence, owing to the
opposition of members of the Greek Church, the fall of Constantinople
left a deep impression upon Russia, which chose to consider itself (p. 095)
as the heir to the Byzantine Empire. More than this, the influence of
the men who found a refuge in Russia, served to inoculate the country
of their adoption with the semi-oriental civilization which had
distinguished Constantinople from Western Europe. The time, too, was
propitious. Russia was gradually recovering from the blow of Tartar
rule, which had marred its progress during two centuries. Here was,
therefore, to all intent and purposes, a virgin soil, which promised
to yield a rich harvest to whatever principles were planted in it. It
might even regenerate the decaying elements of the Byzantine
civilization.

[Illustration: Ivan III]                                           (p. 096)




XI--IVAN III, THE GREAT.                                           (p. 097)


Vassili's eldest son Ivan was born in 1440. It is said that upon the
occasion of his birth, an old monk at Novgorod had a vision which he
reported to the Archbishop. "Truly," he said, "it is to-day that the
grand duke triumphs; God has given him an heir; I behold this child
making himself illustrious by glorious deeds. He will subdue princes
and nations. But woe to Novgorod! Novgorod will fall at his feet, and
never rise again."

Vassili, wishing to avoid the disputes incident upon the succession,
during his lifetime admitted Ivan as co-regent. Upon his father's
death, in 1462, Ivan was twenty-two years old. He succeeded without
the usual disturbances, and the first six years of his reign were
uneventful. In 1468, he gained forcible possession of his brother
George's estate, and allowed him to die in prison. When he heard of
his death,--he wept. Another brother, Andrew, was in his way, and was
flung into prison, whereupon Ivan called the Metropolitan and bishops
to his palace, wept some more, and confessed that he had been too
severe;--but he forgot to restore Andrew's property. When his third
brother, Boris, died, Ivan seized the estate and kept it; but he wept
some more.

This soft-hearted but tenacious gentleman found fault with his     (p. 098)
neighbor, Michael of Tver, for entering into an alliance with
Lithuania. To settle the difficulty, he invaded the dukedom, and
annexed it to Moscow. Then, having his hands free, he thought of
Novgorod. The Germans of the Hanseatic League had formed a colony in
the old republic, which had grown very wealthy. Ivan looked upon that
wealth as his; if it was not, it ought to be. Acting upon this
satisfactory conclusion, he remembered that the people of Novgorod had
omitted to do him homage when he succeeded his father. They had even
failed to appreciate the gentle letter of remonstrance in which he
reminded them of their oversight. Good-natured as he knew himself to
be, he could not afford to encourage such a rebellious spirit; but,
being a careful man, he concluded that it would be more humane as well
as cheaper to try the gentle means of bribery. His gold, distributed
where it would do most good, procured him a large party. The
opposition was led by a woman named Marfa, the wealthy widow of a
possadnik. She urged that the republic should ask the help of Casimir
IV, King of Poland, but Ivan's friends in the vetche replied that, if
Poland should win, the Roman Catholic Church would enter, whereas
Russia was at least loyal to the Greek Church.

Marfa's influence prevailed; the republic submitted to Poland, on
condition that its charter should be respected. Gentle Ivan despatched
some Envoys to warn the people of the error of their ways, and when
that did no good, he hired Tartar cavalry, overran the territory of
the republic, and directed his troops to cut off the noses and lips
of the prisoners. It is probable that he wept, although history    (p. 099)
omits mentioning the fact. Novgorod was unprepared; a mob was
collected and styled an army, and in the battle of the Chelona, 3,000
trained troops put to flight 30,000 citizen soldiers. Novgorod was
lost. Ivan kindly permitted the name "republic" to continue, but his
authority was admitted. He also received a share of the wealth as an
indemnity. (1470.)

Two years later he married the niece and supposed heiress of the last
Byzantine emperor. Her father, Thomas Palaeologus, had fled to Rome
where he died leaving one daughter Sophia. Pope Paul II wished to find
her a husband, and Cardinal Bessarion of the Greek Church advised him
to offer her hand to Ivan. The offer was accepted; Sophia received a
dower from the Pope who still hoped to unite the two churches, and the
bride was received with great honor in Ivan's territory. The grand
duke probably had his eye on Constantinople, but deferred his claim to
some favorable opportunity. With Sophia came many Greek nobles,
artists, and learned men. Ivan, as may be judged from his gentle
nature, was a patron of art, and had no prejudice against foreigners.
Several Italians came to Moscow where their services were appreciated.

Ivan left Novgorod in peace during five years, when he thought it time
to familiarize the citizens with the fact that their republic was a
thing of the past. He needed a pretext; by a judicious use of money,
his agents raised a mob against the boyards, who, being assaulted,
invoked the strong arm of the law, in the person of Ivan. The grand
duke came to Novgorod in 1475, to hold court. He at once ordered   (p. 100)
the arrest of the possadnik, Marfa's son, and a number of boyards who
believed in a republic, had them put in chains and carried to Moscow.
This was in violation of the charter, but Ivan had an elastic
conscience. Next he tempted a scribe to mention him as _Sovereign_
instead of "lord," in an official document; and when, in a last effort
to save the republic, Marfa's partisans killed a number of Ivan's
friends, it was evidently his duty to restore order.

Upon his return to Moscow, he announced that Novgorod was the enemy of
the Greek Church, and the ally of the Pope and of Lithuania. This so
alarmed the Metropolitan and the priests that they begged Ivan to make
war upon the wicked city. Many dukes and boyards, moved by loyalty for
the church, and perhaps scenting spoils, flocked to his camp. Marfa's
partisans in vain tried to arouse the citizens by the cry, "Let us die
for liberty and St. Sophia!" It fell on deaf ears; every one for
himself, was the general thought. Novgorod surrendered. Ivan
guaranteed,--for just so long as it should suit him,--the people's
lives and property, their ancient code of laws, and exemption from
Muscovite service; but the vetche and office of possadnik were
abolished, and with them died the republic. (1478.)

Having settled with Novgorod to his satisfaction, Ivan bethought
himself of establishing peace in his own household. Russian writers
state that his wife, Sophia, annoyed him by often repeating the
interesting inquiry, "How long am I to be the slave of the Tartars?"
The Khan of the Golden Horde had been dissolved since Tamerlane's raid;
several states had been formed from it, of which the principal     (p. 101)
were Kazan, Sarai or Astrakhan, and the Crimea. Kazan was ruled by a
czar; its people were the descendants of Mongols and Bulgars who had
made great progress in commerce. The Khan of Sarai and his men clung
to the life of nomads; but the subjects of the Khan of the Crimea,
were Mongols, Armenians, Greeks, Jews, and Italians; and all three had
this in common that they were constantly indulging in quarrels and
strife at home.

Ivan knew all this, because sometimes a chief would come to Moscow for
an asylum, and others took service in his army. He no longer sent
tribute, although occasionally, when he was occupied elsewhere, he did
send a small present. In 1478 Khan Akhmet sent ambassadors to Moscow
to remind him that the tribute was in arrears. Ivan, who had
apparently a wonderful command over his features, pretended to lose
his temper, jumped on the picture of the khan, and ordered all the
envoys except one to be put to death. The survivor was told to go
home, and tell his master of his reception.

Ivan had reasonable cause for thinking that Akhmet would be
displeased, and collected an army of 150,000 men on the Oka, where he
took up a strong position. He had been right in his conjecture, for
Akhmet gathered an army and in due time arrived on the opposite bank
of the river. Ivan had time to reflect. He did not much fancy risking
a decisive battle, and returned to Moscow to consult his mother, the
boyards, and the priests. All urged him to fight, and finally he came
back to the camp, convinced that scheming and plotting were more in
his line. All this time the two armies lay within earshot, exchanging
complimentary remarks, with no casualties. The khan offered to     (p. 102)
pardon Ivan on condition that he should come and hold his stirrup;
or, if he were too tired, if he should send some high officer to do it
in his name. Ivan shook his head. Meanwhile the priests at Moscow were
growing impatient, and the Archbishop Vassian sent him a warm letter.
It happened that Akhmet was quite as prudent as Ivan; but when the
winter came and the Oka, instead of a barrier, became an easy crossing,
Ivan ordered the retreat. Just then the two armies, led by such brave
commanders, were seized with a panic, and away they fled in opposite
directions. (1480.) The honors were with Ivan, because he did not have
so far to run as Akhmet, who did not stop until he reached Sarai. It
is not stated why Ivan received no surname from this great battle.

The following year, 1481, Ivan had sufficiently recovered to show the
courage he possessed. There was a disturbance in Novgorod, where the
people did not appreciate the nobility of his character. He ordered
some of the boyards to be tortured and put to death, and _eight
thousand_ citizens were forcibly packed off to Souzdal.

In fear of his doughty enemy Akhmet, Ivan made friends with the Khan
of the Crimea, calculating that if the former should attack him again,
he would have to look out for his rear. Akhmet, however, seemed to
have had enough of it, and Ivan, who was on bad terms with Lithuania
and Poland, suggested to his friend that a raid into those territories
might pay. The Khan of the Crimea took the hint; he penetrated as far
as Kief which he captured and pillaged. (1482.) The famous monastery
of the Catacombs was almost destroyed; but Ivan had the            (p. 103)
satisfaction of knowing that his two enemies had other things to think
of, instead of annoying him.

In 1487 war broke out with Kazan. A Russian army marched against it,
but Ivan did not take command. As a result, the city was taken and the
khan, who had assumed the title of czar, was brought a prisoner to
Moscow. Fearing that he would unite the other Tartars against him if
he annexed the territory at once, he appointed a nephew of his friend,
the Khan of the Crimea, but placed Russian soldiers in the fortress,
while he added the title of Prince of Bulgaria to his own. Other
Tartar princes sent envoys to protest against the arrest. Ivan did not
receive them in person, and refused to release the prisoner, but he
ordered the envoys to be treated with great honor and gave them so
many presents, that they returned in great good humor.

In 1492, the King of Poland died, leaving that kingdom to his eldest
son Albert, and Lithuania to his second son Alexander. Ivan was justly
indignant that he had not been remembered in the will. He sent envoys
to Bajazet II, Sultan of Turkey, to the Kings of Hungary and Moldavia,
and to his old friend the Khan of the Crimea, to secure their
assistance or at least their kind neutrality. Of the services of the
Khan of the Crimea he felt assured.

He began by discovering a Polish plot against his life at Moscow, and
appealed to the religious prejudices of the Lithuanian nobles
belonging to the Greek Church, omitting to mention his little
arrangement with the infidel sultan. When Alexander sent envoys to
negotiate terms of peace, Ivan's deputies said to them: "Lithuania (p. 104)
has profited by the misfortunes of Russia to take our territory, but
to-day things are changed." They were right. When peace was concluded
in 1494, Ivan's frontier in the west was extended.

The marriage of Alexander to Ivan's daughter seemed to end the
hostility between the two countries, but nothing was further from the
schemes of the wily grand duke. He stipulated that she should have a
Greek chapel in the palace, and warned her never to appear in a
Catholic church, and always to wear the Russian national dress. Soon
after the wedding Ivan complained that his daughter was forced to wear
Polish costumes, and that the Greek Church was being persecuted. These
were to him ample cause for war, the more so since he had good reason
to count upon his friends, the priests and boyards of the Greek
Church. When the war broke out, cities where the majority of the
people belonged to that church, opened their gates to his army, and
Alexander was badly defeated in the battle of Vedrocha. This war added
another slice to Ivan's territory.

Alexander in his distress made an alliance with the Livonian Order and
with the Great Horde at Sarai; but Ivan's old friend, the Khan of the
Crimea, made a raid in Gallicia and Volhynia, and the Lithuanians were
defeated at Mstislaf; but they compelled the Russians to raise the
siege of Smolensk. Meanwhile Ivan had serious trouble. In 1495, he
ordered the merchants of several Hanseatic towns to be arrested at
Novgorod, and incidentally had goods to the value of $200,000,--an
immense sum in those days,--carried to Moscow. This caused the     (p. 105)
foreign merchants to leave for safer places; but the Livonian Order
invaded his territory, and in the battle of Siritza, they crushed a
Russian army of 50,000 men, but the following year, 1502, they were
defeated at Pskof.

Toward the end of his life he was in doubt about his successor,
because his eldest son was dead. At first he thought of making his
grandson Dmitri, his heir; but he changed his mind, sent his
daughter-in-law and grandson to prison and proclaimed his second son
Vassili his heir. He died in 1505, after a reign of forty-three years.
It was under his direction that a new code of laws, the Oulogenia, was
prepared.




XII--RUSSIA BECOMES AN AUTOCRACY.                                  (p. 106)


Vassili, Ivan's son, showed a great resemblance to his father. He did
not evince any greater love for his near relatives, as one of his
first acts was to put his nephew Dmitri in prison, where he died. One
of his brothers who did not like his manners, tried to escape, but was
brought back and severely punished.

The republic of Pskof, and the dukedoms of Riazan and
Novgorod-Seversky were still enjoying some degree of liberty, which
Vassili did not approve. At Pskof, the grand duke was represented by
_a namiestnik_, or ducal delegate; the people, citizens and peasants,
nobles and lower classes, quarreled constantly among themselves, but
united to quarrel with the delegate. Vassili determined to put an end
to this. He came to Novgorod to hold court, and summoned the
magistrates of Pskof to appear before him, and when they arrived he
ordered their arrest. A merchant of Pskof heard of it and, hurrying
home, told the people. Immediately the bell was rung to convoke the
vetche, and the masses called for war with Moscow. More prudent
counsels prevailed when messengers arrived from the prisoners,
imploring their friends not to try a useless resistance and to avoid
the shedding of blood. A leading citizen was sent to Vassili to    (p. 107)
offer him submission; he was dismissed with the answer that one of the
_diaks_ or secretaries would come to Pskof to let the people know the
terms. When that officer arrived, he was admitted in the vetche, where
he informed his hearers that Vassili imposed two conditions, namely,
that Pskof and the towns subject to it must receive his delegates, and
that the vetche must be abolished and the great bell, used to convoke
it, must be taken down. Twenty-four hours were asked to deliberate.
Before the time expired, the vetche met for the last time, when the
first magistrate addressed the delegate. "It is written in our
chronicles," he said, "that our ancestors took oaths to the grand
duke. The people of Pskof swore never to rebel against our lord who is
at Moscow, nor to ally themselves with Lithuania, with Poland, nor
with the Germans, otherwise the wrath of God would be upon them,
bringing with it famine, fires, floods, and the invasion of the
infidels. If the grand duke, on his part, did not observe his vow, he
dared the same consequences. Now our town and our bell are in the
power of God and the duke. As for us, we have kept our oath." The
great bell was taken to Novgorod, and Vassili visited "his patrimony."
Three hundred wealthy families were transported to other cities and
replaced by as many families from Moscow. When he departed from Pskof,
he left a garrison of 5,000 guards and 500 artillerymen. That was the
end of the last republic in Russia. (1510.)

In 1521, it was the turn of Riazan whose duke was accused of having
entered into an alliance with the Khan of the Crimea. He was summoned
to Moscow, where he was arrested, but he managed to escape. His
dukedom, however, was annexed to Moscow. Two years later, in 1523, (p. 108)
the Duke of Novgorod-Severski was put in prison for underhand dealing
with Poland, and that dukedom was added to Vassili's territories. This
rounded up Vassili's possessions in Central Russia.

The grand duke continued his father's policy toward Lithuania. When
Alexander died, he tried to become Grand Duke of Wilna, but the King
of Poland was too quick for him. War broke out, but neither gained any
important advantage, and in 1509 a _perpetual peace_ was concluded
wherein Vassili renounced all claims upon Kief and Smolensk. The
"perpetual peace" lasted three years. Vassili then went to the other
extreme, by declaring that "as long as his horse was in marching
condition and his sword cut sharp, there should be neither peace nor
truce with Lithuania." In 1514, the Russian army besieged and took
Smolensk, but in the same year they were badly defeated in the battle
of Orcha.

The two grand dukes tried to involve as many allies as they could. The
Khan of the Crimea, the useful friend of Vassili's father, had become
the son's enemy; Vassili offset him by an alliance with the Khan of
Astrakhan. When Sigismund tried to secure the help of Sweden, Vassili
sought that of Denmark; and when his enemy set the Dnieper Cossacks at
him, the grand duke induced the Teutonic Order to invade Poland. After
Sigismund was defeated at Smolensk, the Emperor of Germany and the
Pope offered to mediate; the latter advised Vassili to let Lithuania
alone, and to turn his attention toward Constantinople. Negotiations
commenced in 1520, but it was six years later before a truce was   (p. 109)
concluded. On this occasion Vassili made a speech in which he praised
Emperor Charles V, and Pope Clement VII,--but Lithuania lost Smolensk.
It was during this war that the partition of Poland was first
mentioned.

Vassili did not neglect the east, even while engaged in the west.
Kazan had expelled the nephew of the Khan of the Crimea whom Ivan III
had appointed, and elected a Khan hostile to Russia. Two expeditions
were sent against the city but nothing was effected. When this khan
died, Vassili succeeded in installing a friendly prince, but he was
overthrown and a relative of the Khan of the Crimea took his place. He
prepared a great invasion of Russia in 1521, and did gain a decided
victory on the Oka, after which he ravaged the territory of the grand
duke. Vassili was compelled to humble himself before the khan, in
order to save Moscow; he made him presents and in the treaty signed by
him, called himself the khan's tributary. When the khan withdrew, he
was attacked in Riazan and the treaty was taken away from him. The
invasion was, however, a calamity for the grand dukedom, which was
devastated by fire, and a host of women and children were carried off,
to be sold as slaves at Astrakhan and Kaffa.

The following year Vassili collected a large army on the Oka and
challenged the Khan of the Crimea to come and give battle. The offer
was declined with the remark that he knew the way into Russia, and
that he was not in the habit of consulting his enemies as to when and
where he was to fight.

Hoping to profit by the quarrels among the Tartars, Vassili sent an
expedition to Kazan in 1523, and again in 1524, but both were      (p. 110)
unsuccessful. Kazan owed its wealth to a fair, which attracted a host
of merchants. Vassili thought that he would destroy his enemy's
prosperity by establishing a rival fair. Accordingly one was opened at
Makarief, and this time the grand duke's expectations were realized.
This was the origin of the world-famous fair at Nishni Novgorod,
whither it was transferred afterwards.

Vassili made a long stride forward in the direction of autocracy. He
consulted neither boyard nor priest. He deposed the Metropolitan and
banished him to a monastery. Prince Kholmski, who was married to one
of Vassili's sisters, was thrown into prison for failing to show
abject respect. When one of the boyards complained that "The grand
duke decided all the questions, shut up with two others in the
bedchamber," the noble was promptly arrested, condemned to death, and
executed. He interrupted the objection of a high noble with, "Be
silent, lout!" His court displayed great splendor, but it was
semi-Asiatic. The throne was guarded by young nobles called _ryndis_,
dressed in long caftans of white satin, high caps of white fur, and
carrying silver hatchets.

Like his father, he tried to attract artists and learned men, and
exchanged embassies with most of the European Courts. He extended the
frontiers of his empire, but ruthlessly suppressed free thought. It
has been claimed that the Slav is fit only for an absolute government.
The history of Russia contradicts the statement. The idea of autocracy
was Asiatic and was imported with the Tartar yoke.




XIII--IVAN IV, THE TERRIBLE.                                       (p. 111)


When Vassili died in 1533, he left two infant sons, Ivan and George,
the elder three years old. His widow, Helena Glinski, assumed the
regency. She was a woman remarkable for spirit and beauty, and showed
her courage in ruthlessly suppressing every attempt of high nobles to
contest her authority. She sent her husband's brother George to
prison, and let him die there. One of her own uncles, who had been in
her confidence, showed too much ambition and suffered the same fate.
Andrew, another brother of Vassili, tried to make his escape; he was
promptly brought back and placed in confinement. This caused an
unimportant war with Poland, ending in a truce in 1537. The Tartars of
Kazan and the Crimea were frequently defeated. But Helena was
cordially hated by the great nobles at Moscow; she was poisoned, and
died in 1538.

Ivan, the oldest son and heir, was then eight years old. It must be
placed to the credit of his mother that he had learned to read, for
the children were sadly neglected after her death, and it was the
boy's principal solace and occupation. In later years Ivan wrote of
this time, "We and our brother Iouri (George) were treated like
strangers, like the children of beggars. We were ill-clothed, cold (p. 112)
and hungry." What impressed the child especially, was that when
foreign envoys arrived he was placed upon the throne and the same
nobles who showed him such contemptuous indifference, were respectful
and even servile on such occasions. He noticed, too, that when these
proud nobles needed anything, it was necessary that the papers should
be signed by him. All this set the child thinking, and being a manly,
bright boy, he came to the conclusion that, after all, he was the real
master.

After many quarrels among themselves, Andrew Chouiski, the head of a
noble family, had become all-powerful; all important offices were
occupied by his favorites and friends. Ivan noticed it all, but said
nothing. He was thirteen years old when, after the Christmas
celebration of 1543, he suddenly summoned the boyards before him, and
in a threatening tone sternly accused them of their misdeeds. "There
are among you many guilty ones," he said, "but this time I am
satisfied with making one example." He ordered the guards to seize
Andrew Chouiski, and had him then and there torn to pieces by dogs.
After this terrible punishment, he ordered the arrest of the most
disobedient nobles, who were transported to distant places.

[Illustration: Ivan IV]

The thirteen-year-old boy then assumed the government, relying chiefly
upon his mother's relations, the Glinskis. In 1547, at the age of
seventeen, he directed the Metropolitan to crown him, not as Grand
Duke but as Czar. In a Bible printed in the Slavonic language, he had
read of the _Czar_ Nebuchadnezzar, the _Czar_ Pharaoh, David, _Czar_
of Israel, etc. He knew, besides, that the former masters of the   (p. 114)
grand dukes, the khans, had been addressed by that title. Perhaps it
was because he wished it to be known that he considered himself the
equal of any Tartar ruler; perhaps because he desired to have a title
superior to that of the nobles who descended from former grand dukes,
and who inherited the rank without the power; at any rate Ivan IV was
crowned as the first Czar.

Young as he was, and since his thirteenth year beyond control, Ivan's
life had been the reverse of good. But when, soon after the
coronation, he married Anastasia Romanof, he made an earnest effort to
reform. The relatives of his mother and of his wife, the Glinskis and
the Romanofs, enjoyed his favor at this time.

There was much suppressed dissatisfaction among the nobles, and many
plots were hatched against him. In the year of his coronation, a fire
swept wooden Moscow, and about 1,700 people perished in the flames.
Ivan ordered an investigation, and withdrew to Vorobief. Crowds
gathered in the thoroughfares, when mysterious persons appeared among
them declaring that the Glinskis had set the city on fire. Soon after
shouts were heard, "It is the Princess Anne Glinski who, with her two
sons, has bewitched the city; she has taken human hearts, plunged them
in water, and with this water has sprinkled the houses. This is the
cause of the destruction of Moscow!" A mob collected and made for the
palace of the Glinskis and one of them, George, was stabbed. They went
on to Vorobief, where they demanded the life of Ivan's uncle. The
czar's own life was in danger and the mob had to be dispersed by
force.

Ivan did not forget this, and terrible was his vengeance upon the  (p. 115)
boyards. At this time he gave his confidence to two men, one a priest
named Silvester, who had the reputation of being a very honest man;
the other, a member of the smaller nobility, named Adachef who, in
1551, as Minister of the Interior, gave to Russian cities the first
municipal liberties. Ivan showed an unusual interest in the people; it
was under his orders that a new code of laws (Soudebnik) was prepared,
and many reforms were made in the Church.

This rather increased than diminished the hostility of the nobles.
Ivan's favorites, Silvester and Adachef had grown ambitious and the
former especially was overbearing. He openly opposed the czar, and
tried to sow discord between him and his wife. When Ivan's favorite
son died, Silvester told him that it was a punishment from heaven for
his disobedience. The two men tried to procure the dismissal of the
Glinskis and Romanofs, and for that purpose made friends with the
boyards whom Ivan suspected. In 1553, the czar fell dangerously ill;
he called in the boyards and ordered them to swear loyalty to his
infant son Dmitri. They refused. He was informed that the nobles were
conspiring with his cousin Vladimir, whose mother was distributing
money in the army. He was in terror for the lives of his wife and son.
Once he said to the boyards who had remained faithful, "Do not, I pray
you, forget that you have sworn an oath to my son and to me; do not
let him fall into the hands of the boyards; fly with him to some
foreign country, whithersoever God may guide you." Ivan recovered but
he never could forget the anguish of those days.

Ivan's character at this time was far from bad. He was only twenty (p. 116)
years old, and on several occasions showed that he was compassionate
instead of cruel. It was only natural that his nature should be
perverted, surrounded as he was by men of whom he was suspicious.
Still, such a change could only be gradual. The immediate consequence
of the conduct of his nobles, was that it drew him closer to the
people. This was shown in 1506, when he convoked the three orders,
nobles, priests, and people, to discuss public affairs.

His first act, after his recovery, was to banish his former favorites.
Silvester was ordered to the monastery of St. Cyril, and Adachef was
sent to Livonia. Soon afterwards the Czarina Anastasia died; there was
a strong suspicion that she had been poisoned. To add to his
bitterness, Prince Andrew Kourbski, a descendant of Rurik and a great
friend of Silvester and Adachef, permitted 15,000 Russians to be
defeated by the Poles with whom Ivan was at war. Kourbski deserted to
the King of Poland.

It appears that Ivan at this time feared for his life, for he withdrew
to a neighboring castle with his friends, servants, and treasures.
From there he wrote his abdication in two letters, one addressed to
the Metropolitan, the other to the people of Moscow. This action
struck terror among the nobles and the people. The former dreaded that
the people might rise and avenge the czar, and the people were afraid
that the nobles would once again usurp the government. The nobles and
priests consulted and decided to beg Ivan's pardon and to submit to
any punishment he might impose. Ivan consented to return to Moscow (p. 117)
but on his own terms. This was accepted. After his arrival in the
capital he established a special guard of one thousand men who had a
dog's head and a broom hanging from their saddles, to show that they
were ready to bite and ready to sweep the czar's enemies from off
Russian soil.

It was then that Ivan began to earn the surname of The Terrible, which
has clung to him ever afterwards. We have his own record in a letter
to the Monastery of St. Cyril, in which he asks the prayers of the
Church for the victims of his vengeance. He appears to have kept a
careful account, as we read, "Kazarine Doubrofsky and his two sons,
with ten men who came to their assistance;" "Twenty men of the village
of Kolmenskoe;" "Eighty of Matveiche." It amazes us to read,
"Remember, Lord, the souls of thy servants, to the number of 1,505
persons, Novgorodians." The boyards lived in a state of terror; few
among them knew how long they would keep their heads on their
shoulders. Neither rank nor title was a safeguard. The Archbishop of
Moscow was dismissed, and probably murdered. Alexander, George's
widow, and Ivan's sister-in-law, went to the scaffold. Prince Vladimir
and his mother, Ivan's uncle and grand-aunt, were also executed. It
was on this occasion that the "Novgorodians, to the number of 1,505
persons" were put to death, because Ivan suspected them of a plot to
open the gates to the King of Poland. In 1571, there was another
wholesale execution, in which several of Ivan's latest favorites were
victims.

The burden of his wrath fell upon the boyards. It may have been for the
purpose of humiliating them and the Churchmen that he assembled    (p. 118)
delegates of those two classes to confer with representatives of the
merchants of Moscow and Smolensk, about the war with Poland. Ivan
addressed the assembly in person, and it was decided that the war
should continue.

It was under his reign that British traders accidentally discovered
the White Sea and the mouth of the Dwina. They came overland to Moscow
where they were well received and secured several privileges. Ivan was
anxious to conclude an offensive-defensive alliance with Elizabeth of
England, and proposed an agreement to furnish each other with an
asylum if either of them should be compelled to fly from the country
through being defeated by an enemy or the rebellion of their subjects.
Elizabeth did not fancy such an alliance, and declined the offer of an
asylum, "finding," as she declared, "by the grace of God no dangers of
the sort in her dominions." Ivan never ceased recurring to, and
pleading for, such an agreement, thus showing his ever present
suspicions.

After commercial intercourse was established with England, and British
traders settled in Moscow, Ivan continued to show them his favor. He
was himself the greatest merchant of Russia. The furs which he
received from Siberia were sold to the foreign merchants at the fairs.
His agents went into the provinces where they compelled the people to
sell him furs, wax, honey, etc., at such prices as he chose to pay,
and the foreign merchants had to buy them from him at a high price. He
also bought the imported goods and sold them to Russian merchants.
They were not permitted to buy from anybody else, until the goods  (p. 119)
of the czar were sold.

At the beginning of his reign, in 1551, Ivan was preparing an
expedition to Kazan, and in June of the following year he descended
the Volga and laid siege to that city. It was captured after a brave
defense, when a number of the people were massacred and the rest sold
as slaves. This conquest was followed by that of Astrakhan in 1554;
the Volga from its source to its mouth was thereafter a Russian river.
The Cossacks of the Don also submitted to him.

The European countries bordering on Russia dreaded that country's
growing power. Ivan, after his coronation, sent to western Europe to
engage a number of engineers and mechanics; these men were stopped on
the road, and none of them ever reached Moscow. Sigismund of Poland
even threatened to kill the British merchants on the Baltic,
"because," he said, "if the Muscovite, who is not only our present
adversary, but the eternal enemy of all free countries, should provide
himself with guns, bullets, and munitions; and, above all, with
mechanics who continue to make arms, hitherto unknown in this barbaric
country, he would be a menace to Europe." Ivan, on the other hand, was
equally anxious that the Russians should possess all the advantages of
Europe's superior civilization. This, added to the inherited hostility
between the two countries, caused many wars.

While Ivan was pursuing his conquests in the south, he was attacked by
Gustavus Wasa, Sweden's famous king, who entertained the same fears as
the King of Poland. The war ended by a commercial treaty whereby   (p. 120)
Swedish merchants might trade with India and China by way of Russia,
and those of Russia with Holland, England, and France by way of
Sweden. This war had scarcely ceased before envoys of the Livonian
Order arrived to request a renewal of the truce. Ivan demanded tribute
for Iourief which he claimed as his "patrimony." This was refused, and
war was declared. It was owing to Ivan that this brotherhood was
dissolved and its territory divided. In 1566, a truce was proposed by
Poland.

It was on this occasion that he called the assembly referred to on
page 116. The war continued. Ivan was attacked also by Sultan Selim II
of Turkey, in 1569, and the Khan of the Crimea marched straight upon
Moscow, set fire to the suburbs, and destroyed the capital except the
Kremlin. He carried off a hundred thousand prisoners. (1571.) As he
withdrew, he wrote to Ivan: "I burn, I ravage everything on account of
Kazan and Astrakhan. I came to you and burned Moscow. I wished to have
your crown and your head, but you did not show yourself; you declined
a battle and you dare call yourself a Czar of Moscow! Will you live at
peace with me? Yield me up Kazan and Astrakhan. If you have only money
to offer me, it will be useless were it the riches of the world. What
I want is Kazan and Astrakhan! As to the roads to your empire, I have
seen them--I know them." The khan made another invasion the next year,
1572, but was defeated.

In the same year Sigismund Augustus II of Poland died. There was a
party at Warsaw that proposed to elect Ivan's son, but the czar    (p. 121)
wanted Poland for himself. He failed in the attempt, and the Duke
of Anjou, brother of the King of France, was chosen. He did not like
the people and fled; his place was filled by Stephen Batory, Governor
of Transsylvania, a young, capable, and energetic noble. Batory took
in his service a number of trained German and Hungarian soldiers, and
took Polotsk after a brave defense. He also captured several other
towns, but was repulsed at Pskof.

Ivan sought the mediation of Pope Gregory XIII, and a truce was
concluded in 1582; Ivan ceded Polotsk and all Livonia.

Ivan, in his manhood, was a man of violent temper. He was never seen
without an iron-tipped staff, which he used freely and recklessly upon
the people around him. Nobody, whatever his rank, was safe from
corporal punishment. He killed his eldest son Ivan with a blow, and
suffered from remorse ever afterward. He left a lasting impression
upon Russia by his reforms. He made a law whereby neither church nor
convents could acquire new lands. He was wonderfully well educated,
considering the neglect of his early youth, and tolerant of religious
opinions. A Presbyterian and a Lutheran church were built at Moscow
with his consent, but in deference to the opposition of the people,
they were removed to the suburbs. He was also the founder of the
_streltsi_ or national guard.

Ivan died in 1584, after a reign of forty-one years.




XIV--RUSSIA UNDER IVAN THE TERRIBLE.                               (p. 122)


The reign of Ivan the Terrible is remarkable, first, because it is the
beginning of Russia as we know it in our time; and also because it
occurred at a time when Great Britain was exploring the Atlantic, and
preparing the way for the wonderful expansion of the English-speaking
race, which culminated in the great North American Republic. It was
under this reign, in 1558, that Russia's invasion of Asia began, and
with it a movement eastward, which has not yet ceased.

It is interesting, therefore, to study the condition of the Russian
people at this important period. Although, as we have seen, the Tartar
yoke did not influence the people directly, because there was no
intercourse between victor and vanquished, the indirect influence was
great, owing to the adoption of Tartar habits or customs by the dukes
and nobles, during their visits to the khan. During this time
intercourse with Europe ceased; hence, in the 16th and 17th centuries,
Russia was more Asiatic than European, although the Russians hated the
victors. Who can say how much influence this has exerted upon Russia's
conquests in Asia?

Among the old Slavs, the family was the unit from which the State was
built up, and this was confirmed under the Tartar yoke. There is   (p. 123)
some similarity between the Empire of Russia and that of China, for
there, too, the family is the unit. In both countries the Emperor is
not only the master, he is also considered as the father and high
priest of his people. Their persons and property are the emperor's, to
do with as he pleases. But in Russia there was a nobility descended
from the former dukes; in China there was none, except the descendant
of Confucius. Yet in Russia these lords, many of whom traced their
descent to Rurik, became in time the slaves of the czar. They
prostrated themselves before him, as they had seen the courtiers of
the khan do. When they presented a petition, they expressed it by the
word _tchelobitie_, which means "beating of the forehead," showing
that they performed what is known in China as the _kowtow_. In
addressing the czar, they said, "Order me not to be chastised; order
me to speak a word!" The Grand Dukes of Moscow considered their
territory and the people on it, as their own private property. They
had learned this from the khans. The palace, a mixture of oriental
splendor and barbarism, showed the influence of the Tartars.

The people of Russia were divided into classes, the lowest of which
were the slaves or _kholop_, prisoners of war, men who had sold
themselves, or who were born in slavery. Above them were the peasants,
born on the estate of a noble, but still known as free men. Then came
the peasants who farmed the land of an owner, but these were few. Much
of the land was owned by the several mirs or villages, but in the
course of time they were assigned to gentlemen, who were able to serve
in the army without pay, being supported by the revenues derived   (p. 124)
from these villages. Gradually these gentlemen looked upon the land of
the mir as their own property, but the peasants never did lose the
conviction that the mir was the real proprietor. In Ivan's time and
later, the mir and not the individual, was held responsible for the
tax to the czar, for the free labor furnished to the lord, and for his
dues. The mir, therefore, was absolute master over every inhabitant of
the village, and this power was vested in the _starost_. The peasant
gradually descended into a beast of burden, who was not even a human
being, but merely a productive force for the benefit of the State and
of the lord.

A Russian town consisted, first of the _kremlin_, a fortress of wood
which, when required, was defended by "men of the service"; then came
the suburbs, built around the kremlin, and inhabited by the people.
They were governed by a _voievod_ or governor, appointed by the czar,
or by a starost or mayor, elected by the nobles, priests, and
privileged citizens. The principal duty of the citizens was to pay the
taxes, and therefore they were forbidden to leave the city. Under the
Czar Alexis, the penalty for such offense was death.

The merchants did not form a separate class. They are known in Russian
as _gosti_ or guests, thus showing that, notwithstanding the old and
honorable record of Novgorod and Kief, the Tartar yoke and subsequent
arbitrary rule of the grand dukes had ruined trade or left it in the
hands of aliens. Ivan the Terrible called them the moujiks of commerce.
Fletcher, an Englishman who spent many years in Moscow under Ivan IV,
gives the following curious pen picture: "Often you will see them  (p. 125)
trembling with fear, lest a boyard should know what they have to sell.
I have seen them at times, when they had spread out their wares so
that you might make a better choice, look all around them,--as if they
feared an enemy would surprise them and lay hands on them. If I asked
them the cause, they would say to me, 'I was afraid that there might
be a noble or one of the sons of boyards here: they would take away my
merchandise by force.'"

The Russian women were kept secluded in women's quarters as they are
in China, but they remained a member of their own family. A wife's
duty was "to obey her husband as the slave obeys his master," and she
was taught to think of herself as her master's property. He had the
right to punish her as he did his children or his slaves. The priest
Silvester advises the husband not to use sticks that are too thick or
tipped with iron, nor to whip her before his men, but to correct her
moderately and in private. No Russian woman dared object to being
beaten. A Russian proverb says: "I love you like my soul, and I dust
you like my jacket."

The men wore oriental tunics or robes, and a long beard; the women
painted their faces. Ivan the Terrible said that to shave the beard
was "a sin that the blood of all the martyrs could not cleanse. Was it
not to defile the image of man created by God?"

There was a general belief in magic and witchcraft; sorcerers were
burned alive in a cage. Ivan, although in advance of his age, was not
free from superstition. The art of medicine was, of course, still in
its infancy, and those who practiced it were in constant danger    (p. 126)
of their lives, because if they did not cure a patient, they might
suffer for it.

Both the nobles and the people were addicted to the vice of
drunkenness. No one paid any attention when a person, rich or poor,
young or old, fell down in the street from the effects of drink. This
is what the priests said of this vice: "My brethren, what is worse
than drunkenness? You lose memory and reason like a madman who does
not know what he is doing. The drunkard is senseless; he lies like a
corpse. If you speak to him he does not answer. Think of his poor soul
which grows foul in its vile body which is its prison.... To drink is
lawful and is to the glory of God, who has given us wine to make us
rejoice."

The Metropolitan of Moscow, until a Patriarch was appointed, was
supposed to be the head of the Church, but the czar held the real
power. There were two classes of priests: The Black Clergy lived as
monks in monasteries, some of which were exceedingly wealthy; they
were forbidden to marry, and the bishops were appointed from among
them. The White Clergy lived among the people and were compelled to
marry. Most of them were grossly ignorant. The same Englishman quoted
before, Mr. Fletcher, says of these priests: "As for exhorting or
instructing their flock, they have neither the habit of it nor the
talent for it, for all the clergy are as profoundly ignorant of the
Word of God as of all other learning."

The revenues of the Empire consisted of a tax on every sixty measures
of corn; of a house-tax, or tax on every fire; the customhouse     (p. 127)
dues, and what remained of the municipal taxes after paying expenses;
of a tax on public baths; the farming out of lands belonging to the
crown; the fines and confiscations in the "Court of the Brigands;" and
finally of the tribute paid by thirty-six towns and their landed
possessions "belonging to the Crown."

The Courts of Justice belonged to the Middle Ages; tortures were
applied similar to those employed by the Spanish Inquisition. A wife
who murdered her husband "was buried alive up to her neck." Heretics
were burned at the stake; sorcerers were burned in an iron cage, and
coiners had liquid metal poured down their throats. A noble who killed
a moujik was fined or sometimes whipped; but he might kill as many
slaves as he pleased, because they were his property.

The Russian infantry, so famous under the early Norsemen, had given
way to cavalry, in imitation of the Tartars. The Imperial Guard was
composed of 8,000 young nobles. The "men-at-arms" were mounted, but
received no pay beyond the revenue of their lands, which they held in
return for their military service. The army numbered about 80,000,
and, with a levy among the peasants, could be brought up to 300,000.
There was, besides, the irregular cavalry of the Don Cossacks, and of
the Tartars. Such infantry as there was, consisted of peasants from
the crown lands, churches, and convents; the national guard, and
foreign soldiers or officers.

[Illustration: Feodor]                                             (p. 128)




XV--FEODOR, THE LAST OF RURIK'S DESCENDANTS.                       (p. 129)


Ivan the Terrible left two sons, Feodor, the son of Anastasia Romanof,
and Dmitri, a child, the son of his seventh wife. Feodor was neither a
strong-minded nor a very able man. He was married to Irene Godounof,
and, following the usual custom, his wife's relations held the
principal offices of the government. Gradually the czar's authority
passed into the hands of Prince Boris Godounof, Irene's brother, a
very ambitious and unscrupulous man. Wizards had foretold that Boris
would be czar, but that his reign would last only seven years, and he
did all he could to aid his destiny.

He first caused Feodor's half-brother, Dmitri, to be sent with his
mother and her relations to Ouglitch, where they would be out of the
way. He also caused the Metropolitan to be dismissed, and had a friend
appointed in his place. He aroused the higher nobles against him, and
then made an effort to make friends with the smaller nobility,--at the
expense of the poor peasants. According to law, these people were
free; that is, when the contract with a landowner expired, they could
move where they pleased, and the large owners could offer better terms
than those who held small estates. But without labor, the land was (p. 130)
worthless and Russia, at the time, was so sparsely populated, that
every hand counted. The object of the government was not to open up
new lands, so as to create prosperity, but to provide for its current
wants by seeing that the taxes were paid, and that the army was kept
up to its standard. How could the men-at-arms, that is the small
nobility, defray their own expenses while serving, if their revenues
failed from lack of labor? Boris Godounof, therefore, made a law
forbidding peasants to go from one estate to another. They were tied
to the ground, and this was the first step to make serfs of them. The
peasants did object; they had been accustomed to change service on St.
George's day, and that day remained for many years one of deep sorrow.
There was no rebellion, but a great many fled, and joined the
Cossacks. After some years the law was changed so that peasants were
permitted to change from one _small_ estate to another.

Another change under Feodor's reign was the appointment of a Patriarch
as the head of the Greek Church under the czar. He was placed above
the several Metropolitans, and thus the Church secured more unity.

Feodor had no heirs, and his health was bad. It was, therefore, to
young Dmitri at Ouglitch that the great nobles looked for relief from
Godounof's tyranny. In 1591, this man sent hired assassins to Ouglitch
and the youngest son of Ivan was murdered. Some of the hirelings were
arrested by the people, and put to death. There was not even a doubt
as to the facts. But Godounof ordered an investigation by his own
friends; they declared that the young heir had committed suicide in a
fit of insanity, and that the people of Ouglitch had put innocent  (p. 131)
men to death. The assassination of Dmitri's relatives, and the
depopulation of Ouglitch made further inquiry impossible.

Stephen Batory who had worsted Ivan the Terrible, died in 1586, and
the throne of Poland was once again vacant. Godounof tried hard to
have Feodor elected, but the Poles feared that the czar might attach
their kingdom to Moscow like a sleeve to a coat. Besides, the Roman
Catholic electors did not like the thought of having a king belonging
to the Greek Church; last of all, money counted in these elections,
and Godounof was a very saving man. The result was that the Prince of
Sweden was elected, and that war with Sweden broke out.

The Poles, fearing lest Sweden should grow too powerful, held aloof;
as a consequence, Russia gained back the towns which had been lost
under Ivan the Terrible. Godounof made an effort to bring about a war
between Poland and Sweden, but he only succeeded in arousing the
suspicion and dislike of both countries.

Feodor died in 1598; with him the house of Rurik, the old Norse
Viking, ceased to exist.

By trickery and knavery, Boris Godounof was elected czar by the
_douma_ or council of nobles, a body presided over by his friend the
Patriarch, and containing many of his partisans. The great nobles,
many of whom traced their descent to Rurik, objected to a czar, whom
they considered and called an upstart. But Boris displayed cruelty as
well as severity. Feodor, the eldest of the noble family of the
Romanofs, was forced to become a monk and his wife a nun. He took  (p. 132)
the name of Philarete, and she that of Marfa.

Godounof did reign seven years, according to the wizard's prediction,
but it was a stormy time for Russia. A young adventurer named Gregory
Otrepief, pretended that he was the murdered Dmitri, and secured a
large following. The troops sent against him "had no hands to fight
but only feet to fly." At Godounof's death, in 1605, he confided his
son and heir to a favorite named Basmanof, who turned traitor, joined
the false Dmitri, and caused Godounof's widow and son to be murdered.
Otrepief, who lacked neither courage nor ability, was made czar, but
he reigned little over a month, when he, too, was murdered by a band
of nobles under the leadership of Chouiski. This man seized the throne
in 1606. The people in the country, owing to its vast extent and the
poor roads, heard of Otrepief's coronation, his death, and the
succession of Chouiski almost at the same time, and anarchy followed.
At the same time Russia was involved in a war with Poland, at the time
when a second false Dmitri made his appearance. The Cossacks and a
host of Polish adventurers joined him, and he laid siege to the
immensely wealthy Troitsa monastery, where the monks defended
themselves for sixteen months, and he was forced to withdraw. Affairs
came to such a pass that the people of Moscow "humbly requested the
czar to abdicate, because he was not successful, and also because he
was to blame for the shedding of Christian blood." Chouiski was forced
to yield, and soon after entered a monastery as a monk.

Two candidates appeared for the vacant throne; the second false    (p. 133)
Dmitri and Vladislas, the second son of Sigismund, King of Poland. The
douma, not fancying the idea that an impostor should rule over them,
invited the hetman of a Polish army to Moscow, to discuss the other
candidate. This hetman promised in name of the prince to maintain the
Greek Church and the privileges of the three orders, nobles, priests,
and people, and that the law-making power should be shared by the czar
and the douma; that no one should be executed without a trial, or
deprived of his dignity without good reason; and finally, that
Russians might go abroad to be educated if they so desired. Vladislas
was then elected czar on condition that he should enter the Greek
Church, and two envoys, one of them Philarete Romanof who had risen to
the rank of Metropolitan, left for the Polish camp at Smolensk to
complete the necessary arrangements. The douma invited the hetman to
occupy the kremlin with his shoulders. He did so, taking the late Czar
Chouiski and his two brothers as hostages.

At Smolensk a difficulty occurred: the King of Poland wanted the
Russian throne for himself. He also asked the envoys to cede Smolensk
to Poland; they refused, and in turn asked that Vladislas should leave
at once for Moscow. The king refused his consent, and began to use
money. He found many Russian traitors willing to accept it, but the
envoys remained firm.

Soon after this, the second false Dmitri died, and the people began to
show an interest in the dispute with Sigismund. Leading men at Moscow
and Smolensk wrote to the provinces, begging their friends not to
recognize the King of Poland as czar. Men-at-arms gathered, and    (p. 134)
when an army of them drew near Moscow, the Poles fortified the
Kremlin. At this time a quarrel arose between the Polish troops and
the people, and some 7,000 persons were killed. The Russians made a
stand in the suburbs, when the Poles set fire to the city, and the
greater part of Moscow was burned.

Sigismund ordered the arrest of the two envoys who were taken to
Marienburg in Prussia under escort. Smolensk fell soon after into his
hands, and the king returned to Warsaw which he entered in triumph
with the last Czar Chouiski a prisoner in his train. By this time the
Russians were aroused; 100,000 men-at-arms gathered at Moscow and
besieged the Poles in the Kremlin. Meanwhile Sweden had declared war,
giving as reason the election of Vladislas, and had captured the ports
on the Baltic. The monks of Troitsa, whose heroic defense against the
second false Dmitri had made the convent famous, sent letters to all
the Russian cities bidding them fight for their country and religion.
When this letter was read in public at Nishni Novgorod, a butcher,
Kouzma Minine spoke up: "If we wish to save the Muscovite Empire," he
said, "we must spare neither our lands nor our goods; let us sell our
houses and put our wives and children out to service; let us seek a
man who will fight for the national faith, and march under his
banner." He set the example by giving one-third of all he possessed,
and others followed. Those who refused to contribute were compelled to
do so. Minine was elected treasurer; he accepted on condition that his
orders should be obeyed without delay. Believing that the leadership
should be given to a noble, Minine went to Prince Pojarski who     (p. 135)
lived in the neighborhood. Pojarski accepted the command, and ordered
three days of fasting and prayer. The streltsi were equipped as well
as the men-at-arms; but the services of Cossacks and foreign
mercenaries were refused.

An army was collected and marched toward Moscow, with bishops and
monks carrying holy eikons at the head; at Iaroslaf they were
reenforced by other troops. They laid siege to the Kremlin; an attempt
to relieve the fortress by the Poles was defeated. At last the
garrison was forced to surrender. Among the Russian prisoners who
regained their liberty was a fifteen-year-old boy, Michael Romanof,
the son of Philarete and Marfa.

Sigismund was on the way to reenforce the garrison, but hearing of its
surrender, he fell back. An assembly was convoked to elect a czar. It
was composed of delegates of the clergy, the nobles, the men-at-arms,
the merchants, towns, and districts. There was much bickering, but all
were agreed that no alien should be presented. When the name of
Michael Romanof was called, it was received with enthusiasm, and he
was declared elected. (1613.) The delegates remembered the relation
between his family and Ivan the Terrible, and the services rendered by
his father, the Metropolitan Philarete. There is a story that the King
of Poland, when he heard of Michael's election, tried to kidnap him at
Kostroma, and that a peasant guide led the party astray on a dark
night. When the Poles discovered it, he was struck dead. This is the
subject of a famous opera "A Life for the Czar."

Russia's efforts to resume intercourse with Europe, which during the
Tartar yoke had been suspended, were continued under Godounof. He  (p. 136)
sent an ambassador to Queen Elizabeth with a letter, in which he
says:--"I have learned that the Queen had furnished help to the Turks
against the Emperor of Germany. We are astonished at it, as to act
thus is not proper for Christian sovereigns; and you, our well-beloved
sister, you ought not in the future to enter into relationships of
friendship with Mussulman princes, nor to help them in any way,
whether with men or money; but on the contrary should desire and
insist that all the great Christian potentates should have a good
understanding, union, and strong friendship, and unite against the
Mussulmans, till the hand of the Christian rise and that of the
Mussulman is abased." Judging from Elizabeth's character, it is likely
that she shrugged her shoulders as she read this sermon. During the
period of Russia's internal troubles, and owing to the vacancy of the
throne, the relations with Europe were again suspended.




XVI--MICHAEL FEODOROVITCH OR MICHAEL, THE SON OF THEODORE, THE FIRST
ROMANOF.                                                           (p. 137)


Fifteen years of anarchy left Russia in disorder. The boyards had done
as they pleased since there was no one to control them. The peasants
who asked for nothing but a simple existence, had seen their crops
trampled under foot, and their homes laid in ruins. It needed a strong
hand to restore order; more than could be expected from a
fifteen-year-old boy, who had neither the iron will of Ivan the
Terrible, nor the advantage of having grown up with the conviction
that he was the Master. Besides, although his election had been
regular, the Don Cossacks and others refused to recognize him as the
czar. On the other hand, the patriots stood by him. But the conditions
were such that a foreigner in Moscow wrote at the time: "Oh that God
would open the eyes of the czar as He opened those of Ivan, otherwise
Muscovy is lost!"

There was no money in the treasury, and the men-at-arms demanded pay
because they received no revenues from their ruined estates. The czar
and the clergy wrote to the Russian towns begging them for money and
for troops to help the government, and a generous response was     (p. 138)
made. The people of the provinces, anxious to see law and order
restored, rose in favor of the czar, and Astrakhan sent a rebel chief
to prison. He was shortly afterwards tried and executed.

While the people were thus aiding the government, no time was lost in
dealing with the foreign enemy. In 1614, Michael sent envoys to
Holland to request help in men and money. The Dutch gave a small sum,
regretting that they could do no more as they had just ended a war
that had lasted forty-one years (1568-1609); they promised that they
would persuade Sweden to come to an understanding with Russia. Another
embassy went to James I of England, who was told that the Poles had
murdered British merchants and plundered their warehouses. This was a
falsehood, because the envoys knew that the outrage had been committed
by Cossacks and a Russian mob, but they hoped that the king would not
know it. James did not, and advanced 20,000 rubles. After this British
merchants demanded concessions and privileges in Russia, but as they
asked too much, they received nothing. Sweden, urged by England and
Holland, concluded with Russia the Peace of Stolbovo in 1617. Sweden
received an indemnity of 20,000 rubles, and surrendered Novgorod and
other towns.

The war with Poland was then continued more vigorously, and in 1618 a
truce of fourteen years and six months was arranged. It was understood
that this was temporary, because the King of Poland still claimed the
throne of Russia, and refused to recognize Michael. But the prisoners
were released and Philarete, the czar's father, returned to Moscow, where
his presence was soon felt by the nobles. The most independent     (p. 140)
were arrested and sent into exile. So long as Philarete assisted his
son, there was no disorder.

[Illustration: Michael Feodorovitch]

In 1618, the great struggle between Protestant and Roman Catholic
Europe began and Sweden, which was to take such a glorious part in it,
sought Russia's aid. Gustavus wrote to Michael telling him that if the
Catholic league should prevail, the Greek Church would be in danger.
"When your neighbor's house is on fire," he wrote, "you must bring
water and try to extinguish it, to guarantee your own safety. May your
Czarian Majesty help your neighbors to protect yourself." Sound as the
advice was, Russia had enough to do at home. Sultan Osman of Turkey
offered an alliance against Poland, when Michael convoked the Estates.
The deputies beat their foreheads, and implored the czar "to hold
himself firm for the holy churches of God, for his czarian honor, and
for their own country against the enemy. The men-at-arms were ready to
fight, and the merchants to give money." The war was postponed when
news arrived that the Turks had been defeated.

Sigismund of Poland died in 1632, and his son Vladislas was elected.
The following year Philarete died, and the nobles, released from his
stern supervision, resumed their former behavior. The war between the
two neighbors recommenced, but did not last long. When a new truce was
concluded Michael's title as czar was recognized by Vladislas.

It was entirely the fault of the Polish nobles that Poland lost
Lithuania or White Russia. The only excuse that can be offered, is the
spirit of religious persecution which was rampant all over Europe  (p. 141)
in the seventeenth century. It was the ceaseless effort of the Poles
to force the Lithuanians from the Greek into the Roman Church that
drove them into the arms of Russia; but it was not until after the
death of Michael, in 1645, that the consequences of this short-sighted
policy were to show.

Michael was succeeded by his son, who ascended the throne as Alexis
Michaelovitch. He was better educated than his father had been and
resembled him in good nature. He had been taught by a tutor named
Morozof, who during thirty years exerted a great influence over his
pupil. When Alexis married into the Miloslavski family, its members
secured the most influential positions, according to well-established
custom. Morozof did not oppose them; instead he courted and married
the czarina's sister, and thus became the czar's brother-in-law.

The wars in which Russia was engaged and the necessity of maintaining
a large and well-equipped army, together with the increasing expenses
of the Court, and above all, the dishonest practices of the officials
rendered the burden of taxation so unbearable, that several revolts
broke out. In 1648, the people of Moscow rose and demanded the
surrender of a judge and another officer, both of whom were
notoriously corrupt; the two men were promptly murdered. Then the
popular fury turned upon Morozof, who would have suffered the same
fate, had not the czar helped him to escape. The government was
helpless. In some places, such as Pskof, Novgorod, and elsewhere, the
streltsi joined the people, and Russia was for some time at the mercy
of an enemy.

It was fortunate for Russia that just at that time, Poland had     (p. 142)
serious trouble at home. A Cossack, owner of a large estate, educated
and brave, was ill-treated and imprisoned by a Polish landowner; and
his little son was publicly whipped. He went to Warsaw and laid his
complaint before the king. Vladislas told him plainly that the nobles
were beyond his control; then, pointing to his sword, he asked if the
Cossack could not help himself. The Cossack took the hint, went home,
and when the Polish landowners tried to arrest him, he fled to the
Khan of the Crimea, interested him in his cause and returned at the
head of a Mussulman army. Lithuania rose in rebellion against Poland;
the governors and nobles, and especially the priests of the Catholic
Church, were hunted down, and those of the Greek Church took revenge
for recent injuries and insults.

Vladislas died, and the Diet elected his brother John Casimir. He
tried to reduce the very serious rebellion by promises, but there was
too deep a hatred between the two churches. Meanwhile order had been
restored in Russia, when the people of Lithuania wrote to the czar
begging him to take them under his protection. Alexis convoked the
Estates, told them that he had been insulted by Poland, and that the
Poles were persecuting the members of the Greek Church. They declared
in favor of war, and a boyard was sent to Kief to receive the oath of
allegiance. The people were willing provided their liberties would be
respected. This the czar promised. He declared that the privileges of
the Assembly and of the towns would be maintained, that only natives
would be employed in the administration and in taxation.

Poland was now sorely pressed. Charles X of Sweden invaded the     (p. 143)
kingdom and took two of its capitals. The Cossack and Lithuanians
entered it from the south, and the Czar Alexis at the head of his own
army attacked it on the east. He maintained strict discipline so that
the Polish Governors said, "Moscow makes war in quite a new way, and
conquers the people by the clemency and good-nature of the czar." The
towns of White Russia opened their gates to his army, and Smolensk
surrendered after a five weeks' siege. The Swedes captured Warsaw, the
last capital of the misruled kingdom.

It was the jealousy of its enemies that saved Poland this time. Alexis
entered into a truce and attacked Sweden. This war was carried on from
1656 until 1661, and ended by the peace of Cardis whereby neither
country gained any advantage. The Poles, seeing the danger they had
incurred, rallied, and once again war broke out with Russia. It was
carried on with various success until both countries were exhausted.
In 1661, a thirteen years' truce was concluded, whereby Russia
restored Lithuania, but kept Little Russia on the left bank of the
Dnieper, together with Kief and Smolensk.

In 1668, a revolt was organized by the Metropolitan of Kief, who
preferred the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople to that
of Moscow. As a result, Little Russia was subject to all the horrors
of war, but the Russian power prevailed in the end. Then the Cossacks
of the Don broke out, and until 1671 the territory between that river
and the Volga suffered terribly.

Alexis' reign was remarkable for the introduction of so-called
"reforms" in the Church, which were confined wholly to ceremonies  (p. 144)
and externals. The czar supported the "reformer" Nicon, and those who
did not agree with him were called _religious madmen_ and suffered
persecution. The monasteries near Archangel rebelled and troops were
sent against them; but it was eight months before the sturdy monks
capitulated.

Alexis continued his father's efforts to reestablish intercourse with
Western Europe. But the West was only recovering from the terrible
Thirty Years' War, so that little interest was shown.

Alexis had married twice. From the first marriage he had two sons
Feodor and Ivan, and six daughters; by his second wife he had one son,
Peter, and two daughters. When he died, in 1676, he was succeeded by
his eldest son Feodor.

Feodor Alexievitch, the third czar of the Romanof family, reigned only
six years, from 1676 to 1682. It was under his reign that a truce for
twenty years with Turkey, restored peace to White Russia.

Hitherto Russia had suffered from the rivalry resulting from disputes
caused by precedence of birth; generals had lost battles, because they
refused to serve under men whom they looked upon as inferiors. At an
assembly of the higher clergy, it was resolved to burn the Book of
Rank, and the czar made a law that any one disputing about his rank,
should lose it as well as his property.

To protect the Greek Church from dividing into sects, an academy was
founded at Moscow where the Slav, Latin, and Greek languages were
taught.




XVII--EARLY YEARS OF PETER THE GREAT (PETER ALEXIEVITCH).          (p. 145)


Feodor died childless, and should have been succeeded by his little
brother Ivan, but the child was of unsound mind. The other son of
Alexis, Peter, was the child of his last wife, and nine years old at
the time. The question about the succession was discussed in the
Council, and decided in Peter's favor, and his mother Natalia became
Regent. Among Peter's half sisters was one, Sophia, twenty-five years
old, who did not propose to submit to this decision. She took part in
Feodor's funeral, in defiance of the law which forbade women to appear
in public, and after it schemed and plotted to form a party in her
favor. A rumor was spread that the czarina's brother had seized the
throne and that Ivan had been murdered. The people of Moscow rose, and
the streltsi marched to the kremlin where the appearance of Natalia
with the two children made the mob hesitate. Unfortunately Prince
Dolgorouki addressed the men in violent language; they seized him on
their pikes and killed him. They then stabbed the czarina's foster
father, Matveef, in her presence, and sacked the palace, murdering
many of its inmates. One of Natalia's brothers was thrown out of a
window and caught on the points of the lances of the streltsi who  (p. 146)
were waiting below. Natalia's father and brother were taken from her;
Cyril, the father, was sent to a monastery and her brother Ivan was
tortured and cut to pieces, although the czarina went on her knees
begging for his life. The streltsi acted under authority from Sophia
when they committed these outrages. After this rioting had continued
seven days, the streltsi sent their commandant Khovanski to the douma,
to demand that there should be two czars, Ivan, with Peter as his
assistant. The douma did not fancy the idea,--but there were the
streltsi with their pikes, and they carried the day.

From this time it was Sophia who was the real czar. She reigned in
name of the two half-brothers, and showed herself in public, insisting
upon being present on every occasion. The Russians as a rule are not
fond of new fashions; they did not like this, and objected so strongly
that Sophia was forced to give way. Thereafter the two young czars sat
in public on the throne, but it was constructed in such a manner that
Sophia could hear and see without being visible.

She shocked every Russian by her manners until the streltsi began to
speak of her as "the scandalous person." They hated her when she
persecuted the _raskolnik_ or Old Believers, that is, the men who
objected to the reforms of Nicon. At last she thought that it was not
safe for her to remain at Moscow; she fled to the strong convent at
Troitsa, taking with her the czarina and the two little tsars, and
there summoned the men-at-arms whom she could trust. Khovanski, the
commandant of the streltsi, was summoned before her; he was arrested
on the way, and put to death with his son. The streltsi were       (p. 147)
considering another revolt, when they were seized with a panic;
instead of marching upon Troitsa, they went there to beg her pardon.
Sophia forgave them, but their leaders were executed.

Sophia trusted the government to two favorites, Prince Galitsyne who
was at the head of Foreign Affairs, and Chaklovity whom she made
commandant of the streltsi. Galitsyne tried hard to form an alliance
among the Christian powers against the Turks and Tartars. His scheme
failed because Louis XIV of France kept the whole of Western Europe in
turmoil by his constant wars with the House of Austria, and the
Christian princes had to look after their own interests. He was more
fortunate in Poland where John Sobieski was king. A treaty of
"perpetual" peace was concluded between Russia and Poland at
Androussovo, in 1686, and an alliance was entered into against the
Turks.

In 1687, an army of 100,000 Russians and 50,000 Cossacks marched
against the Crimea. The Tartars had burned the steppes, and the
Russians suffered such severe hardships that they were forced to
retreat. The hetman of the Cossacks was accused of treachery, and
deported to Siberia, when Mazeppa, who had been his secretary, was
appointed hetman. In the spring of 1689, the Russians under Galitsyne
and the Cossacks under Mazeppa started again for the Crimea, but they
had no better success than before.

Peter, who was born in 1673, was then sixteen years old, but being
tall and strongly built, he looked much older. He was bright and
anxious to learn, and at an early age had shown that he possessed  (p. 148)
a will of his own. He had read much, but his tutor, a man named Zorof,
had allowed him to have his own way, and when the boy grew up to be a
man, he made that tutor "the arch-priest of fools." When the boy was
tired, Zorof would allow him to put his work aside, and would read to
him about the great deeds of his father Alexis, and of those of Ivan
the Terrible, their campaigns, battles, and sieges; how they endured
privations better than the common soldiers, and how they added other
territory to Russia. He also learned Latin, German, and Dutch. He
afterwards complained that his education was neglected, because he was
allowed to do as he pleased. He chose his own companions, and as he
did not like to be confined within the palace grounds, he roamed in
the streets and often became acquainted with men whom he would not
have met in the palace, Russians, Dutch, Swiss, English, and Germans.
His usual attendants were Boris Galitsyne and other young nobles with
whom he played at soldier. He pressed the palace servants into the
ranks and had them drilled in European tactics. Peter took lessons in
geometry and fortification; he constructed small forts which were
besieged and defended by the young players. Sometimes the game became
earnest; blows were given and received, when Peter took his share
without a murmur, even when he was wounded as sometimes happened.

At first Peter did not like the water; no Russian does; but he
mastered his dislike. Once, when he saw a stranded English boat, he
sent for a boatbuilder to make him a sailboat and to teach him how to
manage it. He took a great fancy to sailing, and often took his    (p. 149)
boat on the Yaousa, and afterwards on Lake Pereiaslaf, to the terror
of his mother. Thus Peter grew up, healthy in body and strong of mind,
until his ambitious half-sister Sophia began to think what would
become of her when the boy should be czar. She had styled herself
Autocrat of all the Russias and did not like the idea of surrendering
the title. For some time she was appeased when her courtiers told her
that the boy cared for nothing except to amuse himself.

When he was sixteen years old, Peter asserted himself. Sophia had
ordered a triumphal entry for Prince Galitsyne and the army of the
Crimea, when Peter forbade her to leave the palace. She paid no
attention to his orders, but headed the procession of the returned
army. Peter saw that this meant war to the knife, and left for
Preobajenskoe.

As soon as she heard of this, Sophia determined to seize the throne.
She intended to attack the palace, kill Peter's friends and arrest his
mother, and after that to deal with the young czar as circumstances
demanded. She sent for the commandant of the streltsi who agreed to
sound the men. He told them that Sophia's life was in danger, and that
she had fled to a convent. The latter part of the story was true, as
she had in fact retreated to such a place, from which she sent letters
to the streltsi to come to her rescue. The commandant failed to secure
more than 500 men; the other streltsi told him that there should be an
investigation.

Two of the streltsi went to Peter and reported to him what was going
on, whereupon he moved to the famous Troitsa monastery. The        (p. 150)
Patriarch, foreign officers serving in the army, his playmates, and
even a regiment of streltsi came to him to offer their services. Peter
issued orders for the arrest of Sophia's favorite, the commandant of
the militia. She begged the Patriarch to interfere but met with a
refusal. The commandant under torture confessed the plot, and was
beheaded. Sophia's other friends were arrested; some were executed
while others were sent to prison; she herself was confined in the
convent where she had found a retreat. Peter was now the czar,
although he conducted the government in his own name and in that of
his weak-minded brother Ivan.

If Sophia had shocked the Russians by leaving the seclusion of the
women's apartments, Peter's acts were likely to astonish them still
more and to give offense. Rowing in a boat, instead of sitting in it
surrounded by his grandees; working like a carpenter, instead of
merely giving his orders through a courtier, and fighting with
foreigners and grooms, were acts so unlike to what a czar should do,
that Peter made a host of enemies. Little did he care! No sooner was
he free to do as he pleased, than he rushed off to Archangel, the only
port Russia could call her own, and there he saw salt water for the
first time. He mingled freely with captains of the foreign merchant
vessels and went out in their boats. On one occasion, he was out in a
storm and came near being drowned; but this did not prevent "Skipper
Peter Alexievitch," from putting out to sea again. Once he piloted
three Dutch vessels. The young czar gave orders to construct a
dockyard and to have boats built.

Peter longed for ports on an open sea, a sea that would not freeze (p. 151)
in winter. There were three which Russia might reasonably hope to own
some day, the Baltic, the Black, and the Caspian Sea. The Baltic
belonged to Sweden, and Peter feared difficulties in that direction;
but the Black Sea belonged to the Turks, and Peter quite understood
that a war with the infidels would be popular in Russia. He wished to
visit Western Europe; to see for himself the wonders of which he had
heard foreigners speak; but he made up his mind not to go until he
could appear as a victorious general.

Thus Peter made preparations for war with the Khan of the Crimea. He
did not command his army; what he wanted, was to learn, and therefore
he went as the gunner Peter Alexievitch. That did not prevent him from
keeping a sharp eye on his generals. Chief-engineer Jansen received a
sound whipping from him and deserted to the enemy. For this and other
causes he was compelled to raise the siege of Azof and to fall back to
Russia. His mother died in 1694. He returned to Russia in 1695, and
notwithstanding his defeat, he ordered a triumphal entry into Moscow;
but he felt very sore. The following year, 1696, his half-brother Ivan
died, and Peter was the sole Autocrat of all the Russias.

[Illustration: Peter the Great]                                    (p. 152)




XVIII--PETER THE GREAT AND HIS REIGN.                              (p. 153)


Far from being discouraged by his defeat, Peter was more than ever
resolved to have a port on the Black Sea. He introduced reforms in the
army, and while doing this, he ordered a fleet of boats to be built on
the Don, and set 26,000 men to work on them. He also sent to Holland
and other parts of Europe for officers and gunners, and superintended
everything. It was at this time that he wrote to Moscow that,
"following the command God gave Adam, he was earning his bread by the
sweat of his brow." When he was ready, the army and the boats went
down the Don; Azof was blockaded by sea and by land, and forced to
capitulate. When the news arrived at Moscow, there was general
rejoicing, and even at Warsaw in Poland the people cheered for the
czar. The army returned to Moscow under triumphal arches, the generals
seated in magnificent sledges. A young officer, Peter Alexievitch,
recently promoted to captain, was marching in the ranks.

Peter wished to make of Azof a Russian town in the shortest time
possible. He secured from the douma an order by which three thousand
families were moved to that port, and streltsi were dispatched to
garrison it. The czar wanted a naval force, and moved by his energy,
the Patriarch, the prelates, and the monasteries offered to give   (p. 154)
one ship for every 5,000 serfs owned by them. This example was
followed by nobles, officials, and merchants, and once more Peter sent
to the west for competent men to help build them. At the same time
fifty young nobles were dispatched to Venice to learn shipbuilding.

When he was seventeen years old, Peter had married Eudoxia Lapoukine,
whose relatives abhorred all that was new; Peter's wife shared their
sentiments, so that his home life was far from happy. He had a son by
her, named Alexis; after the fall of Azof, Peter secured a divorce, an
act unheard of in Russia, where she remained czarina in the eyes of
the people. Busy as he was, Peter left his son and heir in charge of
his divorced wife, while he was making preparations for the long
expected visit to the west of Europe.

He determined that an embassy should be sent, and that it should be
worthy of Russia. Accordingly he appointed the Swiss Lafort and two
Russian generals "the great Ambassadors of the Czar." Among their
retinue composed of two hundred and seventy persons, was a young man
Peter Mikhailof, better known as Peter Alexievitch. When the embassy
came to Riga, that young man was insulted by the governor. Peter said
nothing, but made a note of it for future use. At Koenigsberg, "Mr.
Peter Mikhailof" was appointed master of artillery by the Prussian
Colonel Sternfeld. The progress of the embassy was too slow for Peter
who had an object in view. He went ahead to Holland where he hired a
room from a blacksmith at Zaandam, bought a workman's suit, and    (p. 155)
went to work in a dockyard. He often visited Amsterdam where his good
nature and passion to learn gained him the good-will of the people.
Peter then crossed over to London where he spent three months.
Competent men of every profession and trade were engaged by him
everywhere. Returning to Holland, his ship was caught in a violent
gale, which frightened even the sailors. Peter kept cool, and,
smiling, asked them if they "had ever heard of a Czar of Russia who
was drowned in the North Sea?"

Peter did not forget Russia's political interests. He talked with
William of Orange, the great opponent of Louis XIV, and with other
influential men, but he did not visit the court of France. After
satisfying his curiosity, he went to Vienna where he intended to study
strategy; but his stay was cut short by bad news from home.

Peter had met with a sullen, obstinate opposition in Russia. It was
led by the priests who said, and perhaps believed, that Peter was the
anti-Christ. It was a cause for complaint that Peter often wore
clothes of a German fashion; was the Russian costume not good enough
for him? Again, why did he not devote his time to war, as the other
czars had done? He had made a bargain with British merchants to import
tobacco into Russia; what did the Russians want with this
"sacrilegious smell?" But the climax was that a _Czar of the Russias_
should leave Holy Russia to go among heretics and heathens. Geography
was not studied in the czar's empire, and all nations on earth were
thought to belong to either of the two classes.

The trouble began among the streltsi who had been sent to Azof.    (p. 156)
These citizen soldiers looked upon their destination at the other end
of the empire as an exile,--which it may have been. Two hundred
deserted and made their way back to Moscow and their families; they
were promptly hunted down. When they returned to their regiments, they
brought with them a secret proclamation from Sophia. "You suffer," she
declared, "but it will grow worse still. March on Moscow! What are you
waiting for? There is no news of the czar!" There was a rumor that
Peter was dead and that his son Alexis had been murdered by the
boyards. Four regiments revolted and left the ranks. Generals Gordon
and Schein went after them with the regular troops, and after
overtaking the mutineers, tried to bring them to reason. In reply they
stated their grievances and persisted in their determination not to
return to duty. The government troops then fired and scattered the
streltsi. A number of them were arrested, tortured, and executed.

At this time Peter returned, furious at what had happened. He was
determined to strike at the head of the opposition, the Russians who
openly denounced innovations. He ordered that the face must be shaved.
This was hitting every adult Russian in a tender spot, because the
shaving of the face was considered in the light of a blasphemy. He
began to enforce his orders at his court, sometimes acting as a barber
himself, when he was none too gentle. A number of gibbets erected on
the Red Square, reminded the bearded noble that the choice lay between
losing the beard or the head. The Patriarch appealed to Peter, a   (p. 157)
holy eikon of the Virgin in his hand. "Why did you bring out the holy
eikon?" asked the czar. "Withdraw and restore it to its place. Know
that I venerate God and His mother as much as you do, but know also
that it is my duty to protect the people and to punish the rebels."

The gibbets did not stand as an idle threat. The Austrian Minister
Korb was a witness of the executions, which he describes thus: "Five
rebel heads had been sent into the dust by blows from an ax wielded by
the noblest hand in Russia." Thus Peter did not hesitate to be his own
executioner. It was like him to do his own work, regardless of what
the people might think. A thousand men were sent to a gory grave, by
the highest officers of the court; the executions lasted a week. The
funeral of the executed was forbidden. Bodies were seen dangling from
the walls of the kremlin for five months, and for the same length of
time, the corpses of some of the streltsi hung from the bars of
Sophia's prison, clutching the secret proclamation. Peter's divorced
wife had joined Sophia's party; the two ladies had their head shaved
and were confined in convents. The streltsi were dissolved and
replaced by regular troops.

Peter then turned upon the Cossacks of the Don, who had shown greater
independence than pleased him. Prince Dolgorouki to whom the task was
confided of bringing them to order, wrote to the czar after he had
destroyed the Cossack camp: "The chief rebels and traitors have been
hung; of the others, one out of every ten; and all these dead
malefactors have been laid on rafts, and turned into the river, to (p. 158)
strike terror into the hearts of the Don people and to cause them to
repent."

Mazeppa, as we have seen, was at this time hetman of the Cossacks of
Little Russia. In his youth he had been a page of John Casimir, king
of Poland; it was then that he had that terrible adventure which is
connected indelibly with his name. After he was cut loose from the
back of the unbroken horse that had carried him in the steppes, he
entered among the Cossacks, and rose from the ranks by betraying every
chief who helped him. Although it was Sophia who made him hetman, he
was among the first to declare for Peter. His enemies, of whom he had
many, accused him before the czar, but Peter admired him, and
delivered his accusers up to him; they did not live long after Mazeppa
had them in his power.

It was Mazeppa's scheme to establish an independent kingdom, he had
the support of the Cossacks who did not care to work but preferred to
be supported by the people. The industrious classes longed to get rid
of this burden, and looked toward the czar to set them free. The
tribute which Little Russia paid to Moscow was quite heavy, and when
it was rumored that Peter was going to war with Sweden, Mazeppa
thought this was an opportunity to carry out his scheme. He entered
into negotiations with Stanislas Lecszinski whom Swedish influence had
placed upon the throne of Poland. Peter was informed of this in
detail, but he did not credit it, beheaded one of his informants, and
the others, were tortured and sent to Siberia.

The war broke out, Charles XII, the romantic king of Sweden        (p. 159)
arrived in the neighborhood of Little Russia, and Peter called on
Mazeppa to join the Russian army with his Cossacks. He pretended to be
dying, but when the two hostile armies were drawing close, he crossed
the Desna with his most trusted Cossacks to join the Swedes. Peter's
eyes were opened; he gave orders to his general Menzikoff to take and
sack Mazeppa's capital. This was done and Mazeppa's friends, who had
remained behind, were executed. Mazeppa himself reached the Swedish
camp. He was compelled to seek safety in Turkey, where he died
miserably at Bender. His territory was annexed to Russia, the Cossacks
lost all their privileges, and 1,200 of them were set to work on the
Ladoga canal.

It was in 1700 that Peter, after concluding an alliance with Poland,
determined to declare war against Sweden where young Charles XII had
recently succeeded to the throne. Attacked at the same time by Russia,
Poland, and Denmark, this young hero invaded the last-named country
and compelled its king to conclude peace. After relieving Riga,
Charles marched into Russia at the head of 8,500 men, and on the 30th
of November defeated a Russian army of 63,000 men. This victory proved
a misfortune, because it inspired the King of Sweden with contempt for
Russian soldiers and made him careless, whereas Peter worked
cheerfully and hard to profit from the lesson. While Charles was
absent in Poland, his army was twice defeated.

Each of the two antagonists was worthy of the other's steel. Both were
brave, but Charles was impetuous, whereas Peter acted upon cool
judgment. The war continued until 1709 when Charles found himself  (p. 160)
in Little Russia, far away from supplies and reinforcements, in a
Russian winter which happened to be exceptionally severe. In the
spring he laid siege to Pultowa. The czar arrived on the 15th of June
with 60,000 men; Charles had 29,000. On July 8, 1709, the battle of
Pultowa was fought and Charles was defeated; he narrowly escaped being
captured. With Mazeppa and the Pole Poniatowski, he made his way
across the Turkish frontier, and remained until 1713, in the territory
of the Sultan, whom he finally induced to declare war against Peter.
This victory gave Peter the longed-for port on the Baltic, since
Sweden was no longer in a condition to stop him.

What induced Sultan Ahmed III to risk war with Russia, was the hope of
regaining Azof. Peter, on the other hand, hoped for an opportunity to
capture Constantinople, the Czargrad of former times. He knew that he
had the sympathy of the many Christians of the Greek Church, who were
suffering under the yoke of the Turk. Trusting upon their support,
Peter arrived on the bank of the Pruth with 38,000 exhausted soldiers.
There he found himself surrounded by 200,000 Turks and Tartars. Peter
gained a slight success, but not of sufficient importance to extricate
or relieve him. Fearing an overwhelming calamity, Peter was prepared
to make immense sacrifices in return for peace, and even to surrender
Azof and the territory taken from Sweden, when his second wife
Catherine had a happy thought. She collected all the money and jewels
in the Russian camp, and sent them as a present to the Grand Vizier in
command of the enemy, asking at the same time, what terms he would (p. 161)
make. They were found unexpectedly reasonable: the surrender of Azof,
the razing of the Russian forts erected on Turkish territory, and that
Charles XII should be free to return to Sweden. Peter accepted
eagerly, much as he regretted the loss of Azof and the failure of his
schemes.

In 1713, a Russian fleet under Admiral Apraxine, with Peter serving
under him as vice-admiral, captured several cities on the Baltic, and
a Russian force entered north Germany. An alliance was formed against
him and Peter decided to make an attempt at an alliance with France.
In 1718, just as peace was being concluded with Charles XII, the King
of Sweden, died and war broke out anew, lasting until 1721, when, by
the Peace of Nystad, Sweden surrendered to Russia Livonia, Esthonia,
and part of Finland. Peter had his way: Russia had open ports.

Peter was greatly pleased, and Russia rejoiced with him. The senate
and Holy Synod conferred upon him the titles of "the Great, the Father
of his country, and Emperor of all the Russias." In 1722, Peter led an
expedition to the Caspian Sea. He captured Baku and five other
important towns. He died three years later, in 1725.




XIX--PETER THE GREAT AND HIS TIME.                                 (p. 162)


Before judging Peter the Great, the time in which he lived, and the
conditions which prevailed should receive careful consideration.
Throughout Western Europe, in France, Germany, Spain, and Italy, in
parliamentary England and republican Holland, the people, that is the
masses, toiled early and late for the privilege of paying the taxes;
all immunities were reserved for the favored few composing the
aristocracy.

There was no education among the people, with the exception perhaps of
Holland, then still a power of the first rank. The principle was that
the interests of the individual were unworthy of consideration by the
side of those of the State. That was the case in France as well as in
Russia. Peter inherited the idea of autocratic power, and his travels
in Europe conveyed to him nothing to upset or contradict that idea. He
cannot, therefore, be considered in the light of a tyrant. He acted,
so far as he could know, within his prerogative, and did his duty as
he saw it.

Russia, with a thin and scattered population largely engaged in
agriculture, felt no impulse toward progress. The moujik lived as his
father had lived. He never came in contact with people of a superior
civilization who, by introducing new wants, could make him         (p. 163)
discontented with his lot. Knowing no desire but to satisfy his
physical craving, he bore the extremes of heat and cold with equal
fortitude; the soil and his labor provided for his subsistence. A life
so sordid must either brutalize man or feed his imagination with the
unknown and dreaded forces of nature; superstition, deep and strong,
became part of the peasant's existence. It is generations before a
traditional and deep-rooted belief can be eradicated.

But Peter the Great gave as little thought to the moujik as did Louis
XIV to the peasants of France. His influence was exerted upon the
boyards, and among them the opposition was the stronger as they had
been imbued with Asiatic ideas under the Tartar yoke. Here the great
muscular strength of Peter rendered him great service. He did not
hesitate to use a stick upon the highest officials any more than Ivan
the Terrible had used his iron-tipped staff. Even Menzikoff was
chastized in this manner. Frederick the Great of Prussia did the same
afterwards. Nor was this method of punishing without its use. One day
when Peter was looking over the accounts of one of his nobles, he
proved to him that, whereas the boyard had been robbing the
government, he in turn had been robbed by his steward. The czar took
the noble by the collar and applied the stick with a muscular arm and
great vigor. After he had punished him to his heart's content, he let
him go, saying, "Now you had better go find your steward and settle
accounts with him."

It was Peter's purpose to make the Russians again into Europeans.  (p. 164)
He rightly deemed it best to begin with externals, because they are
the object lessons of changes. The Russian boyard was attached to the
long caftan or tunic adopted from the Tartars, but above all he was
devoted to the hair on his face. The beard was doomed by the czar. He
could not play barber to all his subjects, but he imposed a heavy tax
upon unshaven faces. Owners of beards paid from thirty to one hundred
rubles, and moujiks had to pay two pence for theirs every time they
entered a city or town.

The reform which had the most lasting influence upon Russia, was the
abolition of the landed nobility as a separate class. They would be
known as "_tchin_" or gentlemen, and any one who entered the service
of the government, regardless of birth, was at once entitled to be
classed among the _tchinovnik_. From that time the terms gentleman and
officer, became synonymous. Every service, civil, military, naval, or
ecclesiastic, was divided into fourteen grades. The lowest grade in
the civil service was held by the registrar of a college, the highest
by the Chancellor of the Empire; the cornet was at the bottom, the
field marshal at the top in the army; and the deacon in a church was
fourteen degrees removed from the Patriarch,--but all were _tchin_.

When, in 1700, the Patriarch Adrian died, the dignity was abolished by
Peter who did not relish the idea of a rival power in the State.
Instead he created the Holy Synod together with the office of
Superintendent of the Patriarchal Throne. He gives his reasons in the
ukase wherein the change is announced. "The simple people," this
document reads, "are not quick to seize the distinction between    (p. 165)
the spiritual and imperial power; struck with the virtue and the
splendor of the supreme pastor of the Church, they imagine that he is
a second sovereign, equal and even superior in power to the Autocrat."

The Holy Synod consisted of bishops and a Procurator-general who
represented the czar and as such could veto any resolution. This
official was often a general. Every bishop had to keep a school in his
palace, and the sons of priests who refused to attend were taken as
soldiers. Autocrat though he was, Peter dared not confiscate the
property of the monasteries, but he forbade any person to enter a
convent before his thirtieth year. The monks were ordered to work at
some trade, or to teach in the schools and colleges. At this time, the
Protestant and Catholic churches of the West tried to make converts,
and the _raskols_ were hostile to the national church. As a rule Peter
did not favor persecution; so long as the church did not interfere
with his authority, there was nothing to fear from him; but upon the
slightest suspicion his heavy hand was felt. Thus, in 1710, he
suddenly ordered the expulsion of the Jesuits. He used to say: "God
has given the czar power over the nations, but Christ alone has power
over the conscience of man." This did not prevent him from exacting a
double tax from the raskols in Moscow, nor from punishing cruelly any
Russian converted to one of the western churches.

The great mass of the people suffered severely by Peter's reforms. The
peasants as tenants of the large landowners had enjoyed some liberty
and were legally free men; they were by him assigned to the soil,
which they were not permitted to leave. Thus they, too, passed into
serfdom. If the proprietor sold the estate, the rural population   (p. 166)
went with it. The owners paid a poll-tax for their serfs. These
unfortunates could also be sold without the land, but the czar made a
law that "If the sale cannot be abolished completely, serfs must be
sold by families without separating husbands from wives, parents from
children, and no longer like cattle, a thing unheard of in the whole
world."

The citizens of towns were divided into three classes; to the first
class belonged bankers, manufacturers, rich merchants, physicians,
chemists, capitalists, jewelers, workers in metal, and artists;
storekeepers and master mechanics were in the second; all other people
belonged to the third. Foreigners could engage in business, acquire
real estate; but they could not depart from the country without paying
to the government one tenth of all they possessed.

Cities and towns were administered by burgomasters elected by the
citizens; this board selected its own president or mayor. If an
important question arose, representatives of the first two classes
were summoned for consultation. All the mayors of Russia were subject
to a magistrate selected from the Council of St. Petersburg, and
appointed by the czar. This official watched over the interests of
commerce and agriculture, settled disputes between citizens and
burgomasters, confirmed local elections, authorized executions when a
death sentence was pronounced by provincial authorities, and made
reports to the tsar.

The _voievodes_ or governors of a province directed all the affairs of
their jurisdiction and disbursed the revenues as they thought      (p. 167)
best. "Help yourself first!" was the unwritten law, and it was
universally obeyed. Peter divided his empire into forty-three
provinces, forming twelve governments each under a viceroy and deputy,
who were assisted by a council elected by the nobles.

The courts were crude and mediaeval, but not more so than in the west
of Europe. Justice, such as it was, was administered by the General
Police Inspector, and in large cities there was a police officer for
every ten houses. Servants who failed to keep the house front clean
were punished with the knout. Peter created the Bureau of Information,
a court of secret police, and thus inaugurated the terrible spy system
which still disgraces Russia.

The douma was abolished, and in its stead Peter created a "Directory
Senate," which could meet only in presence of the czar. It was
originally composed of nine members, but it was afterwards increased
and at last embraced the duties of the Grand Council, the High Finance
Committee, and the Supreme Court. A fair idea of the moral and mental
condition of Russia's high aristocracy, may be had from a rule made by
Peter, forbidding the Senators under severe penalties, while in
session "to cry out, to beat each other, or to call one another
thieves."

Peter's visits to the west, taught him the value of factories. He gave
every possible inducement to foreign capital and skill to come to
Russia, and patronized home industry wherever he could, as by
purchasing the uniforms for army and navy from recently established
mills. Some of his methods appear strange, as, for instance, when he
ordered every town in Russia to send a stipulated number of shoemakers
to Moscow, to learn their trade. Those who continued to work in    (p. 168)
the old fashion, were severely punished. The czar would have met with
greater success, if he had not been hampered by the cupidity of the
officials, who found means to secure the lion's share of the profits.

Peter discarded the old Slavonic alphabet and introduced the one used
at present. St. Petersburg had four printing presses, Moscow two, and
there were also some at Novgorod, Tchernigof, and other large places.
The first newspaper in Russia, the _St. Petersburg Gazette_, was
founded by him. He established, in 1724, the Academy of Sciences, in
imitation of the institution of that name of Paris.

St. Petersburg was founded in 1703. It was far from a promising site
for a new capital, the dreary wastes, dark forests, and marshes where
wild ducks and geese found a favorite feeding place. It was exposed to
frequent floods, and piles were needed before a building could be
erected. But when this autocrat had made up his mind, objections were
brushed aside. Peter collected 40,000 men, soldiers, Cossacks,
Kalmucks, Tartars and such natives as could be found, and put them to
work. At first he provided neither tools nor shelter, and food was
often scarce. Thousands of workmen died;--what did he care? Others
were compelled to take their place. The fortress of St. Peter and Paul
arose first; the czar himself was watching the progress from a little
wooden house on the right bank of the Neva. Men of means were forced
to build stone houses in the new capital. Swedish prisoners and
merchants from Novgorod were invited to move to St. Petersburg, and no
excuse was admitted. Goods could be brought only by boat, and no   (p. 169)
boat was allowed to land unless it carried a certain number of white
stones to be used as building material. He erected churches, and
ordered that he should be buried in the Church of St. Peter and Paul.

Peter's domestic life, as we have seen, was not happy. After his
divorce from his first wife, he married Catherine who, in 1702, had
been made prisoner at Marienburg. It is not known where she was born,
but she was probably a native of Livonia, and was a servant in the
family of Pastor Glueck and engaged to be married to a Swedish dragoon.
She became the property of Menzikoff who gave her to the czar. There
was a secret marriage which was confirmed by a public ceremony in
1712, in reward for her services at Pultowa. Peter also instituted the
Order "For Love and Fidelity," in her honor. A German princess
describes her thus:--"The czarina was small and clumsily made, very
much tanned, and without grace or air of distinction. You had only to
see her to know that she was lowborn. From her usual costume you would
have taken her for a German comedian. Her dress had been bought at a
secondhand shop; it was very old-fashioned, and covered with silver
and dirt. She had a dozen orders, and as many portraits of saints or
relics, fastened all down her dress, in such a way that when she
walked you would have thought by the jingling that a mule was
passing." She could neither read nor write, but she was sharp, had
natural wit, and obtained great influence over Peter. They had two
sons, Peter and Paul, who died in childhood, and two daughters, Anne
and Elizabeth. The former married the Duke of Holstein.

Alexis, the son by his first wife, was Peter's heir. He had grown  (p. 170)
to be a young man before Peter realized that the result of all his
efforts depended upon his successor, and the czar began to pay
attention to his son's education when it was too late, when habits had
been formed. The czarevitch had imbibed the prejudices of his mother;
he was narrow-minded, lazy, weak, and obstinate, and associated with
people to whom Old Russia was Holy Russia, who abhorred reforms of
every kind. Peter sent him to travel in Germany, but the prince would
learn nothing. His father warned him in very plain terms. "Disquiet
for the future," he wrote to Alexis, "destroys the joy caused by my
present successes. I see that you despise everything that can make you
worthy to reign after me. What you call inability, I call rebellion,
for you cannot excuse yourself on the ground of the weakness of your
mind and the state of your health. We have struggled from obscurity
through the toil of war, which has taught other nations to know and
respect us, and yet you will not even hear of military exercises. If
you do not alter your conduct, know that I shall deprive you of my
succession. I have not spared, and I shall not spare, my own life for
my country; do you think that I shall spare yours? I would rather have
a stranger who is worthy for my heir, than a good-for-nothing member
of my own family."

Alexis should have known that his father was in terrible earnest, yet
he did not heed the warning. When Peter was traveling in Western
Europe, his son fled to Vienna, where he thought that he should be
safe. Finding that this was not so, he went to the Tyrol and
afterwards to Naples, but his father's agents traced him and one   (p. 171)
of them, Tolstoi, secured an interview in which he assured the prince
of his father's pardon, and finally persuaded him to return to Moscow.
As soon as he arrived there, he was arrested. The czar convoked the
three Estates before whom he accused the czarevitch. Alexis was forced
to sign his resignation of the Crown. When he was being examined,
probably under torture, a widespread conspiracy was revealed. Peter
learned also that his son had begged the Emperor of Austria for armed
intervention, that he had negotiated with Sweden and that he had
encouraged a mutiny of the army in Germany. It was shown that his
divorced wife and several prelates were in the plot. Peter crushed his
enemies. Most of the persons involved suffered a cruel death, and
Alexis himself, after being punished with the knout, was sentenced to
die. Two days later his death was announced. It appears that on that
day, the heir to the throne was brought before a court composed of
nine men of the highest rank in Russia and that he was beaten with a
knout to secure further confessions, and that he expired under the
torture. Those present were sworn to secrecy, and kept the oath.

Peter, therefore, had no male heir. Alexis, however, had left a son
Peter by Charlotte of Brunswick whom he married against his will. In
1723 the czar ordered Catherine to be crowned as Empress. He had
established the right to select his successor but failed to do so,
owing to his sudden death.

The following description of Peter the Great at the age of forty, is
given by a Frenchman; "He was a very tall man, well made though    (p. 172)
rather thin, his face somewhat round, with a broad forehead, beautiful
eyebrows, a short nose, thick at the end; his lips were rather thick,
his skin was brown and ruddy. He had splendid eyes, large, black,
piercing, and well-opened; his expression was dignified and gracious
when he liked, but often wild and stern, and his eyes, and indeed his
whole face, were distorted by an occasional twitch that was very
unpleasant. It lasted only a moment, and gave him a wandering and
terrible look, when he was himself again. His air expressed intellect,
thoughtfulness, and greatness, and had a certain grace about it. He
wore a linen collar, a round wig, brown and unpowdered, which did not
reach his shoulders; a brown, tight-fitting coat with gold buttons, a
vest, trousers, and stockings, and neither gloves nor cuffs; the star
of his order on his coat, and the ribbon underneath it; his coat was
often unbuttoned, his hat lay on the table, and was never on his head,
even out of doors. In this simplicity, however shabby might be his
carriage or scanty his suit, his natural greatness could not be
mistaken."




XX--THE SUCCESSORS OF PETER THE GREAT.                             (p. 173)


Peter's strong hand had stifled the opposition to his reforms, but
with his death it reappeared. There were, therefore, two parties in
Russia: the men who had assisted the dead czar, Menzikoff, Apraxine,
Tolstoi, and others, such as the members of the secret Court who had
witnessed the violent death of Peter's only son. They dreaded the
succession of Peter's grandson, the boy who, although only twelve
years old, might order an investigation of his father's death. These
men held the power and decided that, since Catherine had been crowned
as Empress, it was she who should succeed. Thus the former maid
servant, not even a native Russian, became Empress of all the Russias.
There were some protests in favor of Peter's grandson, but they were
disregarded.

Menzikoff who was the cause of Catherine's rise, fancied himself
all-powerful, and there was jealousy among Peter's associates.
Menzikoff sent one of them, Tolstoi, to Siberia, but Catherine would
not consent to the punishment of the other friends of the late czar.
She was honest in carrying out Peter's unfinished projects. He had
planned the marriage of his daughter Anne to the Duke of Holstein: the
wedding took place; he intended to send an exploring expedition to
Kamtschatka; she engaged the services of a Danish captain, Bering, (p. 174)
who discovered the sea and strait named after him. The Academy of
Sciences was opened in 1726. She, however, changed the Senate into a
Secret High Council, which met under the presidency of the empress.

Catherine died in 1727, and on her deathbed appointed Peter's
grandson, then fourteen years old, as her successor. In case of his
death, the throne would go to Anne, and next to Elizabeth. During his
minority these two daughters assisted by the Duke of Holstein,
Menzikoff, and some other high officers, would constitute a Board of
Regents.

Menzikoff had taken precautions. He had obtained her consent that the
young heir, Peter II, should marry one of his daughters, a young lady
two years older than the boy. He showed, in his letters to Peter, that
he looked upon him as his son. He also intended his own son to marry
the boy's sister Natalia. There was one member of Peter the Great's
family who did not approve of Menzikoff's schemes, Elizabeth, the
young czar's aunt, then seventeen years old. Not long after
Catherine's death, Menzikoff fell ill; he was compelled to keep to his
rooms, and in that time Elizabeth roused her nephew's suspicions.
Peter left Menzikoff's palace and when Catherine's favorite tried to
resume his authority, he was arrested and exiled to his estates. Soon
after he was sent to Siberia, where he died two years later, in 1729.

The Dolgorouki family succeeded, but its head committed the same
mistakes, besides showing a tendency to undo the work of Peter the
Great. The young czar was growing weary of the Dolgorouki when, in (p. 175)
January 1730, he caught cold and died after a brief illness.

It was during his short reign that Prussia, Austria, and Russia, first
seriously discussed the partition of Poland. A treaty was signed
between Prussia and Russia whereby the two powers agreed to select and
support a candidate for the throne of that kingdom which was to
illustrate the truth that "a kingdom divided against itself cannot
exist."

Peter's death left Russia without a male heir. There were, as we have
seen, two daughters from his marriage with Catherine. Anne, who had
married the Duke of Holstein, had died in 1728, leaving a son also
named Peter. Elizabeth, the other daughter, was in St. Petersburg,
quietly engaged in establishing a party of her own. There were,
besides, two other parties having claims upon the throne. Ivan, the
weak-minded half-brother of Peter the Great, had been married and had
left two daughters, Anne, Duchess of Courland, and Catherine, Duchess
of Mecklenburg.

The decision rested with the Secret High Council. Dolgorouki's claim,
that Peter II had made a secret will leaving the throne to his bride,
was laughed to scorn. The members of the High Council saw an
opportunity to secure most of the autocratic power for themselves, and
resolved to offer the throne to Anne of Courland, provided that she
subscribed to the following conditions: That the Secret High Council
should always consist of eight members, all vacancies to be filled by
themselves; that she could make neither war nor peace, nor appoint an
officer above the rank of colonel, without the consent of the      (p. 176)
Council; that she could not condemn a noble to death, nor confiscate
his property, without a trial; and that she could neither appoint a
successor, nor marry again without the approval of the Council. She
was also to sign an agreement whereby she would forfeit the crown "in
case of my ceasing to observe these engagements." The Council also
decided upon moving the capital back to Moscow.

This might have been the beginning of a more liberal government for
Russia, since it diminished the power of the czar and the people would
have benefited by the increased rights of the nobles, as was the case
in England. It was the nobility who objected, from fear that the power
might be absorbed in the families of the Council members. Anne of
Courland accepted the conditions and came to Moscow. There she
received letters from the enemies of the Council imploring her to
disregard her promises. On the 25th of February, 1731, the Council was
in session when an officer appeared summoning them before the czarina.
Upon arrival in the apartment, they found about eight hundred persons
presenting a petition that Anne might restore autocracy. She read it
and seemed astonished: "What!" she exclaimed, "the conditions sent to
me at Mittau were not the will of the people?" There was a shout of
"No! no!" "Then," she said, addressing the Council, "you have deceived
me!" Anne was a true daughter of the czars. She began by exiling the
principal members of the Council to their estates; when she saw that
there was no opposition, they were sent to Siberia; and when no one
remonstrated, other members were condemned to a cruel death.

Anne was thirty-five years old when she was crowned as czarina.    (p. 177)
She had been in Germany so long that she preferred to surround herself
with Germans who did serve her well, but they naturally aroused the
jealousy and hatred of the Russian nobles. In 1733, Augustus II, King
of Poland, died. Russia, Prussia, and France, each had a candidate.
Austria and Russia favored Augustus III of Saxony, and Louis XV of
France supported his father-in-law Stanislas Lecszinski.

This candidate secretly proceeded to Warsaw, where he was elected by a
vote of 60,000 against 4,000. A Russian army crossed the frontier,
whereupon Stanislas withdrew to Dantzig and the Russians proclaimed
Augustus III. The war spread and a Russian army of 20,000 men advanced
as far as Heidelberg in Baden. It ended in 1735, by the Peace of
Vienna, but Russia became involved in a war with Turkey, as an ally of
Austria.

In 1736, the Russians took Azof and ravaged the western Crimea. In the
following year they laid waste its eastern part, and in 1739 they
gained a great victory at Savoutchani. Austria was not anxious to have
Russia as a close neighbor, and arranged the Peace of Belgrade.
(1739.) Russia surrendered all the conquests, except a small tongue of
land between the Dnieper and the Bug. Sweden threatened war, but it
was averted. The following year, 1740, Anne died, leaving the throne
to her infant son, Ivan of Brunswick.

Anne Ivanovna introduced western luxury into Russia. Prior to her
arrival, fashions were unknown, and people used to wear their clothes
until they were worn out. Soon after restoring autocracy, she      (p. 178)
returned to St. Petersburg where she endeavored to establish a court
in imitation of that of France. She could compel her nobles to appear
in the costume of the west, and, unless they were very wealthy, make
them sacrifice estates and serfs to pay his increased expenses, but of
the refinement which creates fashion, there was none. One of her
guests, a procurator-general was so intoxicated at one of her
receptions that he insulted one of Anne's most trusted advisers; she
was a witness, but only laughed heartily.

The young nobles benefited by the German influence at Court, since
they received a better education. A law was made requiring them to
study from their seventh to their twentieth year, and to serve the
government from that age until they were forty-five. Between the age
of twelve and sixteen they were made to appear before an examining
board, and any one failing to pass the second time in catechism,
arithmetic, and geometry, was put into the navy. In the schools for
young nobles,--the serfs received no instruction of any kind,--the
course of studies was enlarged after the German system.

Anne's infant son, Ivan, was three months old, when he succeeded to
the throne as Ivan VI. Elizabeth, the daughter of Peter the Great and
Catherine, was twenty-eight years old; tall and masculine, bright and
bold, daring on horseback as well as on the water, she had made a host
of friends among the high officials and the Guards. She found an able
adviser in the French Minister at St. Petersburg who was anxious to
destroy the influence of Germany. The Swedes went so far as to begin
a war, proclaiming the desire to deliver "the glorious Russian     (p. 179)
nation" from the German yoke. Elizabeth decided that the time had come
to act, when the regiments devoted to her were ordered to the
frontier. In the night of October 25, 1741, she went with three
friends to the barracks. "Boys," she said to the men, "you know whose
daughter I am?" "Matuska," (little mother), they replied, "we are
ready; we will kill all of them." She said that she did not wish any
blood to be shed, and added: "I swear to die for you; will _you_ swear
to die for me?" They made the oath. When she returned to the palace,
the regent, the infant czar, and the German members of the Government
were arrested. Ivan VI was sent to a fortress near the Swedish
frontier. The Germans were brought before a court and condemned to
death, but Elizabeth commuted the sentence to exile. After this she
went to Moscow, where she was crowned as czarina. Her next act was to
send for her nephew, Peter, the son of her sister Anne of Holstein. He
came and entered the Greek Church, when he was proclaimed as heir to
the throne as Peter Feodorovitch.

Sweden demanded the cession of the territory conquered by Peter the
Great, and, since Elizabeth refused, the war continued. But Sweden was
no longer the kingdom of Charles XII; the Russians were everywhere
victorious, and by the Peace of Abo, in 1743, Sweden ceded South
Finland and agreed to elect Elizabeth's ally, Adolphus of Holstein, as
heir to the throne.

In 1740 the Emperor of Germany died, after obtaining from the powers
the consent to set aside the Salic Law of succession, in favor of his
daughter. This law restricted the right of succession to male      (p. 180)
heirs exclusively. In violation of the pledged word, several claimants
appeared to contest the claim of his daughter Maria Theresa, and since
almost every nation took sides, it was important to know what Russia
would do. Elizabeth was undecided; at least, she played with both
sides until 1746, when she entered into an alliance with Maria
Theresa, while England promised subsidies in money. It was, however,
1748 before a Russian army of 30,000 men passed through Germany and
took up a position on the Rhine. In the same year the war was ended by
the Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle, without the Russians having been under
fire.

Elizabeth hated Frederick the Great of Prussia. She claimed that "The
King of Prussia is certainly a bad prince who has no fear of God
before his eyes; he turns holy things into ridicule, and he never goes
to church." The real reason was that Frederick had expressed his
opinion about Elizabeth's private life, and she was not the woman to
forgive his remarks. Then again, Frederick had an excellent army of
200,000 men; Elizabeth's chancellor, on that account, called Prussia
"the most dangerous of neighbors, whose power it was necessary to
break."

Russia, Austria, France, and Saxony, entered into a secret alliance
against Prussia. Frederick found it out, and in 1756, began the famous
Seven Years' War. The same year, 83,000 Russians under Apraxine
crossed the frontier and seized East Prussia. A battle was fought; the
Russians were the victors, but Apraxine fell back across the Niemen.
France and Austria suspected treachery; Apraxine was arrested and
the chancellor was dismissed and exiled. Fermor was appointed      (p. 181)
commander-in-chief.

The Russian army recrossed the frontier in 1758, took Koenigsberg and
bombarded Kuestrin on the Oder. Frederick with 32,000 men attacked the
Russian army 89,000 strong at Zorndorf. The Russians fought stubbornly
but were defeated with a loss of 20,000 men. Fermor was recalled, and
succeeded by Soltykof who, in 1759, entered Frankfort on the Oder.
Another battle was fought and Frederick was defeated by greatly
superior numbers. He lost 8,000 men. Prussia was exhausted, but his
enemies, too, began to feel the expense of the war. Elizabeth,
however, was determined to humble the outspoken King when she died
suddenly in 1761. She was succeeded by her nephew Peter Feodorovitch
under the name of Peter III.

Elizabeth, although careless in her mode of living, was a stout
supporter of the Greek Church. In 1742, she agreed with the Holy Synod
to suppress all other churches, as well as the Mosques or Mahomedan
temples in the south. This caused a revolt of the Mahomedans. The Jews
were also expelled in some parts of the empire. A fever of fanaticism
broke out; fifty-three _raskolnik_ in Russia, and one hundred and
seventy-two in Siberia, burned themselves to death.

Count Ivan Schouvalof, one of Elizabeth's friends, believed in
education and was given a free hand. He ordered that the priests and
their children should attend school, on penalty of being whipped. He
founded the University of Moscow, which has educated many learned
Russians. To induce students to enter, he induced Elizabeth to     (p. 182)
make a law that all students should be tchins of the tenth grade, and
the professors hold the eighth grade. He sent young men abroad to
study and established higher schools in every Government. Schouvalof
was also the founder of the Academy of Fine Arts at St. Petersburg.

That capital was growing; its population was 74,000 under Elizabeth.
She built the Winter Palace and saw the plans for Tsarskoe Selo, the
magnificent retreat of the Russian emperors. She reestablished the
Senate, as organized by Peter the Great.




XXI--RUSSIA UNDER CATHERINE II (THE GREAT).                        (p. 183)


Peter III was thirty-four years old when he succeeded to the throne.
Although it was twenty years since his aunt Elizabeth sent for him
from Holstein, he was more of a German than a Russian, and had an
intense admiration for Frederick the Great. He at once reversed
Russia's policy, ordered the commander-in-chief of the Russian armies
to leave his Austrian allies, and made peace with the King of Prussia
to whom he restored all Russia's conquests. Then he entered into an
alliance with Frederick, which was the means of saving Prussia.

Peter relieved the nobles of the duty of serving the state, for which
they were so grateful that they proposed to erect his statue in gold;
he heard of it, and forbade their doing so. He abolished the Secret
Court of Police, and showed great kindness to the raskols and
permitted many of them to return from Siberia. A host of other exiles
were recalled, and he thought of relieving the hard lot of the
moujiks.

For all this, he was unpopular and disliked. His disregard for old
Russian customs and his mode of life gave deep offense. He was married
to Sophia of Anhalt, who had assumed the name of Catherine; she    (p. 184)
was a woman of decided ability and strong character. Peter wanted a
divorce. She heard of it and contrived a conspiracy among the high
nobles and officers of the army and navy. Peter had no thought of
danger, when he ordered the arrest of Passek, a young officer and
favorite of Catherine. Thinking that the conspiracy had been discovered,
she left her palace in the outskirts and came to St. Petersburg where
the three regiments of Foot Guards declared in her favor, and Peter's
uncle was arrested by his own regiment of Horse Guards. When Catherine
entered the Winter Palace, she was sure of the army and navy;
Cronstadt was seized by her supporters, and she issued a proclamation
assuming the government. At the head of 20,000 men, she marched upon
the Palace, where the czar, her husband, was residing.

Peter fled to Cronstadt and sought the Admiral. "I am the czar," he
said. "There is no longer a czar," was the reply, and all Peter could
do was to return to his palace, where he abdicated "like a child being
sent to sleep," as Frederick the Great expressed it. He then called on
his wife, "after which," Catherine tells us, "I sent the deposed
emperor, under the command of Alexis Orlof accompanied by four
officers and a detachment of gentle and reasonable men, to a place
called Ropcha, fifteen miles from Peterhof, a secluded spot, but very
pleasant." Four days later Peter III was dead. Catherine declared that
he died of colic "with the blood flying to the brains."

[Illustration: Catharine II]

But one was living with just and strong claims to the throne. Ivan VI,
the infant czar sent to prison by Elizabeth in 1741, was now       (p. 186)
twenty-one years old. It was reported that he had lost his reason,
which may have been true or false. Catherine disposed of him. She
said: "It is my opinion that he should not be allowed to escape, so as
to place him beyond the power of doing harm. It would be best to
tonsure him (that is, to make a monk of him), and to transfer him to
some monastery, neither too near nor too far off; it will suffice if
it does not become a shrine." She did not desire that the people
should make a martyr of a descendant of Peter the Great, while she, a
foreign woman, was occupying the throne. Poor Ivan was murdered by his
keepers two years later, when a lieutenant of the Guards was trying to
effect his escape. After that, Catherine had no rival for the crown,
except her son Paul, whom she disliked.

At first it seemed as if Catherine would reverse her husband's policy
with regard to Prussia. She gave orders to the army to leave the
Prussian camp, but she did not command active hostilities; since the
parties felt the exhaustion of a seven years' struggle, peace
negotiations were begun and concluded successfully.

Catherine made Russia a party to the System of the North; that is, she
entered into an alliance with England, Prussia, and Denmark, as
against France and Austria. Nearly all Europe was deeply interested in
the severe illness of the King of Poland, because of the election
which must follow his death. Unhappy Poland was bringing destruction
upon itself. A lawless nobility kept the country in anarchy, and
religious persecution, which had disappeared elsewhere, was still
rampant. It was the gold distributed by interested powers, that
controlled the vote of the Diet, and since it was merely a         (p. 187)
question of the highest bidder, Frederick the Great and Catherine came
to an understanding. They decided to elect Stanislas Poniatowski, a
Polish noble. France and Austria supported the Prince of Saxony, who
was also the choice of the Court party. After the death of Augustus
III, the Diet assembled and elected the French and Austrian candidate.
Members of the Diet asked for Russian intervention and, supported by
Catherine's army, Poniatowski was placed on the throne.

Russia and Prussia were not satisfied; they wanted part of the
kingdom and the prevailing anarchy on their frontiers justified
them. But Catherine made a pretext out of Poland's religious
intolerance,--although the same existed in Russia. In 1765, Koninski,
the Bishop of the Greek Church presented to the King a petition asking
redress for a number of grievances which he enumerated. The King
promised relief and submitted the matter to the Diet of 1766. The
majority would not hear of any tolerance, although Russia had on the
frontier an army of 80,000 men ready to invade Poland. The Diet of
1767 showed the same foolish spirit, but it was broken when two of its
members, both Catholic bishops, were arrested under Russian orders,
and carried into Russian territory. The Diet did not appear to resent
this violation of a friendly territory but entered in 1768 into a
treaty with Russia, in which it was agreed that Poland would make no
change in its constitution without Russia's consent. The Russian army
was withdrawn from Warsaw, and a deputation from the Diet was sent to
St. Petersburg to thank Catherine.

Two hostile parties soon appeared in arms. The Catholics raised    (p. 188)
the banner "Pro religione et libertate!"--as if they understood what
liberty meant! France helped with money, and urged the Sultan of
Turkey to declare war against Russia, so that Catherine would be
compelled to withdraw her troops. Russia was inciting those of the
Greek and Protestant religions to whom assistance was promised.

In the winter of 1768, the Tartars of the Crimea, aided by the Turks,
invaded Russia, and Catherine dispatched an army of 30,000 men,--all
she could spare. In the following year, the Russians attacked and
defeated the enemy 100,000 strong at Khotin on the Dnieper, and in
1770 the Khan of the Crimea met the same fate. In the same year at the
battle of Kagul, 17,000 Russians defeated 150,000 Turks commanded by
the Grand Vizier. In the same year the Russians destroyed the Turkish
fleet in the port of Chesme. In 1771, the Tartars of the Crimea were
put to rout, and the Russians took Bessarabia and some forts on the
Danube. They were, however, too late to take possession of the
Dardanelles, which the Turks had put into a state of defense.

Austria was becoming alarmed at Russia's victories, and lent a willing
ear to the suggestion of Frederick the Great that it would be safer to
permit Russia to gain territory belonging to Poland, provided Austria
and Prussia should receive their share. On February 17, 1771, a treaty
was concluded between Russia and Prussia, and accepted by Austria in
April, whereby Poland was deprived of a good part of its territory.
Catherine, secured White Russia with a population of 1,600,000;
Frederick the Great took West Prussia with 900,000 inhabitants,    (p. 189)
and Austria received Western Gallicia and Red Russia with 2,500,000
people. This was the beginning of the end of Poland.

The peace negotiations with Turkey were broken off, and war was
resumed. Being busy elsewhere, Catherine could not prevent a _coup
d'etat_ in Sweden, which saved that country from the fate of Poland.
Besides suffering from these constant wars, Russia was visited by the
plague, which in July and August, 1771, daily carried off a thousand
victims in Moscow alone. The Archbishop, an enlightened man, was put
to death by a mob for ordering the streets to be fumigated. Troops
were necessary to restore order.

The condition of the country was dreadful. Alexander Bibikof was sent
to suppress a dangerous insurrection, he wrote to his wife after
arriving on the spot, that the general discontent was frightful. It
was for this reason that Catherine concluded peace with the sultan in
1774; besides an indemnity, she received Azof on the Don and all the
strong places in the Crimea, and was recognized as the protector of
the sultan's Christian subjects. In 1775, she finally broke the power
of the Cossacks.

Through the mediation of France and Russia, a war between Prussia and
Austria concerning the succession in Bavaria, was narrowly averted.
During the American War of Independence, Russia, Sweden, Denmark,
Prussia, and Portugal, proclaimed armed neutrality, and Holland
declared war, because British warships caused endless trouble to vessels
under neutral flags. This celebrated act declared "that contraband
goods" included only arms and ammunition. Most  countries agreed   (p. 190)
to this, with the exception of England.

In 1775 Catherine annexed the Crimea, on the plea that anarchy
prevailed. Turkey protested and threatened war but France meditated
and the sultan recognized the annexation by the Treaty of
Constantinople in 1783.

In 1787, a remarkable secret agreement was signed between Russia and
Austria. It is known as the _Greek Project_, and was nothing less than
a scheme to divide Turkey between the two powers. The plot as proposed
by Russia, was to create an independent state under the name of Dacia,
to embrace Moldavia, Wallachia, and Bessarabia, with a prince
belonging to the Greek Church at the head. Russia was to receive
Otchakof, the shore between the Bug and the Dnieper, and some islands
in the Archipelago, and Austria would annex the Turkish province
adjoining its territory. If the Turk should be expelled from Europe,
the old Byzantine Empire was to be reestablished, and the throne
occupied by Catherine's grandson Constantine, "who would renounce all
his claims to Russia, so that the two empires might never be united
under the same scepter." Austria agreed on condition that she should
also receive the Venetian possessions in Moldavia, when Venice would
be indemnified by part of Greece.

Soon after this the sultan declared war against Russia. This took
Catherine by surprise. Other enemies sprang up: the King of Prussia
wanted Dantzig, the King of Sweden, South Finland. The latter invaded
Russia and might have marched upon St. Petersburg, for all Catherine
could collect was an army of 12,000 men. A mutiny in the camp of   (p. 191)
Gustavus III, compelled him to return to Stockholm, and the opportunity
was lost. He defeated the Russians in the naval battle of Svenska
Sund, but a second engagement was to the advantage of Russia. The
French Revolution caused him to make peace, and to enter into an
alliance with Russia against the French.

In the south Russian arms were more fortunate. The Turks were defeated
in 1789, and 1790, on which occasions a young general named Souvorof
distinguished himself. Upon the death of Joseph II of Austria, his
successor Leopold made peace with Turkey at Sistova. (1791.) It was
the French revolution, which seriously alarmed every crowned head in
Europe, and which induced Catherine to follow Leopold's example at
Jassy, in January, 1792, Russia kept only Otchakof and the shore
between the Bug and the Dniester.

Poland, meanwhile, had made an earnest effort at reform. Thaddeus
Kosciusko had returned from the United States, where he had fought for
liberty and was trying to save his own country. Born in 1752, he
entered a military school founded by the Czartoryskis at the age of
twelve, and distinguished himself by attention to his studies and
duties. His father was assassinated by exasperated peasants, and he
himself was scornfully ejected by a powerful noble whose daughter he
was courting. Attracted by the struggle of a handful of colonists
against powerful England, he went to America and served with
distinction in the War of the Revolution. After seeing Great Britain
humbled and a new republic established in the New World, he came back
to Poland and was soon among the foremost reformers,--a man in     (p. 192)
whom the patriotic Poles justly trusted. But traitors were found to
accept Russian bribes, and for the second time Poland was despoiled.
Russia annexed the eastern provinces with 3,000,000 inhabitants, and
Prussia took Dantzig and Thorn. Austria was told that she might take
from the French Republic as much as she wished,--or could.

Manfully and indefatigably did Kosciusko labor to stem the tide of his
country's ruin. His patriotism aroused even that of the poor,
down-trodden serfs, who had no interests to defend, yet stood by him
in battle when the nobles on horseback fled, and wrenched a victory
out of defeat. Well might Kosciusko thereafter dress in the garb of a
peasant; a gentleman's dress was a badge of dishonor.

It was in 1794, that this battle took place and gave the signal, too,
for an effort to restore Poland. But Austria, Prussia, and Russia
combined, and Poland was lost. Heroic children were made to pay for
the sins of their fathers. Poland expired in 1795. Prussia took
Eastern Poland, including Warsaw; Austria annexed Cracow, Sandomir,
Lublin, and Selm, and Russia took what remained. The patriots
dispersed; most of them took service with the French, hoping for an
opportunity to revive their country.

Catherine took especial pains to prevent the ideas, which alone made
the French revolution possible, from entering into Russia. There was
no occasion for this prudence. The great majority of the Russian
people did not know of any world beyond Russia; most of them knew  (p. 193)
nothing beyond the narrow horizon of their own village, and could
neither read nor write. The harrowing tales brought by the fugitive
French nobles did not tend toward inspiring the Russian aristocracy
with sympathy for Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity.

Satisfied that Russia was beyond the sphere of what she regarded as
pernicious doctrines, Catherine determined to make the greatest
possible profit out of the disturbed condition of Europe. She never
ceased to incite Prussia and Austria against the French Republic, but
carefully refrained from spending a dollar or risking a man. She
pleaded first her war with Turkey, and afterwards the Polish
insurrection. She said to Osterman, one of her ministers: "Am I wrong?
For reasons that I cannot give to the Courts of Berlin and Vienna, I
wish to involve them in these affairs, so that I may have my hands
free. Many of my enterprises are still unfinished, and they must be so
occupied as to leave me unfettered."

While Europe was engaged in the hopeless task of establishing and
maintaining the divine rights of kings, Catherine began a war with
Persia. One of her "unfinished enterprises" was interrupted by her
death in November, 1796, at the age of sixty-seven. She left the
throne to her son Paul.




XXII--RUSSIA DURING THE WARS OF NAPOLEON.                          (p. 194)


Paul was forty-two years old when he succeeded to the throne. His
youth and early manhood had been far from pleasant. His mother had
never shown any love for him, and Paul had not forgotten his father's
sudden death. He was held in absolute submission, and was not
permitted to share in the government; he had not even a voice in the
education of his children. The courtiers, in order to please his
mother, showed him scant courtesy; this is probably the reason of his
sensitiveness after he came to the throne. He ordered men and women to
kneel down in the street when he was passing, and those who drove in
carriages had to halt. It is also shown in this remark, "Know that the
only person of consideration in Russia is the person whom I address,
at the moment that I am addressing him." It was justice, but it
reflected upon his mother's memory when, immediately after her death,
Paul ordered his father's remains to be exhumed, to be buried at the
same time and with the same pomp as those of Catherine.

Such a man could have no sympathy with the French revolution which was
shaking the foundations of Old Europe. He forbade the use of any word
that might be construed to refer to it. He ordered the army to     (p. 195)
adopt the Russian uniform, including the powdered pigtails of that
time. Souvorof fell in disgrace because he was reported to have said:
"There is powder and powder. Shoe buckles are not gun carriages, nor
pigtails bayonets; we are not Prussians but Russians."

Paul pardoned a number of exiled Poles, and brought the last king,
Stanislas Poniatowski, to St. Petersburg. He discontinued the war with
Persia, and instructed his ambassadors to announce that since Russia,
and Russia alone, had been at war since 1756, "the humanity of the
Emperor did not allow him to refuse his beloved subjects the peace for
which they sighed."

Nevertheless, Russia was drawn into Napoleon's gigantic wars. Uneasy
at the plans of the French Republic, Paul entered into an alliance
with England, Austria, Naples, and Turkey. He furnished troops for
England's descent upon Holland, and recalled Souvorof to take command
of the Russian forces cooperating with those of Austria. The British
expedition proved a failure, but Souvorof's strategy and indomitable
courage shed glory upon the Russian army.

When Souvorof arrived at Vienna, he took command of the allied forces
consisting of 90,000 men. On April 28, 1799, he surprised Moreau at
Cassano and took 3,000 prisoners. He entered Milan, and soon after
laid siege to Mantua, Alessandria, and Turin. On June 17, Souvorof was
attacked on the Trebia; the battle lasted three days, leaving the
victory to the Russians. After the victory at Novi, on the 15th of
August, the French were forced to evacuate Italy.

Souvorof had divided his force of 80,000 Russians into two corps,  (p. 196)
one to operate in Switzerland, the other under his own command, to
conduct the campaign in Italy. His great success brought upon him the
envy of the Austrian generals, by whom his movements were constantly
hampered. He therefore resolved to effect a junction with the forces
in Switzerland, who, on the 26th of September, had been defeated at
Zurich with a loss of 6,000 men. Souvorof did not know this. He
reached the St. Gothard on the 21st and crossed it under unheard-of
difficulties. "In this kingdom of terrors," he writes to Paul,
"abysses open beside us at every step, like tombs awaiting our
arrival. Nights spent among the clouds, thunder that never ceases,
rain, fog, the noise of cataracts, the breaking of avalanches,
enormous masses of rocks and ice which fall from the heights, torrents
which sometimes carry men and horses down the precipices, the St.
Gothard, that colossus who sees the mists pass under him,--we have
surmounted all, and in these inaccessible spots the enemy has been
forced to give way before us. Words fail to describe the horrors we
have seen, and in the midst of which Providence has preserved us."
"The Russian, inhabitant of the plain, was awestruck by the grandeur
of this mountain scenery."

Souvorof brushed the French out of his way until, on the 26th, he
arrived at Altdorf with the loss of only 2,000 men. Here he received
information of the defeat at Zurich, and saw that he was surrounded on
all sides by superior forces. His retreat showed the highest military
skill, as well as the man's indomitable energy. Over untrodden
mountains, and snow at one place five feet deep, he guided the     (p. 197)
remains of his army to a lower altitude, and went into winter quarters
between the Iler and the Lech.

Souvorof complained bitterly to the czar of the Austrian generals, who
had given him ample reason. At about this time Napoleon had returned
from his fruitless campaign in Egypt, and at Marengo defeated the
Austrians, whereby the results of Souvorof's campaign were lost. Paul
was angry at Austria and Great Britain. Napoleon, shrewdly guessed the
czar's feelings, released the Russian prisoners, after equipping them
anew. Paul satisfied that Napoleon was an enemy of republican
institutions, conceived an intense admiration for his military genius,
and came to an understanding with him to overthrow British rule in
India. The czar at once commenced to prepare its execution. Two armies
were formed; one was to march on the Upper Indus by way of Khiva and
Bokhara, while the Cossacks under their hetman Denisof would go by
Orenburg. He was confident that the gigantic task could be
accomplished, and sent daily instructions to the hetman.

Napoleon had a far better idea of the difficulties, but he did not
consider the expedition as hopeless. But even if it failed, he would
be the winner, because England would be compelled to send most of her
navy to India, while Russia would be too fully occupied, to interfere
with his projects in Europe. The Cossacks started on their long
journey, by crossing the Volga on the floating ice when, on the 24th
of March, 1801, Paul was assassinated in his palace.

There was no doubt as to the guilty men, but Paul's son, Alexander,
who succeeded him, did not order an investigation. Pahlen, Panine, (p. 198)
Zoubof, and others, known as the "men of the 24th of March," were
removed from office, but that was their only punishment. Paul's mother
had alienated her grandchildren from the father, and Alexander always
showed greater affection for Catherine than for Paul. The greatest
sufferer was Napoleon, who saw his grand schemes go up in smoke.
Alexander reversed his father's policy, both at home and abroad. He
came to an understanding with England. Napoleon tried earnestly to
secure the new czar's friendship. He wanted a free hand in Europe and
in return offered the same privilege in Asia, but Alexander mistrusted
the First Consul. The murder of the Duke of Enghien, who, by
Napoleon's order, was kidnaped in a neutral territory and shot,--still
further alienated the czar.

After Napoleon's coronation as emperor, Alexander entered into an
alliance with England, whereby he would receive six million dollars
for every 100,000 men Russia placed in the field. The Emperor of
Austria and the King of Prussia joined, but the Austrians, whose
generals seemed unable to learn by experience, were defeated before
the Russian army could reach the Tyrol. Once again the Russians
covered themselves with glory by Koutouzof's masterly retreat to the
north, and Bagration's heroic self-sacrifice. At Olmutz, in the
presence of Alexander, the Russo-Austrian army, 80,000 strong, was
attacked by Napoleon with 70,000 men. The Austrians had induced the
czar to adopt their plan of battle, and it met with the usual result.
Alexander escaped, escorted by his physician, two Cossacks, and a
company of the Guards. (Dec. 2., 1805.) Twenty-four days later
Alexander concluded peace with France by the Treaty of Presburg.   (p. 199)

The growing power of Napoleon induced Alexander to enter into a new
coalition with England, Prussia, and Sweden. Russia bore the brunt of
the war, after Prussia had been rendered harmless after the battles of
Jena and Auerstadt. The Russians withdrew from Prussian Poland; they
suddenly left their winter quarters and attacked the French. On the
8th of February, one of the bloodiest battles was fought at Eylau; the
French claimed the victory, but it was barren of results.

Napoleon dreaded Russia. He persuaded the Sultan of Turkey and the
Shah of Persia to declare war, so as to occupy Alexander elsewhere.
The czar, however, was loyal to his allies until, on the 14th of June,
his army was almost annihilated at Friedland. This loss compelled him
to enter into negotiations. On June 25, 1807, the two emperors met on
a raft at Tilsit. Napoleon was prepared to do almost anything that
would induce Alexander to cease interfering in Europe. An
offensive-defensive alliance was concluded, whereby Napoleon agreed
not to oppose the expulsion of the Turk or Russia's conquest of
Constantinople. The czar meant to carry out the treaty in letter and
in spirit, but he soon saw that Napoleon's ambition was limitless, and
that he was playing with his ally. This was evident by the proposed
partition of Turkey: nothing came of it. Still he accepted Napoleon's
invitation to a conference at Erfurt, where he was received by the
French Emperor amid a court composed of sovereigns and princes. A
convention was signed on the 12th of October, 1808, whereby Alexander
promised Napoleon a free hand, in return for the annexation by     (p. 200)
Russia of Finland and the Turkish provinces on the Danube.

This led to a war with Great Britain, Sweden, and Austria, not
including Turkey and Persia. Russia acquired Finland, when Alexander,
after convoking the Diet, guaranteed its constitution, privileges, and
university. In 1809, war again broke out between Austria and France.
By the terms of the alliance, Russia had agreed to furnish troops, but
they showed that they did not relish fighting with the French. There
were two engagements; in one of these, the casualties were one Russian
killed and two wounded. By an oversight of Napoleon the Poles serving
under him were to cooperate with the Russians, and, far from doing so,
they often came to blows. The Russian general constantly sent
complaints to the czar. Napoleon made a great effort to appease
Alexander by assigning to Russia Eastern Gallicia with a population of
400,000. Alexander declined to be represented in the peace
negotiations at Vienna. Napoleon's creation of the Grand Dukedom of
Warsaw was a constant menace to Russia.

Meanwhile the Russians were uniformly victorious in Turkey; the czar
concluded peace only when it was evident that war with France was
unavoidable, and that Russia would need every man. It was on this
account that he gave easy terms to the hard-pressed Sultan. Russia
annexed Bessarabia, part of Roumania, Ismail, and Kilia on the Lower
Danube.

The time for the momentous struggle had arrived. Napoleon, the master
of Continental Europe, thought that he was more than a match for
serf-ridden Russia. He reckoned upon the echo which the words      (p. 201)
liberty, equality, and fraternity, would awaken in the hearts of the
moujik, and forgot that they were abstract ideas which to the serf,
struggling for enough black bread to allay the cravings of hunger,
were so many empty sounds. He tried to arouse Europe's suspicions of
Russia's designs, not thinking that any yoke, even that of the
Tartars, would be a welcome relief to nations mourning for the
slaughter of their sons.

Napoleon left Paris for Dresden on the 9th of May, 1812; on the first
of June an army of 678,000 men, including 60,000 Poles, stood ready to
invade Russia. Alexander had only 150,000 men under Bagration and
Barclay de Tolly, 90,000 posted on the Niemen, and 60,000 on the
Vistula; but he issued a proclamation announcing a Holy War. "Rise all
of you!" he urged, "With the Cross in your hearts and arms in your
hands, no human force can prevail against you!"

Napoleon advanced clutching shadows. After his army left Wilna,
leaving dead desolation in its wake, the time soon came when retreat
was no longer possible. Russian patriotism clamored for battle and
Russian prudence had to give way to it. All of Koutouzof's remarkable
influence was required to restrain his men under the retreat which
foretold victory, because every step forward sealed Napoleon's doom.
The Corsican knew it but, with the superstition born in him, trusted
to his star. Finally he drew near Moscow, the Holy City, where Count
Rostopchine, the governor, was preparing the grand climax of the
drama, while pacifying Russian patriotism by a series of hardy falsehoods.
"I have resolved," he explained, "at every disagreeable piece of   (p. 202)
news to raise doubts as to its truth; by this means, I shall weaken
the first impression, and before there is time to verify it, others
will come which will require investigation." The people implicitly
believed his most daring inventions. When he evacuated Moscow, he
ordered all prisons to be opened, and the guns in the arsenal to be
distributed among the people; he also had the pumps removed and
finally gave instructions to set fire to the stores of _vodka_ and the
boats loaded with alcohol.

Napoleon arrived at the Kremlin on the 14th of September. Short as was
his sojourn, it was with difficulty that he escaped through the flames
and found refuge in a park. Why did he waste thirty-five days in the
charred capital? Was it belief in his star, or was it despair at the
ruin of his prospects? On the 13th of October, the remnant of the
Grand Army started on its long journey over the desert it had left
behind, because all other roads were closed to it. The retreat has
been described by many writers; but what pen shall do justice to the
suffering caused by the unusually severe winter, the snow, the ice,
the hunger, and the thirst? And how many hearts were rent, when the
news came of the dead, the wounded, and the missing? Napoleon's
campaign in Russia was the most impressive sermon against war, but it
fell upon heedless ears.

After the Battle of the Berezina, Napoleon left the army and hurried
home. All his thoughts were on the effect of the disastrous
defeat,--not upon the hundred thousand desolate homes, but upon his
own fortunes. He arrived in Paris where he gathered 450,000 men,
many of them mere youths, to support him with their blood. But     (p. 203)
Europe was weary of slaughter. Kings might tremble for their crowns,
it was the people, aroused to frenzy, that impelled them to action. On
Napoleon's heels, besides, there was a bloodhound whom nobler
instincts than mere self-preservation inspired to ceaseless pursuit.
Alexander I, at this time, earned and deserved the glorious surname of
The Well-beloved. Not a thought of self-glory or personal
aggrandizement sullied the relentless chase. Emperors and kings
dreading the awakened conscience of the people would have made peace,
and they could have done so with security for themselves, but
Alexander said, "No!" Under fire at the four days' battle of Leipzig,
he personally directed reenforcements where they were required. And
when, at last, the host of invaders stepped on the soil whose people
during twenty years had committed outrages in almost every known
country of Europe, they were noble words which the Autocrat addressed
to his troops whom he had brought so far away from home. "By invading
our empire," he says, "the enemy has done us much harm, and has
therefore been subjected to a terrible chastisement. The anger of God
has overthrown him. Do not let us imitate him. The merciful God does
not love cruel and inhuman men. Let us forget the evil he has wrought;
let us carry to our foes, not vengeance and hate, but friendship, and
a hand extended in peace."

These were not mere words; Alexander the Well-beloved was sincere. But
it was he who refused to receive Napoleon's envoy at Freiburg, and it
was he who, when Napoleon, fighting like a tiger at bay, was
defeating the separated armies, so that the British envoy urged to (p. 204)
come to terms with him, answered, "It would not be a peace but a
truce. I cannot come four hundred leagues to your assistance every
day. No peace, so long as Napoleon is on the throne!" By his direction
the united armies rolled like an avalanche upon Paris,--and Napoleon
gave up the struggle by abdicating.

Again it was Alexander the Well-beloved who intervened when other
powers would have overwhelmed the fallen colossus. It was Alexander
who procured for his enemy the sovereignty of the island of Elba, and
commissioned Count Schouvalof to escort him. "I confide to you a great
mission;" he said; "you will answer to me with your head for a single
hair which falls from the head of Napoleon."

At the Congress of Vienna assembled the statesmen to dispose of
nations and peoples, as their own ambition prompted. Alexander desired
to unite Poland to his crown, but separate from Russia; but was
opposed by Austria, Great Britain, and France, who entered into a
secret alliance against him. Had Napoleon waited two hundred days
instead of half that time, who knows that he might not yet have been
the arbiter of Europe? His descent united all factions, and Alexander
declared that he would pursue Napoleon "down to his last man and his
last ruble."

Once again armies were set in motion, and once again Napoleon resorted
to his well-known tactics of destroying his enemies one by one. He
failed at Waterloo. (June 17, 1815.) Again the allies re-entered
Paris, the Prussians first but closely followed by the czar and his
army.

"Justice, but no revenge!" proclaimed Alexander when Bluecher would (p. 205)
have followed Napoleon's example of robbing a country of its works of
art. The czar stood the friend of France when Prussia demanded a
frontier which would render her safe from French invasion; but he said
frankly that he "wished to allow some danger to exist on that side, so
that Germany, having need of Russia, might remain dependent," He was
in favor of allowing the French to select their own government, but
was overruled. At last the allies came to an understanding, and Poland
was joined to the Russian Crown.

The Polish soldiers who had fought so bravely under Napoleon, placed
themselves at the czar's service, hoping and trusting that their
country would revive under a Russian king. Alexander's promises at
Vienna had been vague, but recent events had made a deep impression
upon him. In this frame of mind, he directed that Poland be restored.
This was announced on the 21st of June, at Warsaw amid the roar of
cannon. Constantine, Alexander's brother, was made King, and a
legislative body, composed of a senate and house of representatives,
was formed under a constitution which also guaranteed the freedom of
the press.

Thus Alexander returned to Russia. Soon after that he gave evidence
that strong emotions were required to subdue the inborn prejudice in
favor of autocracy. Russia, of necessity, had acquired an overwhelming
influence in Europe. This showed at the several Congresses, at
Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818, at Carlsbad in 1819, at Troppau in 1820, and
at Verona in 1822. The crowned heads of Europe appeared unable to
comprehend that the French revolution, with its orgies of blood    (p. 206)
and tears, had produced an impassable abyss between the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. They wished to return to the conditions
prevailing before the revolution, which caused the success of that
upheaval; but the people, the masses, had quaffed of the cup of
liberty, and the taste lingered. The Holy Alliance with its unholy
aims might ordain what it pleased, the _people_ obstinately refused to
resume the place of beasts of burden for the benefit of the State.
Thus a spirit of unrest was perceptible, and when Alexander learned
that his "I, the czar, will it!" was not able to restore quiet, he
joined the other crowned heads in their struggle against more liberal
ideas. From that time his conduct changed.

There was evidence of this in the events occurring in the south. The
majority of the inhabitants of the Balkan provinces of Turkey belonged
to the Greek Church, and looked to Alexander for relief from the
oppressive Mahomedan yoke. The Servians took up arms, the people of
Greece did the same. On Easter day, 1821, the Patriarch of the Greek
Church at Constantinople was seized at the altar, and hung in his
vestment at the door of the church. Three metropolitans and eight
bishops were also murdered. The news caused deep indignation in
Russia, but Alexander moved not. He believed in the theory that no
people should be encouraged in rising against its ordained masters. In
Russia all liberal ideas were rigidly suppressed.

In 1825, Alexander left St. Petersburg for the south where he intended
to spend some time. He was full of gloomy forebodings and gave further
evidence of an unsound mind by having a mass for the dead sung in  (p. 207)
his presence in broad daylight. While in the Crimea he was heard to
repeat: "They may say what they like of me, but I have lived and will
die a republican." He died on the 19th of November, 1825, while on his
journey.

He left no sons. His brother Constantine had renounced the crown when
he became King of Poland, and in 1823, Alexander had made his next
brother Nicholas his successor. Alexander's reign marked a new era for
Russia inasmuch as it was brought into closer contact with Europe, and
promised to change in thought and impulse, from an Asiatic into a
European nation. The necessity of securing the help of the masses
against Napoleon's invasion created newspapers, and writers of unusual
ability expressed their patriotic thoughts in prose and poetry. In
1814, the Imperial Library was opened to the public at St. Petersburg.
It contained at that time 242,000 volumes, and about 10,000
manuscripts.

In 1803, Captains Krusenstern and Lisianski made the first Russian
voyage around the world in the _Nadejda_ (the _Hope_), and the _Neva_.
It was on this occasion that Russia entered into relations with the
United States.




XXIII--AN EVENTFUL PERIOD.                                         (p. 208)


Alexander's will came as a surprise upon Nicholas, but Constantine was
loyal to his promise and after a brief but generous contest, Nicholas
was crowned at Moscow. Twenty-three days had elapsed since Alexander's
death, long enough to show that the spirit of unrest had penetrated
into Russia. On the 26th of December there were some disturbances at
Moscow, but they were suppressed without great trouble. The secret
police hunted down the leaders, many of whom were known in art or
literature, but they suffered death. Nicholas, a man of colossal
stature, commanding appearance, iron will, passion for a military
life, of simple and correct habits, was a true champion of the right
divine of kings. He had neither sympathy nor patience with any
movement tending toward greater liberty for the people. Nevertheless
Nicholas was much more popular than Alexander had been, because he was
the type of the Russian czars, who had increased Russia's power and
territory.

Not many days after his coronation, Nicholas became involved in a
quarrel with the Shah of Persia. In vain did the shah call upon Great
Britain for help; the Persians were twice defeated in 1826, and the
Russians were on the road to Teheran when the shah preferred to    (p. 209)
save his capital by ceding two provinces, and paying a heavy indemnity
in 1828. The following year, the Russian Minister at Teheran was
murdered, but Persia escaped with a humble apology.

Turkey, too, was made to feel Nicholas' heavy hand; urged by other
powers the sultan submitted to the loss of territory in Asia, which
had been in dispute, and permitted the free passage of Russian vessels
between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean. (Convention of Akkerman,
Oct. 8, 1826.) The czar, after this, took up the Greek question, and
entered into an agreement with England and France. In vain did the
sultan offer the plea which had been successful with Alexander, that
the Greeks "violated the passive obedience owed by subjects to their
legitimate sovereigns." Nicholas wanted Turkey for himself, and
proposed to leave no stone unturned to secure possession of
Constantinople.

After the battle of Navarino, on the 20th of October, 1827, where the
allied forces destroyed the Turkish fleet. England withdrew,
suspicious of Nicholas' schemes; but France and Russia continued the
war until by the Peace of Adrianople, the sultan recognized the
independence of Greece,--and ceded to Russia four fortresses in Asia
and the islands in the delta of the Danube. Russia was thus in
possession of the whole southern slope of the Caucasus, besides
holding part of its northern front. The czar began war upon the tribes
dwelling in the mountains, but found that he had engaged in a very
difficult enterprise. A soldier-priest named Schamyl defied the power
of Russia for a quarter of a century. It cost Nicholas more in men (p. 210)
and money to subdue the liberty-loving mountaineer, than all the wars
he waged in Asia.

The year 1830, was one of great unrest in Europe. Nicholas was deeply
angered when his friend Charles X of France was expelled. The
revolution in Paris was the signal for a similar movement in the
capital of Poland. Owing to the independent expression of opinion in
the Diet, Alexander had adjourned that body indefinitely in 1822. At
the same time the liberty of the press was revoked and the police
assumed a power in defiance of the law. The Grand Duke Constantine was
really a friend of Poland, but he was eccentric and impetuous and
often unconsciously gave offense. In 1830, Nicholas came to Warsaw to
open the Diet, when its members made demands which he could not grant.
Both sides were angry when Nicholas returned to St. Petersburg.

As soon as the French tricolor was raised above the consulate at
Warsaw, the trouble commenced. Taken unprepared, Constantine withdrew
with his troops. Again the Poles were divided; the patriots advised
reconciliation with Russia, while hotheads demanded the abdication of
the Romanofs. The first party sent a deputation to St. Petersburg and
another to Paris and London, to secure mediation. The czar's answer
was decisive; he absolutely refused to "make concessions (to the
revolutionists), as the price of their crimes." Again, too, there was
discord among the leaders as they entered upon a life or death
struggle. Poland appealed to Europe. The people were sympathetic, but
the governments, rejoicing at seeing a revolutionary movement
suppressed, refused to interfere.

In February, 1831, a Russian army of 130,000 men invaded Poland.   (p. 211)
The Poles showed a heroism which appealed to the people of Europe, but
more than sympathy was needed to arrest the irresistible Russian
advance upon Warsaw. Constantine and the Russian commander-in-chief
fell the victims of cholera, but an epidemic of discord struck Poland
and sealed its fate. On the 6th of September, Warsaw was invested. The
capital was forced to surrender. "Warsaw is at your feet," wrote the
commander-in-chief to the czar, who lost no time in trampling upon the
conquered. The constitution was abrogated, the Diet, a thing of the
past. Poland was no more. Where it had stood, was a Russian province.
Russian officials introduced Russian taxes, Russian coinage, and
Russian justice such as it was. The Poles saw samples of it when
thousands were arrested without process of law, and were sent to
prison or to Siberia, while other thousands lost their property by
confiscation. In White Russia and Lithuania the use of the Polish
language was prohibited and the Catholic Clergy were forced to "ask"
admittance to the bosom of the Greek Church. It must be admitted that
the Polish peasants benefited by the change. With a view of reducing
the influence of the nobles, the government issued regulations
protecting the laborer against the landowner.

The Polish revolution caused the reorganization of European policies.
Austria and Prussia, each in possession of territory that formerly
belonged to Poland, entered into friendly relations with Russia,
whereas England and France, where public opinion could not be ignored,
drew more closely together. Nicholas was posing as the arbiter of  (p. 212)
Europe and the champion of kings. He assumed the right to command, but
would soon find his will contested.

This was brought home to him in 1832, when trouble broke out between
Turkey and Egypt. The Egyptian army was victorious and threatened
Constantinople, when the sultan appealed to the powers. Russia
responded at once by sending two armies, but a strong protest from
England and France caused the withdrawal of the troops of Russia as
well as those of Egypt. Baffled, Nicholas on June 3, 1833, entered
into an offensive-defensive alliance with the sultan, which really
placed Turkey and with it Constantinople in Russia's power. Another
sharp protest from England and France prevented the consummation of
the alliance.

In 1839 the trouble between Turkey and Egypt recommenced when Great
Britain, anxious to preserve Turkey's integrity, entered into an
agreement with Russia, Austria and Prussia, which was signed at London
in July, 1840. There was some danger of a war with France but England,
fearing Russia's designs, returned to her former ally. By the
Convention of July 13, 1841, Russia's designs upon old Czargrad were
postponed until a more favorable opportunity. In 1844, Nicholas
visited England, but his reception in London was cool. He, however,
entered into an agreement whereby the Khanates of Central Asia should
remain neutral ground between Russia and India.

In 1846, trouble broke out in Gallicia, where the Poles rose against
Austria; but as the nobles had to subdue a revolt of their own     (p. 213)
peasants, order was quickly restored. The free city Cracow was the
resort of the Poles. Russia, Austria, and Prussia sent troops against
it, and Cracow was annexed by Austria notwithstanding a protest from
England and France.

The year 1848 will long be remembered for the blows bestowed upon the
divine right of kings, and the privileges which the sovereigns were
compelled to concede to the people. The Emperor Ferdinand of Austria
was expelled from his capital, and the King of Prussia was subjected
to humiliation by his own people. France proclaimed the republic, and
Nicholas proclaimed himself the champion of the right divine. He
dispatched an army into Hungary, which was soon "at the feet of your
Majesty," and felt the wrath of the frightened Ferdinand.

Notwithstanding this cooperation, the understanding among the three
powers, Russia, Austria and Prussia, was giving way before individual
interests. When, in 1852, Prussia attempted to seize the German
provinces of Denmark, it was Nicholas who compelled her to withdraw.
On the 8th of May of that year, the independence and integrity of
Denmark were recognized by the Treaty of London.

In the same year Louis Napoleon made an end to the French Republic by
the notorious _Coup d'Etat_. This gave great satisfaction to the czar
who was heard to remark: "France has set an evil example; she will now
set a good one. I have faith in the conduct of Louis Napoleon." The
new emperor of France did not seem to appreciate this condescension,
or else he showed gross ingratitude when France and Austria,       (p. 214)
without even consulting Nicholas, settled some troubles in Turkey. The
czar sent Menzikoff as special envoy to Constantinople to demand a new
treaty whereby Russia's rights as Protector of the Greek Christians
should be recognized. Supported as he was by France, the sultan
refused. Nicholas then had a plain talk with Sir Hamilton Seymour, the
British Minister at St. Petersburg, wherein he revealed his designs
upon Turkey. As to Constantinople, he said, he might establish himself
there as a trustee, but not as a proprietor. Sir Hamilton, as in duty
bound, notified his government, and England hastened to join France in
opposing Russia.

Pretending that all he wanted was a recognition of his rights,
Nicholas, on the 3d of July, 1853, sent an army under Gortchakof
across the Pruth. At this an allied British-French fleet took up a
position near the threatened point, but did not cross the Straits,
which would have been a violation of the treaty. Nicholas stormed; he
declared that "This was a threat" and would lead to complications.
Austria proposed a conference at which Russia, Great Britain, France,
Austria and Prussia assisted. It seemed as if peace would be secured,
when the sultan demanded that the Russian forces should withdraw,
whereupon Admiral Nakhimof, on the 30th of November, 1853, destroyed
the Turkish fleet at Sinope. The British-French fleet then sailed into
the Black Sea, and the Russian ships sought shelter in the ports.

In January, 1854, Napoleon III made a last attempt at maintaining
peace, but Nicholas was thoroughly angry at the publication of
Seymour's dispatches, claiming that the conversation with the      (p. 215)
British Minister was entitled to secrecy as between "a friend and a
gentleman." Austria and Prussia resented the contempt which the czar
had expressed for them, and on the 10th of April England and France
entered into an offensive-defensive alliance. Ten days later Austria
and Prussia arrived at a written agreement providing for the
possibility that the Russians should attack Austria or cross the
Balkans. Nicholas had aroused all Europe against him.

The Russian fleet was unable to cope with that of the allies, and thus
condemned to inactivity in the ports. After heroic efforts, the
Russians were compelled to raise the siege of Silistria, and to retire
from the Danube, while Austria occupied the evacuated territory. But
Nicholas was dismayed when, after a conference on July 21, 1854, the
allied commanders resolved to attack the Crimea. _Russia was
unprepared._ It was the assault upon Russia's vaunted "holy soil,"
which gave a severe blow to the arbiter of Europe, at home as well as
abroad. Still with clogged energy the Russians worked to construct
defenses. On the 14th of September 500 troopships landed the allied
armies, and on the 20th, the Battle of the Alma opened the road to
Sebastopol. The port of Balaclava was captured by the allies, and
three bloody battles were fought, at Balaclava on the 25th of October,
at Inkermann on the 5th of November, and at Eupatoria on the 17th of
February, 1855.

It seemed as if the knowledge that an enemy was in Russia, aroused the
Russians from a torpor. Pamphlets and other publications denouncing
the government in withering terms, seemed to spring up from the
pavement. "Arise, Oh Russia!" says one unknown writer, "Devoured   (p. 216)
by enemies, ruined by slavery, shamefully oppressed by the stupidity
of tchinovnik and spies, awaken from thy long sleep of ignorance and
apathy! We have been kept in bondage long enough _by the successors of
the Tartar khans_. Arise! and stand erect and calm before the throne
of the despot; demand of him a reckoning for the national misfortunes.
Tell him boldly that his throne is not the altar of God, and that God
has not condemned us to be slaves forever."

The feeling among his people was not unknown to Nicholas. Whatever may
be said of him, he was not weakling, fool, or hypocrite, and it was no
disgrace that he felt as if the ground were giving way under his feet.
He was upright and sincere, and had lived up to his convictions. There
is no doubt that when these convictions grew dim, his strength
vanished. He was heard to exclaim "My successor may do what he will: I
cannot change." The sincerity of this man of iron showed in his losing
his courage when doubts arose. Life ceased to have any value for him.
One day, in February, 1855, while suffering from a severe cold, he
went out without his overcoat. To the physician who tried to restrain
him, he said: "You have done your duty; now let me do mine!" A serious
illness followed, and he sent for his successor to whom he gave some
instructions. As a message to his people, and a last cry for sympathy,
he dictated the dispatch "The emperor is dying," which was sent to all
the large towns of Russia. On the 19th of March, 1855, Nicholas I was
dead.

Under his directions wealthy merchants were classified as "chief   (p. 217)
citizens," which procured for them exemption from poll-tax,
conscription, and corporal punishment. They might take part in the
assessment of real estate, and were eligible to the offices to which
members of the first class were entitled. The same privilege was
extended to all who were entitled to the degree of Master of Arts, and
free-born and qualified artists. It was he who built the first railway
in Russia, by drawing a straight line between Moscow and St.
Petersburg. He also joined the Volga and the Don by a canal. His reign
is also noted for the progress of Russian literature. The works of
Ivan Tourguenief are known throughout the civilized world.

[Illustration: Alexander II]                                       (p. 218)




XXIV--ALEXANDER II, THE LIBERATOR.                                 (p. 219)


Alexander II was thirty-seven years old when he succeeded to the
throne. The war oppressed Russia, and he felt that peace must be
concluded. But Russian diplomacy loves the tortuous path. The first
proclamation of the czar announced that he promised "to accomplish the
plans and desires of our illustrious predecessors, Peter, Catherine,
Alexander the Well-beloved, and our father of imperishable memory." It
was hoped that this would cause the other powers to propose peace, on
account of the expense of the war. Indeed, a conference was proposed
and took place at Vienna, but the demands of the allies were not so
modest as Russia expected; hence the war continued, and with it the
siege of Sebastopol.

The Danube territory was lost to Russia since, on the 2d December
1854, Austria had undertaken to defend it, and Prussia had agreed to
help Austria. But Sebastopol was stubbornly defended. In the latter
part of August 1855, 874 guns vomited death and destruction upon the
doomed city where the Russians lost 18,000 men. The French had dug
fifty miles of trenches during the 366 days of the siege, and 4,100
feet of mines before a single bastion. In one day 70,000 bombs and
shells were fired into the town. On the 8th of September the       (p. 220)
assault was ordered, and Sebastopol fell.

Again Russia tried what boasting would effect. Gortchakof declared to
whoever chose to believe him that he would not voluntarily abandon the
country where Saint Vladimir had received baptism, and the official
newspaper announced that the war was now becoming serious, and that
Sebastopol being destroyed, a stronger fortress would be built. This
meant that Russia was anxious to secure favorable terms. The war had
cost 250,000 men, and Russia's credit at home was in a bad condition.
Austria offered the basis of an agreement which was accepted by
Russia, and on the 25th of February, 1856, a Congress met at Paris.
Five days later the Treaty of Paris was signed. Russia renounced the
right of protecting the Christians in the Danubian principalities, and
restored the delta of that river. The Black Sea was opened to merchant
vessels of all nations, but closed to all warships, and no arsenals
were to be constructed on its shores. The sultan agreed to renew the
privileges of his Christian subjects, but with the understanding that
the powers should not find cause to interfere. It was a hard blow to
Russia's prestige, and indefinitely postponed the execution of making
of Russia the restored Eastern Roman Empire.

Alexander, in many respects, was the opposite of his father; he seemed
more like his uncle in his younger days when he earned the surname of
Well-beloved. It may be, however, that Alexander was but the executor
of his father's instructions, after doubt began to torture him. It is
known that Nicholas had seriously considered the emancipation of   (p. 221)
the serfs. Alexander took it up in earnest. There were two serious
difficulties, namely, the compensation to be allowed to the serf
owners, and the extent of the soil to be allotted to the serfs. It
must be remembered that, although the peasant had become resigned to
serve the landowner, his proverb: "Our backs are the owner's, but the
soil is our own," showed how stubbornly he held to the conviction that
it was his own land which he cultivated, however little profit he
derived from his toil. For once the tchinovnik dared not interfere;
public opinion had so strongly condemned their incompetence and
dishonesty that the Russian official was glad to efface himself; the
landowners, on the other hand, showed little enthusiasm. They knew
what their revenues were, but not what they would be under altered
circumstances.

Soon after the Treaty of Paris had restored peace, Alexander addressed
his "faithful nobles" at Moscow, inviting them to consult about the
proper measures to be taken with the view to emancipation. When this
produced no results, he appointed a Committee, "for the amelioration
of the condition of the peasants." The nobles of Poland, seeing what
was coming, declared themselves ready to emancipate their serfs. The
czar gave his consent and the ukase containing it was sent to all the
governors and marshals of the nobility "for your information," and
also "for your instruction if the nobles under your administration
should express the same intention as those of the three Lithuanian
governments."

The press supported the czar, and for that reason was allowed an
unusual freedom of expression. The plan was formed to reconstruct  (p. 222)
and strengthen the national mir. This was favored by a number of large
landowners who saw in this plan the beginning of constitutional
liberty. The czar directed that committees be appointed to examine the
scheme.

There were at this time 47,000,000 serfs, of whom 21,000,000 belonged
to private landowners, 1,400,000 were domestic servants, and the rest
Crown peasants who possessed greater privileges and enjoyed some
degree of self-government. Their local affairs were administered by
the mir and an elected council with an elder as executive. They were
judged by elected courts, that is juries, either in the mir court or
in that of the volost (district).

Forty-six committees composed of 1,336 land and serf-owners, assembled
to discuss the future of 22,500,000 serfs and of 120,000 owners. These
committees declared in favor of emancipation, but could not agree upon
the allowance of acreage or the indemnity to the owners. Another
committee of twelve was appointed, presided over by the czar, but
there Alexander met considerable passive opposition. The czar made a
journey through the provinces, where he appealed to the nobles,
warning them that "reforms came better from above than below." After
his return another committee superior in authority to the one existing
and composed of friends of emancipation was called. Its members,
inspired by the czar, drafted laws whereby emancipation was to proceed
at once, and stringent laws were made to prevent the free peasant from
again becoming a serf, and to make of him a proprietor upon payment of
an indemnity. On the 3d of March, 1861, the emancipation ukase was
published.

The scheme, as is evident, was fraught with difficulty. A stroke   (p. 223)
of the pen by the hand of the czar could set free millions of serfs,
but all the czar's power stopped short of endowing the serf with the
dignity and responsibility, which are the freeman's birthright. For
more than a century and a half, the moujik had been a beast of burden,
toiling as he was bid, and finding recreation only in besotting
himself with strong drink whenever he could find the means to indulge.
Mental faculties, save such as are inseparable from animal instinct,
had lain dormant; moral perception was limited between the knout on
one side, and gross superstition on the other. Could such a being be
intrusted with life and property? When the serf, brutalized by
generations of oppression, should come to understand that he was free
to do as he pleased, and that the hovel where he and his brood were
styed was his to do with as he pleased, what could he be expected to
do? Would he not seize the opportunity to indulge in his favorite
craving, and, having sold his property, swell the army of homeless
vagabonds?

The mir was the only means to prevent this, and mir meant serfdom
under another name. The landowners disposed of their land, or of so
much as was required to support the peasants, not to individuals but
to the mir. To indemnify the owners, the mir could secure a loan
whereby the debt was transferred from the owner to the government, and
the mir was responsible for its payment as well as for the taxes. The
moujik, as part of the mir, was responsible to the community for his
share of the debt, and was not allowed to leave his village without a
written permission from the starost or elder. He was, therefore,   (p. 224)
in a worse position than before the emancipation because in time of
distress it was his lord's interest to support him, whereas after it
he had to deal with a soulless government that demanded the taxes
regardless of circumstances. The mir might succeed so long as the
peasant remained in a state of tutelage; education only could lift him
out of this,--but this means was not considered by the government.

But whatever may have been Alexander's intentions, the men charged
with their execution had no sympathy with the moujik. The question
never occurred to them: How shall we raise the peasant from his
degradation? The problem before them was, how he should be made to
support the State, as he had done before. The Russian statesmen had no
conception of the truth that the wealth of a State is gauged by the
prosperity of the people.

As to the serf, he did not consider that a boon had been bestowed upon
him. The soil and the hovel were his, descended to him from his
forbears! Why, then, should he pay for them? He clung to this idea
with all the stubbornness implanted by a sense of justice upon a
limited intelligence. It had been hammered into his head that the
Little Father at St. Petersburg was conferring a favor upon him, and
this was within his limited conception; but when he heard what the
favor was, the only solution which his cunning brain could devise was
that the nobles had cheated the czar, or that there had been some
juggling with the ukase. Thus grave disturbances occurred. In one
district, that of Kazan, 10,000 men rose at the call of the moujik
Petrof, who promised them the real article of liberty. Troops were
called out and a hundred peasants besides Petrof were shot.        (p. 225)
Similar disturbances occurred in other provinces. The poor moujik did
not know that he was saddled with a debt which neither he nor his
children could hope to pay; but he did know that he was charged with a
debt which he had not incurred.

Nevertheless, the emancipation was a step forward. Under the liberal
impulse then rushing irresistibly over Russia's broad level the upper
classes clamored for reforms. They asked for the re-establishment of
the douma as the beginning of a constitutional government, but the
czar was not prepared to grant this, and he was right because
under existing circumstances the peasants would have to be
disfranchized,--and there is small choice between an autocracy and an
oligarchy.

It is to be regretted that the reforms in the judicial system,
introduced by Alexander in the ukases of 1862 to 1865, have since been
rescinded. Secret examinations were displaced by open sessions of the
courts, and criminal cases were decided by juries; the police was
forbidden to examine the accused, which duty was placed into the hands
of a qualified judge. Appeals could be taken to a higher court, and
the Senate acted as a Supreme Court in the last resort. Apart from
this system was the justice of the peace who adjudged ordinary police
cases, acted as an arbitrator, and decided civil suits when the amount
involved did not exceed 500 rubles ($250). No appeal could be taken in
cases involving less than thirty rubles in civil suits, or fifteen
rubles or three days' prison in police offenses. If an appeal was
taken the case was brought, not before a higher court, but before the
collective justices of the peace of the district, whose verdict    (p. 226)
could be set aside only by the Senate.

The Russian _goubernii_, governments, were divided into districts
(_ouiezdi_). The imperial ukase of 1864, created _zemstvos_ or
district assemblies composed of representatives of the landed
proprietors or gentlemen; or rural communes or mirs, and of the towns.
These representatives were elected every three years. The assembly
appointed an executive committee which is in permanent session, but
the zemstvo assembles once a year. Its duties are strictly limited to
local affairs, such as keeping roads and bridges in repair; to watch
over education and sanitation, to report on the condition of the
harvest, and to guard against the occurrence of famine. Above the
district zemstvo is the goubernkoe zemstvo or provincial assembly,
whose members are elected from the district zemstvos. Its duties
embrace the estimate of the provincial budget, and a general
supervision over the districts.

Alexander was kindly disposed and meant to do well. He showed it by
removing the barriers erected by his father between Russia and western
Europe. Foreigners in Russia were granted civil rights, and Russians
were allowed to travel abroad. The universities were relieved of
restraints and Jews who had learned a trade could settle where they
pleased. All these reforms were so many promises of a new era for
Russia.

Alexander soon found out that his concessions only served to create
demands for more. The trouble began in Poland, where the news of
Nicholas' death was received with relief, if not with joy. Great hopes
were entertained from the new czar; besides, the Europe of 1855    (p. 227)
was very different from that of 1825: monarchs had learned the lesson
that the people possessed inalienable rights. Italy had shaken off the
encumbrance of a number of princelings,--and was the better for it;
Austria had been compelled to grant self-government to its Hungarian
subjects; why, then, should Poland despair of recovering its
independence?

It was Poland's greatest misfortune that her best sons were always
divided in opinion; many of them, moreover, thought that Poland's
cause should command the sacrifices of every people. They forgot that
their country owed its downfall to itself and that, whereas people
might express their sympathy, it cannot be expected that they shall
neglect their own business for the sake of other people. Some of the
leaders expected that the czar would grant them self-government, and
Alexander might have done so after some time; but others demanded not
only independence but that Russia should restore the parts which she
had owned for so many years that they had become parts of the empire.
The czar dared not grant such a request, because it would have
produced a revolution in Russia, besides a war with Austria and
Prussia, since those powers owned part of Poland. He was, however,
willing to grant important concessions and did so. In February 1863,
an insurrection broke out, and Russian troops were dispatched to
subdue it. The Russians acted with great cruelty, so that England,
France, and Austria protested on the 17th of June. Russia, knowing
that Prussia would come to her assistance paid no attention, and in
1866, Russian Poland became a part of Russia. The Russian language (p. 228)
displaced the Polish, and Poland is no longer even a name; it is a
memory and a warning,--nothing more.

Quite different was Alexander's treatment of Finland. In 1863, he
convoked the Diet of that grand dukedom, where nobility and people
appreciated the degree of liberty which they enjoyed. The government
did not interfere with the national language or religion, but took
measures that neither should spread in Russia.

Alexander's concessions raised the expectation of a constitution among
those who knew what the word implies, including the students at the
universities. These institutions were closed. The provincial zemstvos
exceeded their authority. That of Tver demanded the convocation of the
three Estates; that at Toula discussed a national assembly. Was it
Alexander or his court and ministers who bore the responsibility for
the suppressive means that were employed? It may be that the attempts
upon his life, by Karakozof in 1866, and by the Pole Berezofski at
Paris in 1867, embittered him. But his kindly feeling and love for his
people, taken in conjunction with a later event, warrant the belief
that he was ignorant.




XXV--GREAT EVENTS DURING ALEXANDER'S REIGN.                        (p. 229)

NIHILISM.


Prussia's behavior during the Polish insurrection brought her into a
close friendship with Russia. The result was seen when Austria and
Prussia, in 1864, invaded the German provinces of Denmark, when Russia
prevented intervention, and Denmark lost the two provinces by the
Treaty of Vienna, October 30, 1864. Soon after Prussia and Austria
quarreled about the spoils. The countries of South Germany supported
Austria. War began on June 18, 1866, and little over two months later,
on August 23, 1866, it ended by the Peace of Prague, which gave to
Prussia Hanover, Schleswig-Holstein, Hesse, Nassau, and the city of
Frankfort. Prussia did not annex Wurtemburg in compliment to the czar,
who was related to its king by marriage.

If Russia looked carelessly upon Prussia's growth, not so Napoleon III
of France. He saw in it a threat, and to offset Prussia's increase of
power, tried to secure other territory. It was evident that nothing
but a pretext was needed to bring on war. It was found, and Napoleon
declared war on July 15, 1870. Once again it was Alexander who protected
Prussia on the east, by threatening Austria which would gladly have
seized the opportunity to avenge 1866. As a consequence France     (p. 230)
had to fight the whole of Germany; and Russia seized the opportunity
for repudiating the treaty of Paris of 1856, which forbade the
construction of arsenals on the coast of the Black Sea and did not
permit any war vessels in it. None of the powers felt any inclination
to fight Russia single-handed, but Prussia proposed a conference,
which was held at London. The result was that Russia was left free in
the Black Sea, but the sultan has the right to close the Dardanelles
to warships.

On January 18, 1871, the King of Prussia became German Emperor, and in
the following year the Emperor of Russia, the Emperor of Austria, and
the German Emperor met at Vienna, with the result that an alliance was
concluded among the three powers.

In 1867 Russia resolved to dispose of its possessions on the western
hemisphere by selling Alaska, a territory covering 590,884 square
miles, to the United States. In the same year a Slavophil Congress was
held at Moscow with the czar's approval. The object was said to be to
unite all the nations of Slav origin by a bond of friendship; but the
real purpose was to bring them under the rule of the czar. This was
apparent when it was resolved to send emissaries among the Slavs under
Turkish rule. They met with encouragement in Montenegro, Bulgaria,
Bosnia, and Herzegovina. General Ignatieff, the Russian ambassador at
Constantinople, thought that this might be the means to bring about
the longed-for annexation of the old Czargrad. He worked upon the
Turkish subjects belonging to the Greek Church, but showed his hand
when, under his decision, the Bulgarians were released from the    (p. 231)
authority of the Patriarch of Constantinople. In 1875, the Bulgarian
Christians rose against the Turkish tax-farmers. The revolt was fanned
by the Russian emissaries, and it spread to Servia and Montenegro.
Ignatieff did not think that the time was ripe and interfered; but he
threatened the Sultan with European intervention and Abdul Aziz
granted the insurgents the privileges enjoyed by the Christians in
Turkey.

Austria looked with apprehension upon the increasing influence of
Russia in Turkey, and suggested drastic reforms in a note addressed to
the powers on December 30, 1875. It was approved and presented to the
sultan by the five great European powers. Abdul Aziz quietly accepted
it. This was not what the Russian Slavophils expected, and they
incited the Servians to revolt. A religious insurrection followed
which was put down by the Turks with such cruelty that it aroused
universal indignation in Europe, especially in Russia. In
Constantinople the Turks were indignant at the sultan's evident fear
of Ignatieff. The situation became so alarming that Great Britain
assembled a fleet in Besika Bay. The triple alliance, Russia, Austria
and Prussia, demanded of the sultan an armistice and the execution of
reforms under foreign supervision. The situation changed by a
revolution in Turkey on May 29, 1876, when Abdul Aziz was assassinated
and succeeded by his nephew Murad V.

Russia felt that war was inevitable and approached Austria with proposals
to take joint action. The reply was that Austria could not permit the
creation of a Slav state on the frontier and that, if any changes were
made in the Balkans, Austria must receive compensation. This was   (p. 232)
admitted by Russia. A number of Russian officers took service in
Servia, among them General Chernaiev, who had gained distinction in
Central Asia. Montenegro declared war against Turkey on July 2, 1876.

On the 31st of August, of the same year, Sultan Murad V was deposed,
and his half-brother became sultan as Abdul Hamid II. Meanwhile the
Turks were victorious, and on September, 17, the Servians asked for an
armistice.

The reports of Turkish atrocities aroused great indignation in Great
Britain; its government was forced to join the other great powers in a
note to the sultan demanding reforms. Abdul Hamid made vague promises
but when the Servians, trusting to intervention, again took up arms,
they were badly defeated and a great number of Russian officers were
killed. The czar was forced to interfere. On October 31, he demanded
an armistice of six weeks, to which Abdul Hamid replied that he would
make it six months. This was declined because it would keep the
Servians too long in suspense, and the war continued. In the beginning
of November Chernaiev admitted that the Slav cause was lost unless
foreign help came.

Alexander was really concerned in seeking a peaceable solution, but
his high officers were equally earnest in preventing it. Ignatieff, at
Constantinople, was especially active with every means at his
disposal. Alexander suggested a European conference but before it
assembled he declared publicly at Moscow (Nov. 10), that, anxious as
he was to avoid the shedding of Russian blood, he would act alone  (p. 233)
to support his brethren in race and religion unless the conference
brought relief.

The representatives of the powers met at Constantinople on the 5th of
December, 1876. The sultan, a man of rare ability and cunning, knew
that Turkey's disintegration was discussed in its own capital. He did
not object, but made one of the reform party his Grand Vizier, and
astonished the world by proclaiming a constitution on December 25.

The conference concluded its deliberations, and presented its
conclusions to the sultan who agreed to submit them to the National
Assembly, which was to meet in March, 1877. Abdul Hamid was wise. He
made the first legislature Turkey ever had,--and he had firmly
resolved that it should also be the last,--responsible for whatever
might happen. The session was brief, but long enough to refuse the
conditions imposed by the powers.

Alexander demanded that the sultan make peace with Montenegro which
was declined. On the 24th of April the czar declared war. England
protested against Russia's independent action, but 250,000 men crossed
the Turkish frontier. The principal incident was the siege and fall of
Plevna (July 20--Dec. 10, 1877), under Osman Pasha. The surrender of
this brave Turk alarmed England, which, however, did not grant
Turkey's appeal for intervention. It was at the battle of Senova, Jan.
9, 1878, when he captured 27,000 prisoners and 43 Krupp guns, that
Skobelef won fame. On January 23, Constantinople was at the czar's
mercy.

But this awoke England. On February 13, the British fleet passed   (p. 234)
through the Dardanelles without obtaining the sultan's consent, and
thereby ruined Russia's schemes. In vain did its government complain
of the violation of the Treaty of Paris; before the czar could make
good his threat that he would occupy Constantinople,--the object of
the Russian's most fervid hope,--a fleet of British ironclads
prevented its consummation.

Peace negotiations were opened at San Stefano, when Russia imposed
exaggerated demands which the cunning sultan hastened to grant,
convinced that the other powers would prevent their execution. He was
right. Great Britain, Austria, and Turkey entered into an alliance.
England sent for Indian troops to occupy Malta, and called out the
reserves. The war had cost Russia $600,000,000 and 90,000 men, and she
was not in a condition to fight the three powers. Thus, for the second
time, Czargrad slipped out of Russia's clutches, and each time she
owed the disappointment to Great Britain.

The Balkan question was settled at the Congress at Berlin which opened
on June 13, 1878, and finished its sessions a month later. Turkey
ceded to Russia a part of Bessarabia, and in Asia, Kars, Ardahan, and
Batoum. This ending of the war, so different from what was expected by
the Slavophils, caused great dissatisfaction in Russia, and the czar
dissolved all Slavophil committees. This gained him the dislike of the
high officers and of the tchinovnik.

The absurd and dangerous doctrine of nihilism, that is, the destruction
of everything that constitutes society, penetrated into Russia by way
of Germany. At first it was nothing but a theory, fascinating for  (p. 235)
young and inexperienced people such as students of the universities
who, unless properly guided, are apt to adopt any idea that appeals to
the generous sentiments of youth. In 1864, an exile named Bakunin
escaped from Siberia, and made his way to London where he secured
employment on the _Kolokol_ or "Bell," a revolutionary paper published
in Russia which was smuggled over the frontier and scattered broadcast
in the czar's domains. Under Bakunin's influence this paper became
hostile to society, and preached nihilism. In 1869, a Congress of
Nihilists was held at Basel, Switzerland; Bakunin proposed to create
an International Committee of active workers.

Soon unmistakable signs of trouble appeared in Russia, but the
government was on the alert and took strong means of suppression.
Nicholas I, the man with the iron will, had sent an average number of
9,000 persons annually to Siberia; this number under Alexander the
Liberator increased to from 16,000 to 20,000. Bakunin urged his
followers to "go among the people," and a host of young persons, male
and female, many of them belonging to the wealthy classes, adopted the
life of the moujik in the villages. But the Russian peasant possesses
a degree of cunning which shows his dormant intelligence, and
suspected the motives of those who said they wanted to benefit him,
and this, added to his real affection for the czar, rendered the
attempt of the nihilists a failure. The Russian peasant dreads a
change in his condition, because experience has taught him that it
will end to his disadvantage. In 1876 there were still 2,000,000
peasants who preferred serfdom.

The Turkish war, when the government was occupied elsewhere,       (p. 236)
afforded an opportunity which was not neglected by the nihilists. On a
July night of the year 1877, fifteen young men met in the forest near
Litepsk, and formed a conspiracy against all existing institutions.
Two papers, _The Popular Will_ and _The Black Partition_ advised
assassination as the means to gain their object. We may judge of
conditions in Russia from knowing that many good and wealthy people
made contributions, well aware that arrest and punishment would follow
if the secret police should hear of it. In October, 1877, 253
nihilists were arrested, and 160 were convicted at the trial. In
February, 1878, General Trepof, Governor of St. Petersburg was openly
accused in the papers of gross cruelty toward a prisoner, and Vera
Zazulich, a young woman, sought to kill him. She was arrested,
tried,--and acquitted, much to the disgust of the authorities who made
every effort to re-arrest her. Then began a reign of terror. Officials
were condemned to death by an "Executive Committee," composed of
members whose names were unknown. The police did not know whom to
suspect, and therefore suspected everybody, and no one was safe. Often
the condemned officer was warned of his doom by letter or paper, but
the messenger could not be found. In April, the president of the Kief
University was dangerously wounded, and a police officer was stabbed
in public. In August, General Mezensof, Chief of the dreaded Secret
Police, was killed, and when the government abolished trial by jury in
favor of a military court, it seemed as if the public took the part of
the terrorists. These men grew bolder. On the 22d of February,     (p. 237)
1878, Prince Krapotkine, the Governor of Kharkof, was shot, and his
death sentence was found posted in many cities. On the following 7th
of March, Colonel Knoop of the Odessa police, was killed, and as a
climax, on the 14th of April a school-teacher named Solovief fired a
pistol at the czar. Not satisfied with assassination, the terrorists
resorted to incendiarism at Moscow, Nishni Novgorod, and other cities,
and there were riots at Rostof. In April, 1878, the government
proclaimed martial law, and the most renowned generals, Melikof,
Gourko, Todleben, and others were appointed governors with unlimited
authority. At St. Petersburg the _dvorniks_ or house janitors were
directed to spy upon the residents and to report their movements to
the secret police. Executions, imprisonment, and exile multiplied
until it seemed as if the government wished to terrify the terrorists.

Still the situation went from bad to worse. On December 1, 1879, as
the imperial train was entering Moscow, it was wrecked by a mine.
Alexander escaped because he had traveled in an earlier section. Three
days later the "Executive Committee" issued a proclamation excusing
the attempt and announcing that the czar had been condemned to death.
On February 17, 1880, an explosion of dynamite in the guard room of
the Winter Palace, just beneath the imperial dining-room, killed and
maimed a large number of soldiers, but the imperial family escaped by
a hair's breadth, as the czar had not entered the room. On the 24th of
the same month Louis Melikof was placed in charge of the city of St.
Petersburg, and eight days later there was an attempt upon his life.
There was a panic in the capital, when a nihilist proclamation     (p. 238)
announced that these attempts would cease, provided the czar would
renounce his autocracy and "leave the task of establishing social
reforms to an assembly representing the entire Russian people."

Whatever may have been his motive, Melikof urged the czar to try what
conciliation would effect. Upon his advice, a large number of exiles
in Siberia were pardoned, and persons imprisoned for political
offenses were released. About 2,000 students expelled from the
universities were readmitted, and in several cases the death sentence
pronounced against nihilists was commuted. Only two men out of the
sixteen convicted of the attempt to blow up the Winter Palace, were
executed. The effect of this new policy was so satisfactory, that on
the 18th of August, 1880, the czar revoked the ukase of February 24,
and Melikof was appointed as Minister of the Interior. He advised the
czar to grant a constitution, and in February 1881, placed before
Alexander a plan to effect this important change gradually. It was
discussed in the Council of State. The majority approved, but a bitter
opposition was manifested by the other members. The czar himself was
in favor of it, but the persons with whom he came into daily contact
caused him to hesitate. He told Melikof that he would give his final
decision on March 12.

On that day he had not made up his mind, but on the 13th, he ordered
that Melikof's scheme should become a law, and that it be published in
the Official Gazette. That afternoon, as he was returning from his
usual drive, and his carriage was passing between the Catherine Canal
and Michael's Garden, a bomb was thrown under his carriage and     (p. 239)
exploded, killing or wounding a number of the guard, but Alexander was
unhurt. He was hurrying to assist the wounded, when another bomb
exploded near him and he was dreadfully mangled. He regained
consciousness for a moment while his attendants were bearing him to
the palace, but died at 3.30 P.M., without having spoken a word.

A man named Rissakof, said to be a nihilist, was arrested for throwing
the bomb; but there were ugly rumors that the assassination was
committed under the direction of parties interested in maintaining an
autocratic government at all risks. Owing to the secret proceedings in
Russian courts, the murder of Alexander the Liberator still remains a
mystery.

[Illustration: Alexander III]                                      (p. 240)




XXVI--ALEXANDER III, THE PEASANTS' FRIEND.                         (p. 241)


The atrocious death of The Liberator gave the throne to his son, who
succeeded as Alexander III. The new czar was thirty-six years old.
Nicholas, the eldest son of Alexander II, had died of consumption in
1865, and, since he had been the heir, his younger brother had not
received any special training. His principal tutor had been
Pobiedonostzeff, a man who believed in autocracy. He had imbued his
pupil with a deeply religious feeling, and imparted to him a thorough
knowledge of Russia's history. Alexander III was of powerful build and
possessed unusual strength. He was loyal to his word, and tenacious in
his likes and dislikes. Married to Princess Dagmar of Denmark, he was
a model husband and father. His education made him a firm believer in
autocracy.

The sudden and tragic death of his father moved him so deeply that he
gave orders that the last wishes of the late czar should be respected.
"Change nothing in my father's orders;" he said to Melikof; "they are
his last will and testament." He issued two proclamations; in the
first he announced that he would strengthen the bond with Poland and
Finland, and thus gained the support of the Slavophils; and in the
second, he reminded the peasants of the freedom given to them by   (p. 242)
his father, and ordered them to swear allegiance to himself and his
heir. Six men and a woman implicated in the murder of the late czar
were arrested, tried, condemned to death, and, with the exception of
the woman, they were executed on April 15. The czar appointed his
former tutor as Procurator of the Holy Synod. Pobiedonostzeff
persuaded his pupil that this was not the time to make concessions. On
the 11th of May, 1881, Alexander issued a proclamation in which he
declared his intention to maintain the absolute power. Melikof
resigned as Minister of the Interior and was replaced by Ignatieff,
the former Russian Minister at Constantinople.

Shortly after his succession to the throne, Alexander made a journey
to Moscow, and was everywhere received with unmistakable tokens of
loyalty and affection. This confirmed his opinion that the great bulk
of the population was satisfied with the form of government, and
strengthened his determination to defend it.

In 1881, an anti-semitic movement was felt in Germany; that is, an
outburst of hatred for the Jews broke out, which spread to Russia. It
is not generally known that of all the Jews in the world, four fifths
live in Russia in the southwest, in an area of 356,681 square miles.
This is sometimes mentioned as the Jewish territory. Few of these
people engage in agriculture; they are sometimes mechanics, but more
often peddlers, storekeepers, bankers and moneylenders. The principal
objection to them was that they succeed where others fail. In May,
1881, there were anti-Jewish riots at Kief and other places.
Pobiedonostzeff's motto was, "One Russia, One Religion, One Czar;" (p. 243)
prompted by him, Alexander did not take any energetic measures to
suppress the disorder, for he, too, disliked to see in Russia a people
differing in religion, language, and outward appearance. Ignatieff
began a system of persecution by removing the Jews who had profited by
the late czar's permission to settle anywhere, and when the act which
recalled the Middle Ages was hotly condemned by the foreign press,
even the Slavophils said that Ignatieff had gone too far. The
persecution died out until 1884, when the Jews were deprived of their
civil rights, and an attempt was made to compel them to enter the
Greek Church. But the Jew is steadfast under persecution, and the only
result was that some of them heartily joined the nihilists.

The public condemnation which followed these acts, induced Ignatieff
to advise the czar to adopt Melikof's scheme of a constitution.
Alexander did not understand this change of views and when de Giers
was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ignatieff resigned. He was
succeeded by D. Tolstoi.

Misunderstandings and the clashing of interests were dissolving the
triple alliance of Russia, Austria, and Germany. This was apparent in
the Balkan States which had been formed after the last Russo-Turkish
war. Charles I, King of Roumania, was a German prince who mistrusted
Russia's schemes. In March, 1882, Prince Milan Obrenovitch of Servia
assumed the title of king, and the czar offered no objection. The
ruler of Bulgaria was Alexander of Battenberg who was a relative of
the czar and had served in the Russian army, which may have been the
reason of his appointment. The Russian Minister at his court was   (p. 244)
evidently of the opinion that his word, as representative of the czar,
was law, and when he found out that his orders were set at naught, he
withdrew from his post, whereupon the Russian officers serving in the
Bulgarian army, were dismissed. This gave grave offense at St.
Petersburg, but the affair was arranged, and the Russian Minister
returned. In September, 1885, there was a revolution in Sofia, the
capital of Eastern Roumelia, when the crown was offered to Alexander
of Battenberg, who accepted. He hastened to inform the czar, who was
too angry to pay any attention to letters or telegrams.

Bulgaria and Eastern Roumelia, although united under one prince, sent
deputations to St. Petersburg to appease the czar, but were informed
that their future would be decided by the great powers. Soon after
Servia declared war against Bulgaria; after a few unimportant
skirmishes, they were driven back by Prince Alexander, who would have
captured the capital Belgrad, if he had not been stopped by Austria's
intervention. Alexander, after another fruitless attempt to mollify
the czar, applied to the sultan, who appointed him as Governor-general
over Eastern Roumelia for five years. The czar protested and invited
the powers to a conference which was held at Constantinople on April
5, 1886. To the infinite disgust of the czar, the dispute was decided
in favor of Prince Alexander.

Russia, however, had a pro-Russian party in Bulgaria. On August 21,
1886, Prince Alexander was kidnaped and carried across the Danube,
after being compelled to abdicate. At Lemberg, in Austrian territory
he was set free. The Bulgarians rallied under the President of the (p. 245)
National Assembly and forced the pro-Russians to flee, after which
Prince Alexander returned on the 3d of September. Once more he made an
attempt to pacify the czar, but when his telegram remained unanswered,
he abdicated three days later, rather than involve the country in a
war with Russia. He left on the same day, to the sorrow of the people.

The czar was angry. He knew that Austria would not have dared oppose
him unless assured of the support of Germany. The feeling in Russia
grew more bitter when the election in Bulgaria showed a total defeat
of the pro-Russian party, and the crown was offered to Prince Waldemar
of Denmark, who declined at the instance of the czar. The Bulgarians
then made an offer to Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg, who accepted,
and in August made his formal entry in Tirnova. Alexander once more
protested to the powers, but it passed unheeded and he urged the
sultan to expel Ferdinand. Abdul Hamid declined with thanks,
preferring to have as neighbor a small independent country to Russia.
Alexander then demanded payment of the war indemnity due since the
Treaty of San Stefano, but could obtain nothing except a profusion of
excuses and apologies. Soon after the sultan had trouble in Armenia,
which was Russia's latest resort to arouse public opinion against the
Turk.

This is the age of colossal enterprises and combinations in every
direction, in politics as well as in other branches of human activity.
In Russia Slavophilism, gave way to Panslavism, that is, the scheme to
unite all Slav nations. Germany was quick to respond with Pan      (p. 246)
Germanism, that is, to bring all German-speaking nations under one
scepter. The czar, obeying this impulse, made every effort to convert
the Baltic provinces,--which Germany called the German Provinces,--into
Slavs by making the Russian language the only language that was taught
in the schools; and Germany retaliated in the Polish provinces. Under
these circumstances friendship ceased. Russia established a protective
tariff, which was a rude blow to Germany's commerce; and that country
replied by refusing to loan Russia any more money. The czar's
government applied to France which responded with unexpected
generosity. From that time Russia's internal improvements have been
made with French capital.

Prudent as he was, Alexander allowed his anger and dislike to master
him, when Prince Alexander of Battenberg was accepted as suitor to a
daughter of Queen Victoria. Troops were hurried from the Caucasus into
Poland, but Germany averted war by having the match broken off. When
the present German emperor, William II, succeeded to the throne, he
attempted to make friends with the czar by dismissing Prince Bismarck,
in 1890, but Alexander could neither forgive nor forget. It was
chiefly owing to this that Russia and France drew closer together
until it ended in an alliance.

Strong, self-willed, and masterful, Alexander did love his people in
his own way. In January, 1884, he ordered the poll-tax to be
abolished, and thereby relieved the peasants of a heavy burden; he
also compelled the landowners to sell to their former serfs the land
cultivated by them. Since the price was payable in installments    (p. 247)
and the owners needed the money, the government assumed the position
of creditor, but Alexander reduced the total indebtedness by
12,000,000 rubles, and granted 5,000,000 rubles for the relief of
overburdened villages. He calculated that the land would be paid for
in 1930, when the title will be vested in the mir,--unless one of his
successors should please to appropriate the past payments for other
purposes.

In the black earth belt the allotments had been according to the needs
of the population, but the increase among the people rendered them too
small and several severe famines followed. The government tried to
induce the surplus population to emigrate to Siberia, but the Russian
peasant lacks education and has been held in tutelage so long that he
is not fit for the life of a pioneer settler. Transportation
facilities increased by the aid of French capital, and added to the
prosperity of merchants and speculators, but did not help the moujik
who did not know how to profit by them.

Alexander, as autocrat of all the Russias, did not suffer any
authority but his own. The zemstvos, volosts, and mirs, were all
placed under officials appointed by him. Every shadow of
self-government was destroyed. This demanded a reorganization of the
army, which was increased by 900,000 men. The reserves were called out
once a year, and drilled as in actual war. Strategic railways were
built for the speedy transportation of troops. Coast defenses were
constructed and the navy was increased. In 1884, Batoum was closed as
a port and converted into a naval base, and when England protested,
claiming that this was in violation of the Treaty of Berlin,--as   (p. 248)
it was,--Russia, referring to the changes in the Balkan, inquired if
the duty of observing the treaties was reserved exclusively for
Russia.

Alexander's reign was especially discouraging for the Poles who still
hoped for the revival of their country. Poles were made into Russians;
but Panslavism demanded that the German should be banished. In 1887,
Alexander ordered that, when a foreign landowner in Poland died, his
estate must be sold unless his heirs had been residents of Poland
before this order was published. Germany, suffering from
Pan-Germanism, collected several thousand Russian Poles who had
settled in Germany, and put them across the frontier. Russia replied
by making a law in the Baltic provinces that nothing but Russian could
be taught in any school, and that no more Lutheran churches could be
built without the permission of the Holy Synod.

Then came Finland's turn. In 1890, Russian money, Russian stamps, and
worse than that, Russian taxes were introduced. There were loud
protests, which received courteous answers, but the process continued.
In 1891, the Finnish Committee at St. Petersburg, which had directed
the affairs of Finland, was abolished, and Russian censorship
abolished the free press. The Russian language was made obligatory,
and the Finns who could afford it emigrated to the United States and
settled in the northwest.

In 1890, Alexander ordered the construction of the Trans-Siberian
railway, of which more will be said in the chapter on Asiatic Russia.

All these years Alexander had battled with nihilism and            (p. 249)
revolution. His policy neither gave nor asked for quarter. In May,
1888, an army officer named Timovief made an attempt upon the czar's
life. On October 29th of the same year, as he was traveling in
southern Russia an accident occurred in which twenty-one were killed
and many injured; it was ascribed to nihilists, but may have been
caused by defects. Be that as it may, Alexander never recovered from
the shock. In March, 1890, another plot against his life was
discovered. In November, 1891, the secret police came on the scent of
a conspiracy at Moscow, and in April, 1894, they learned of one at St.
Petersburg. In constant fear of assassination, Alexander resided at
Gatschina, twenty-five miles south of St. Petersburg, as in an armed
fortress. The never-ceasing tension wore out the strong man. He caught
cold and suffering from inflammation of the kidneys he went south, but
experienced no relief. He died on the 1st of November, 1894.

In his private life he was essentially a good man; as czar, he acted
according to his convictions. He gave much thought to the welfare of
the peasants and as such deserved the surname of The Peasants' Friend.

[Illustration: Nicholas II]                                        (p. 250)




XXVII--RUSSIA UNDER THE PRESENT CZAR.                              (p. 251)

NICHOLAS II.


"Neglect nothing that can make my son truly a man!" This was the
instruction given by Alexander to the tutors of his son. Consequently,
Nicholas in his youth was allowed to indulge in manly exercises and
sports, while special tutors taught him mathematics, natural
philosophy, history, political economy, English, French, and German,
besides his native language. Destined for the throne, he began his
military career at the age of thirteen as hetman of the Cossacks, and
passed successively through the different grades. In 1889, at the age
of twenty-one, he was appointed president of a committee to prepare
plans for the Trans-Siberian railway, and the following year he made a
tour in the Far East, visiting China and Japan. In the last-named
country he was attacked and wounded by a police officer who had been
brooding over the wrongs which his country had suffered at the hands
of Russia. Nicholas recovered and proceeded to Vladivostok, where he
initiated the building of the great continental line. He returned to
St. Petersburg by way of Siberia and Moscow, and was the first czar
who had ever visited his Asiatic empire.

Born on May 18, 1868, he was twenty-six years old when he was      (p. 252)
called to the throne. He announced that he would "promote the progress
and peaceful glory of our beloved Russia, and the happiness of all our
faithful subjects." On the 26th of November, 1894, the czar married
Princess Alice of Hesse-Darmstadt, the granddaughter of Queen
Victoria, who, on entering the Greek Church, received the name of
Alexandra Feodorofna. The czar retained his father's ministers, except
that Prince Khilkof, who had learned practical railroading in the
United States, was appointed Minister of Public Works. Pobiedonostzeff
continued as Procurator of the Holy Synod.

Nicholas showed greater leniency toward Poland and Finland than his
father had done. He revoked several of his father's ukases and seemed
to be willing to treat them fairly. Finland's forests are a source of
great prosperity and the Russian officials have long been anxious to
secure a share. When the Secretary of State for Finland resigned,
General Kuropatkin became Minister of War, and he wished to introduce
Russia's military system. General Bobrikof, a brusque and haughty man,
was appointed Governor-general with instructions to proceed with the
conversion of the Finns into Slavs. He convoked an extraordinary
session of the Diet, January 24, 1899, and submitted Kuropatkin's
scheme, with a strong hint that it must pass. The Diet ignored the
hint and rejected the scheme, whereupon Bobrikof ignored the Diet and
published it as a law to go into effect in 1903. An imperial ukase of
February 15, 1899, reorganized the Diet according to a plan drawn up
by Pobiedonostzeff. Bobrikof increased the rigor of the press
censorship, but the Finns remained within the law. A petition was  (p. 253)
circulated which in ten days secured 500,000 signatures, and a
delegation was sent to St. Petersburg to present it. The delegation
was not admitted.

In January, 1895, the czar received a deputation of all classes of his
subjects who hinted that the zemstvos might be used as the germ of a
constitutional government. He replied that he believed in autocracy
and that he intended to maintain it as his predecessors had done. On
the 26th of May, 1896, he was crowned at Moscow with more than usual
splendor, and in the same year he and the czarina made a tour through
Europe. After visiting the German Emperor and Queen Victoria, they
went to Paris where the czar, after reviewing 100,000 soldiers
declared that the Empire and the Republic were united in indissoluble
friendship. The visit was returned by the President of the French
Republic, M. Faure, in August, 1897. On this occasion the world
received notice that an alliance existed between the two powers, and
that, if one of them was attacked by more than one power, the other
would assist with the whole of its military and naval strength, and
peace could be concluded only in concert between the allies.

Two great reforms are noticeable under the present reign. The sale of
spirits has greatly decreased since the government took the monopoly
of the manufacture and sale of liquor. The French loans made the
establishment of the gold standard possible and speculation in Russian
paper money ceased.

The completion of the Trans-Siberian Railway aroused great expectation
for the future of Russia's commerce. The war with Japan has        (p. 254)
prevented the possibility of estimating the effect it will have upon
oceanic trade. But Russia's manufactures have had a wonderful
increase; its effect is shown in the population of the cities. In
1870, Russia contained only six cities with a population of over
100,000; their number was doubled in 1897. Warsaw, the old capital of
Poland, had 243,000 inhabitants in 1865; in 1897, they had increased
to 615,000. Lotz, also in Poland, rose from 12,000 to 315,000. This
cannot fail to exert a powerful influence upon the future of the
empire; first, on account of the creation of a middle class which,
even at this early day, numbers nine per cent of the population; and
next, because the mechanics and factory hands are recruited from among
the peasants, who thus are brought into daily contact with more
intelligent people, and acquire new ideas and new necessities. The
official class is bitterly opposed to this new departure, because it
foreshadows the day when the drag upon Russia will be cast off.

Nicholas seems to have reversed his father's policy in the Balkan
States. He also acted in concert with Europe in 1896, when trouble
arose between Turkey and Greece. It began in Crete, where Turk and
Christian could not agree. Stories of massacres infuriated the Greeks
and the king had to choose between a revolution and a declaration of
war. In April, 1897, an army of 80,000 men under Prince George crossed
into Thessaly, but was driven back by a Turkish army of 150,000 men.
Prince George had invaded Crete in February, but the powers compelled
him to evacuate the island. The czar interceded with the sultan, and
the absurd war was ended.

The Slavophils, after their failure in the Balkan provinces had    (p. 255)
excited the Armenians in the provinces near the Russian Caucasus. They
attacked the Kurds, a nomadic tribe of Mussulmans, when the Turks took
the side of their co-religionists and treated the Armenians with no
soft hand. The Panslavists demanded autonomy for Armenia, but this did
not suit Prince Lobanof, who had succeeded de Giers as Minister of
Foreign Affairs, because he feared trouble in the Caucasus. In 1895,
Russia, France, and England, presented a note to the sultan,
suggesting the appointment of a high commissioner, the abolition of
torture, and reforms in taxation. Turkey agreed, but Shakir Pasha, the
high commissioner, failed to restore order and the disorder threatened
to become a revolt. Even in Constantinople a condition of anarchy
prevailed.

The atrocities committed by the Turks aroused indignation everywhere,
when the Armenians seized the Ottoman Bank, but the conspirators were
forced to flee from the building and to seek refuge on an English
yacht. The Turks were furious and killed more than 5,000 Armenians.
Again the powers remonstrated; but at this time it began to dawn upon
the public that the Armenians were a least quite as much to blame as
the Turks, and the interest subsided. Russia had discovered that the
Armenians are undesirable citizens, and sent back some 40,000 of them
who had settled in the Russian Caucasus. Germany, intent upon securing
concessions from Turkey, left the sultan a free hand; meanwhile the
British public was engrossed by the Boer war, and the Armenians,
seeing that they were left to their own devices, subsided.

The civilized world was startled when, on August 24, 1898, Russia  (p. 256)
issued a note to the powers, declaring that "military and naval
budgets attack public prosperity at its very source, and divert
national energies from useful aims," and suggesting a conference to
discuss the subject of displacing war by an International Court.

The note received generous applause, especially in the United States
and Great Britain, the two foremost nations devoted to the arts of
peace. The several governments agreed to participate in the proposed
conference. The place selected was The Hague, the capital of the
Netherlands, where the sessions opened on May 18, 1899.

Of all the great powers, the United States was the only one
unreservedly in favor of an arrangement whereby war would be
prevented. Most of the other powers looked upon an International Court
as visionary, and so far as the ostensible purpose is concerned, the
conference was a failure. Still, it bore fruit in defining and adding
strength to international law. Among its most important results is the
clause that "When a conflict seems imminent, one or several powers
shall have the right to offer mediation, and its exercise shall not be
regarded as an unfriendly act." A permanent Court of Arbitration was
established at The Hague. It is composed of judges selected from a
list on which every country is represented. On the 29th of July, the
delegates of sixteen nations signed the protocol embodying the
conclusions; it was afterwards signed by sixteen more. It remained,
however, with the United States, to give vitality to an institution
which was looked upon with ill favor by many governments.

Although the reign of terror from the nihilists has passed,        (p. 257)
political murder is still rampant in Russia, and recent events in the
Far East have caused a renewal of the agitation for reforms. In 1904,
the Governor-general of Finland was assassinated, and soon afterwards,
the hated and dreaded Minister of the Interior de Plehve shared that
fate. His successor seems to be anxious to grant greater liberties to
the people. The united action of the zemstvos, and the final issue of
the war in the Far East, may have important results. Nicholas II, amid
all his perplexities, was made glad by the birth of a son and heir,
who received the name of Alexis.

[Illustration: Map]                                                (p. 258)




XXVIII--THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH OF THE ASIATIC EMPIRE.               (p. 259)


A close study of the history of Asiatic Russia reveals the fact that,
until within a comparatively recent date, the Russian government had
no fixed policy in or toward Asia. There was a national instinct which
impelled Russia eastward. Twice had Europe been invaded by Asiatic
hordes, and, owing to its position, Russia was doomed to bear the
brunt of the onset. Russia's history points out a ceaseless desire to
be a European nation, to share with Europe its progress and its
burdens. It is within a few years that the heir to the throne first
visited the extensive Asiatic dominions. No czar had ever put foot in
them. Until the reign of Nicholas I (1825-1855), the Russian Empire
spread eastward much as the United States expanded westward, by
individual effort.

The movement began in 1558, when Ivan the Terrible granted to Gregory
Strogonof ninety-two miles of waste land on the banks of the Kama. The
new owner explored the mineral resources of the Urals, crossed the
mountains, and found himself in the kingdom of Sibir. Strogonof had
become acquainted with one Yermak or Irmak, a Cossack and captain of a
robber band known as the Good Companions of the Don. He had been   (p. 260)
condemned to death, if the government could lay hands on him, which,
on account of the sparsity of the population, was exceedingly
doubtful. Strogonof discussed with him a raid into Sibir, and the
Cossack consented, provided his pardon could be secured. Strogonof
went to Moscow and submitted his scheme to Ivan who gave his approval.
Upon his return to the Urals, Strogonof found that he had 850 men,
Russians, Cossacks, Tartars, and German and Polish prisoners of war,
all hardy adventurers. They marched east terrifying the natives with
their firelocks, and levying tribute, that is, taking whatever was
worth the trouble. They defeated the khan, and took his capital,
Sibir, on the Irtish. Yermak then visited Moscow, where he was the
hero of the day. Had he not struck at the very heart of the mysterious
continent whence so much trouble and disgrace had come upon Russia?
And had he not exacted tribute from the very people who not very long
ago held Russia under tribute.

Yermak was therefore praised and entertained and graciously told to go
ahead, Ivan had neither men nor money to spare, but he was quite
willing that these adventurers should despoil the Asiatics, instead of
holding up Russian travelers and traders. Ivan gave him a suit of
armor as a token of good will. After Yermak's return to Siberia, he
was surprised by the natives and drowned by the weight of his armor as
he was trying to escape by swimming the Irtish. (1584.) Other Cossacks
had heard of his success and followed his example. In 1587, Tobolsk
was founded on the Irtish, ten miles below Sibir.

There was little or no communication between Siberia and Moscow,   (p. 261)
owing to the distance separating them, and the successors of Ivan had
ample trouble on their hands. It was, therefore, left to the Cossacks
to make such explorations and conquests as they could. In 1619, Tomsk
was founded. Farther and farther did the Cossacks advance among the
isolated tribes. In 1632, a log fort was built where Yakoutsk now
stands, and six years later they gazed upon the broad waters of the
Pacific and planted the czar's flag on the shore of the Sea of
Okhotsk.

It was a congenial occupation for the Cossack, to roam where he
pleased and to take what suited his fancy, and he did not lack either
the skill or the courage needed by the explorer. In 1639, a party of
Cossacks under Max Perfirief, discovered the Upper Amoor, and heard
tales of such vast wealth that they hastened to Yakoutsk and placed
their discovery before Peter Petrovitch, the first Russian Governor.

Men and money were scarce, but the governor, after many efforts
managed to collect 132 men whom he placed in command of Vassili
Poyarkof, with instructions to do the best he could. The party started
on the 15th of July, 1643, and followed the usual course with the
natives with the result that he returned to Yakoutsk in June 1646,
having lost most of his men in attacks by infuriated and outraged
natives, but in possession of a fund of information, and some skins as
tribute.

During the reign of Alexis Michaelovitch (1645-1676), explorations
of the Amoor regions were pursued vigorously. A young officer
of considerable wealth, named Khabarof, offered to conduct an      (p. 262)
expedition at his own expense. This was gladly accepted, and he left
Yakoutsk in 1649. He reached the Amoor and formed a line of forts, and
met a small party among whom was the khan, who asked what his object
was. Khabarof replied that he had come to trade, but that the czar
would probably take the khan under his powerful protection in return
for a small annual tribute. The khan did not answer, and Khabarof
after burning most of the forts and leaving some of his men in
another, returned to Yakoutsk to report.

In June, 1651, he was on the way back to the Amoor, where he came in
conflict with the Manchus. He, however, forced his way, and gained for
the Russians the reputation that they were "devils, who would make
gridirons of the parents to roast the children on." At this time a
report that the Amoor region contained untold wealth reached Moscow,
where it produced an effect very similar to that felt in Spain after
the return of Columbus.

Alexis intended to send an expedition of 3,000 men to occupy and hold
this treasure grove, but he was prudent enough to dispatch an officer
to order Khabarof to Moscow, so that he might learn the facts. This
officer, Simovief left Moscow in March, 1652, and met Khabarof in
August of the following year. Leaving the command to his lieutenant
Stepanof, Khabarof obeyed the czar's call. He arrived at Moscow and
after the czar had heard his report, the expedition was given up, but
Alexis wrote to Stepanof, upon whom he conferred some honors, and told
him to continue the good work.

The interest manifested by the czar inaugurated an exploration     (p. 263)
fever among the Russian authorities. Pashkof, the Governor of
Yeniseisk started on the 18th of July, 1656, for the Amoor at the head
of 400 Cossacks; in 1658, he built a fort which was the beginning of
Nerchinsk. It was 1662 before he returned to Yeniseisk.

Unfortunately the Russians came into a clash with the Manchus, at that
time in full vigor; they had made themselves masters of China, and
their emperor, Kang-hi, was an exceptionably able and strong man. He
did not want war, but on the other hand he did not intend to suffer an
injustice.

When the government at Moscow became aware that further encroachment
would entail a war with China an ambassador, Feodor Golovin, was
dispatched to come to an understanding. He left Moscow on January 20,
1686, but took his time. Kang-hi had been notified, and ambassadors
were sent from Peking to meet Golovin. The Russian met the Chinese at
Nerchinsk on the 22d August, 1689, and on the 27th the terms of a
treaty were agreed upon. Two days later the treaty was exchanged.
Russia was compelled to withdraw from the Amoor. After this no changes
in the boundary line occurred until after the year 1847.

In 1707, Kamtschatka was annexed to Russia, and two years later the
first prisoners were sent to Siberia. They were prisoners of war and
natives of conquered European provinces who objected to Muscovite
rule. About 14,000 persons were sent the first year, but many died
from the hardships suffered on the road.

Besides Siberia, Russia in Asia consists of:

I. The Caucasus. It was Peter the Great who, in 1722, invaded      (p. 264)
Dagestan and seized the greater part of this territory. We have seen
how the mountaineers defended their liberty under Schamyl,[11] and it
was left to his son Alexander to annex it and make it part of the
Russian Empire. Including Trans Caucasia, it covers an area of 180,843
square miles,--or about that of Colorado and Utah, and contains a
population of 8,350,000.

                   [Footnote 11: See p. 209]

II. The Kirghiz Steppe. This is a country of plains, unfit for
agriculture and still inhabited by nomads who live in tents and wander
with their flocks over the 755,793 square miles of territory. They are
divided into three hordes or families, one of which surrendered to
Anne Ivanovna in 1734. In 1869 the Kirghiz, together with the Cossacks
of the Don, revolted, but in the autumn of 1870, order was restored.
For administrative purposes, it is divided into:

III. Transcaspia, which, as the name indicates, includes the region
east of the Caspian Sea. It contains an area of 383,618 square miles
with a population estimated at 352,000. Like the Kirghiz Steppe, it is
unfit for agriculture, although it contains several oases. It was
formed into a province by Alexander III. in 1881.

IV. Turkestan contains 409,414 square miles with a population of
3,341,000. The valleys of the Oxus and Jaxartes are very fertile, but
the rest of the extensive province is almost a desert. The Oxus or Amu
Daria once formed the boundary of the empires of Cyrus and Alexander.
It was conquered step by step, and after many struggles with the   (p. 265)
Turkomans and Kirghiz to whom it originally belonged.

V. The Khanates, so called because they once formed the territory of
the Khans of Khiva and Bokhara. This province embraces 114,320 square
miles with a population of 3,200,000. Both are recent acquisitions. It
was the war with Khiva, in 1872, which first drew the attention of
Europe to Russia's expansion in Central Asia. There had been some
doubts as to the wisdom of permitting Russia to add more territory to
her already enormous domain, but they had been allayed by a circular
note to the powers, issued by Prince Gortchakof, the Minister of
Foreign Affairs, on November 21, 1864. He declared that Russia had
been brought into contact with a number of half-savage tribes who
proved a constant menace to the security of the Empire, and that the
only means of maintaining order on the frontier, was to bring them
under submission. This, he said, had been done by the United States,
and was nothing but a measure necessary for self-defense.

This reasoning was self-evident, but in 1873 the press of Great
Britain asked when and where this necessity would cease. Count
Schouvalof was sent to London and in several interviews with Lord
Granville, he stated distinctly and plainly that Russia had no
intention to annex any more territory in Central Asia. He declared[12]
solemnly with regard to Khiva that "not only was it far from the
intention of the emperor to take possession of Khiva, but positive
orders had been prepared to prevent it, and directions given that  (p. 266)
the conditions imposed should be such as would not in any way lead to
the prolonged occupation of Khiva."

                   [Footnote 12: Parliamentary Papers, Central Asia.
                   1873.]

Notwithstanding this positive declaration, Khiva was annexed on the
10th of June, 1873. Four months afterwards, on the 10th of October, a
treaty was signed by the Khan of Bokhara, giving to Russia free
navigation on the Oxus, and other privileges. It has never been
formally annexed, but is to all intents and purposes Russian
territory.




XXIX--RUSSIAN METHODS. THE WAR WITH JAPAN.                         (p. 267)


At the time when the United States and the commercial powers of Europe
were discussing the opening of Japan, Russia resolved, if possible, to
forestall them. In 1847, the czar appointed a young general, Nicholas
Muravieff, as governor of Eastern Siberia. Shortly after entering upon
his office he sent an officer named Vagarof, who had explored the
Amoor River, back to it with four Cossacks to make an extensive
report. The party left Strelka in the spring of 1848, but was never
heard of again. Suspecting that they had been captured by the Chinese,
a demand was made for their surrender on the plea that they were
deserters, but the Chinese replied that they knew nothing of them.
Meanwhile Muravieff had ordered the exploration of the shore of the
Sea of Okhotsk and the mouth of the Amoor. These orders were promptly
executed, and in 1850 Lieutenant Orloff entered the river from the
sea. The following year Captain Nevilskoi, who had come out in the
_Baikal_, sent a boat up the river and laid the foundations of
Nikolayefsk and Mariinsk, thereby securing a foothold on the Lower
Amoor, knowing all the time that this was Chinese territory, and that
Russia was at peace with China. The survey of the Sea of Okhotsk   (p. 269)
was not neglected. Port Imperial on the coast of Manchuria was
discovered and occupied, and Urup, one of the Kurile Islands, was
seized. When Commodore Perry arrived off the coast of Japan, he was
watched by Admiral Poutiatine in command of the _Pallas_, _Vostok_,
_Olivutzu_ and _Menzikoff_. Aniwa Bay was seized the same year, and
Russians landed on the west coast of what is known as Saghalien, but
was known and owned by the Japanese under the name of Karafuto.

[Illustration: Village Scene]

The Crimean War gave Muravieff a pretext to violate farther the treaty
with China. He claimed that the settlements on the Pacific, as well as
the Russian ships, were in need of supplies, and that the ocean route
was closed by the allied fleets. Was it Muravieff's duty to furnish
those supplies? In that case, any reference to the ocean route was
preposterous, because it is absurd to suppose that supplies would be
sent from Eastern Siberia to the north Pacific coast by such a route;
and if he had furnished them before by the overland route through
Siberia, why, that road was open to him. What he needed was a pretext
to secure the occupation of Japan, or at least of some of its islands,
before the other powers could know of it; and for that purpose, it was
necessary to be in possession of the lower Amoor. Perry's energetic
action thwarted him; but he could not know that. What he did know was
that China was not in a condition to oppose him, and that the other
powers need not know what he was doing.

He determined to send an expedition strong enough to insure respect,
and lost no time in preparing it. Fifty barges, a steamer, and     (p. 270)
numerous rafts, a thousand Cossacks with cannon, the whole commanded
by Muravieff himself, left Shilkinsk on the 24th of May, 1854.
Following the usual custom, the expedition was accompanied by
scientific men to survey the river, prepare maps, explore the country,
and examine its resources. At ten A.M., June 8, they arrived at Aigun
where Muravieff was received by the Chinese authorities, who displayed
about the same number of armed men, but such men and such arms!
Firelocks dating from the time of Kang-hi--1689,--convinced Muravieff
that fifty Cossacks could put these braves to rout. Not caring to
arouse Chinese hostility for fear that his schemes might attract
attention, Muravieff did not resent it when the Chinese forbade him to
enter the town; he continued on his journey, and on the 27th of June
arrived at Mariinsk. After sending part of his force to Nikolayefsk,
he went on to Port Imperial where he met Admiral Poutiatine. They
discussed the situation, and Poutiatine left for Japan on the _Diana_.

Muravieff hurried back as he had come, and prepared another expedition
which he took down the river in 1855. In that year he sent three
thousand Cossacks, and five hundred colonists down the Amoor, together
with horses, cattle, provisions, and military stores. This activity
could not escape the Chinese who dispatched four officials to
Nikolayefsk to protest against the invasion of their territory. They
arrived in July, and were entertained by Muravieff with a review of
his forces; after this hint he simply dismissed them. At this time the
settlements which stood in such urgent need of supplies, were      (p. 271)
Mariinsk, which consisted of two log cabins, Nikolayefsk numbered ten,
and Castries Bay had "four badly built huts."[13]

                   [Footnote 13: Ravenstein, Russians on the Amoor.]

In a remarkably short time we hear of the indefatigable Muravieff at
St. Petersburg urging the annexation of the Amoor. He was opposed by
the czar's ministers, but succeeded in convincing the emperor that
China could offer no resistance, and that the powers need not hear of
it until it was too late. Thus he secured large supplies of men and
money. In the beginning of 1857, he was back at his post, and on the
1st of June he dispatched Colonel Ushakof with six hundred men from
Shilkinsk, and soon after followed him with a brigade of Cossack
infantry and a regiment of cavalry, to garrison the forts which he
constructed at strategic points.

Seizing the opportunity of China's distress caused by the war with
England and France, Muravieff demanded the cession of the Amoor
Valley. The Chinese were helpless. On the 28th of May, 1858, a treaty
was signed at Aigun, giving to Russia the left bank of the Amoor down
to the Ussuri, and both banks below that confluent, besides the right
to navigate the Sungari and Ussuri rivers. Russia gave absolutely
nothing in return. Meanwhile Count Poutiatine had been sent from St.
Petersburg to watch the allies and to profit by any blunder which they
or the Chinese might make. Poutiatine stopped in Japan, claiming that
the Koreans had given him the privilege of establishing a coaling
station at Port Hamilton, but knowing that Great Britain would
certainly investigate his claim, he did not press it. He tried to
seize the Japanese Island Tsushima in the southern entrance to the (p. 272)
Japan Sea, and midway between Japan and Korea; but a polite and firm
invitation from the British admiral to leave that island, and the
admiral's insistence to remain until after he had left it, spoiled
that little game. Poutiatine then proceeded to China where he proposed
to help put down the Tai P'ing rebellion in return for the cession of
Manchuria to Russia. This handsome offer was politely declined. Once
again Muravieff hurried to St. Petersburg; upon his advice the newly
acquired territory was officially annexed, and, by ukase of October
31, joined to the littoral of the Sea of Okhotsk and Kamtschatka under
the name of Maritime Province of Eastern Siberia, with Nikolayevsk as
capital. Muravieff remained in supreme command.

The tireless empire builder was again on the Pacific Coast in 1858. On
May 21, he founded Blagovestchensk and, after descending the river,
laid the foundation of Khabarofka, at the mouth of the Ussuri. In
October he was back at Kiakhta, arranging for the postal service
between St. Petersburg and the extreme east. On the 26th of August, he
was created Count Amoorsky, or Count of the Amoor, a promotion which
he had well earned. On the 31st of December, a remarkable ukase was
published, beginning "Now that Russia has regained possession of this
valuable region, etc." The entire territory of Eastern Siberia
contained 740,922 square miles, a territory equal to that of all the
Atlantic Coast States, together with Indiana, Ohio, West Virginia,
Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, and Mississippi. This did not include
the Amoor Province, which was placed under the administration of   (p. 273)
a governor and eighteen officials, who received a combined annual
salary of $18,873.60, of which the governor received $4680.

Muravieff was back at his post in 1859. Both he and Poutiatine tried
to induce the Japanese to give up Karafuto (Saghalien), but without
success. At this time there was again trouble between China and the
allied British and French, and when in 1860, a British-French force
marched on Peking, Russia had sent another empire builder, General
Ignatieff, to watch if he could not secure something. He did; when the
allies entered Peking, Ignatieff sought Prince Kung and told him that
the "foreign devils" would surely seize the country unless some strong
power compelled them to leave. Russia was willing to do this, because
she had always been fond of China; and all she asked was a strip of
outlying territory of no value to China. Prince Kung gladly signed
away the whole east coast of Manchuria, six hundred miles long; and
Ignatieff redeemed his promise by visiting Lord Elgin and Baron Gros,
the British and French plenipotentiaries. After paying them some
flattering compliments, he made the remark that the Peiho river would
freeze in a few days, and if they did not get out at once, they would
have to stay all winter in Peking. The two gentlemen finished their
business in a hurry, packed up, and left, but not without thanking
Ignatieff for his kindness and reporting the matter to their
government, which did not hear of the Russian's diplomacy until a year
later. This is how Russia extended her empire on the Pacific Coast.

For many years the efforts to secure the whole island of Karafuto  (p. 274)
continued and Japan saw that war must follow unless a sacrifice was
made. In 1875, Japan surrendered the island, in return for the Kurile
group, but the Japanese treasured in their hearts the loss and
disgrace. It was this which caused the assault upon the present czar,
when he was traveling in Japan.

In 1894 the war between Japan and China broke out, and when China,
humbled, sued for peace, Japan demanded the cession of the Liaotung
Peninsula,--where Port Arthur is located,--besides making other
conditions. When this became known, Russia, after securing the help of
Germany and France, gave Japan the "friendly advice," which was really
a threat, not to take that peninsula. Japan, single-handed, could not
fight the three powers, and gave way; but every Japanese, high or low,
young or old, was determined to pay off Russia. They bought or built
war vessels everywhere and increased their army. Russia did not like
this, and proposed that Japan should take all the islands in the
Pacific, the Philippines, Hawaii, Borneo, etc., and leave the
continent of Asia to Russia. Japan declined, and went on building
ships. In the end of 1898, Russia announced that she had "leased" the
very Liaotung Peninsula which she had prevented Japan from taking.
Japan understood, as the whole world did, that this "lease" meant
possession. The Japanese statesmen did not protest, because there was
but one protest that Russia would heed,--an appeal to arms. That was
Japan's method when, in 1899, Alexander Pavloff, the Russian minister
in Korea, secured from that government a concession in the port of
Masampo, opening into the entrance to the Japan Sea. Japan's       (p. 275)
demand was: Let Masampo go, or it means war. And Russia evacuated
Masampo, while Pavloff was told that he might take a furlough. Then
came 1900, the Boxer troubles and the international march upon Peking.
Japanese officers took note of the Russian troops, leaving the
Russians to do the same with their soldiers. Japan never ceased her
preparations. In the latter part of 1901, Marquis Ito Hirobumi visited
the United States and crossed over to England, where he proposed an
offensive-defensive alliance. British statesmen hesitated, when Ito
told them in plain terms that if no such treaty was concluded, he was
authorized to go on to Russia, and make the best terms he could for
his country.

Meanwhile Pavloff had returned to Seoul, the capital of Korea, and by
means best known to Russian diplomats, was trying to gain a foothold
on the Peninsula. Under the pretext of a timber concession, the
Russians constructed a fort on the Korean side of the Yalu
river,--where it was afterwards discovered by newspaper
correspondents. Russia had secured control of Manchuria with its
362,310 square miles and 11,250,000 population, and none of the powers
dared protest. Japan was ready. Could she allow the "peaceful"
absorption of Korea, as that of Manchuria had been accomplished? Safe
in the offensive-defensive alliance with Great Britain, Japan
approached Russia in a dignified manner, to be put off with vague
replies. After six months of patience, Japan broke off diplomatic
intercourse, and, as this is considered equal to a declaration of war,
she struck and hit hard.

[Illustration: St. Petersburg]                                     (p. 276)




XXX--RUSSIA LOSES HER PRESTIGE.                                    (p. 277)


When, in February, 1904, the world was startled by the Japanese guns
in the harbor of Chemulpo (Korea), one of Russia's well-known
diplomats, speaking in defense of his country, said: "Ours has been a
peaceful absorption." Another statesman, pleading for sympathy,
remarked pathetically: "We were unprepared for war." The two advocates
of Russia's cause spoke the truth, but they did not proclaim the whole
truth.

Ever since Muravieff Amoorsky began the peaceful absorption of
Manchuria by seizing the coastline of that province, Russia has
extended her dominions using no other weapon than her prestige, that
is, the dread inspired by her name, power, and resources. Repeated
protests from Great Britain remained unheeded, because the czar's
government was convinced that they would not be emphasized by a resort
to arms. The semi-civilized tribes of Central Asia were unable, of
course, to oppose the Russian advance; and China was justly afraid of
defying the great northern power. Thus the peaceful absorption
continued with such ease that the Russian tchinovnik ended in
believing in their country's prestige. Herein lies the principal cause
of the astounding history of the war with Japan.

Although Russia repeatedly agreed to evacuate Manchuria, her       (p. 278)
actions in the construction of railways and other roads, the opening
of mines, the enormous capital expended in creating a commercial
emporium in Dalny, and her jealousy in excluding foreigners from that
territory,--all this was ample evidence that nothing short of
compulsion would cause her to withdraw. Besides, Alexander Pavloff,
the Russian Minister in Korea, was anxious to emulate Count Cassini,
his former chief at Peking. He was constantly plotting to secure a
foothold in the Peninsula. In 1903, it was announced that a Russian
company had obtained a timber concession on the Yalu River. A few
months afterwards, some American newspaper correspondents with the
Japanese army discovered the ruins of a Russian fort on that river,
securely screened from indiscreet eyes, but in a fine position to
control the passage. That was the timber concession.

Russia's policy, therefore, was a serious menace to Japan. But Japan
did not purpose to draw ridicule by unavailing protests. Feverishly
the preparations for more emphatic action were continued; in the
latter part of 1903, Japan was ready. Safe from a possible European
intervention by her treaty with Great Britain, Japan reminded Russia
of her promise to evacuate Manchuria on October 7, and requested an
explanation for not keeping the pledge. Russia, with a blind faith in
her prestige, replied that the affair did not concern Japan but China,
whereupon Japan made a proposition concerning Manchuria and Korea which
would be acceptable. With studied contempt replies from the czar were
held back beyond the time permitted by international courtesy.     (p. 279)
Moreover their tenor was not only unsatisfactory, but was also
calculated to exasperate the proud Japanese. When the final
preparations were made, Japan instructed her minister to St.
Petersburg, to demand his passports,--an act equivalent to a
declaration of war.

The tchinovnik doubted their senses. Russia maintained that a
severance of diplomatic relations did not necessarily imply an appeal
to the sword, when the news flashed over the wires that the Russian
war vessels Varyag and Koreyetz had been blown up at Chemulpo to
escape being captured. The world was still marveling at Japan's
audacity when it was informed that three other Russian war vessels had
been disabled owing to a night torpedo attack under Admiral Togo.

Why was the Russian fleet, numerically superior to that of Japan,
divided? The answer is found in that fatal word: prestige. Pavloff in
Korea had requested the presence of the two doomed ships, to keep the
Japanese in awe. Admiral Stark lay under the guns of impregnable Port
Arthur, trusting to the prestige, when the illusion vanished. There
was still the Vladivostok squadron; it made an effort to induce Togo
to leave Port Arthur by making a raid upon the north coast of Japan,
but in vain. Beyond sinking a few unarmed merchantmen, nothing of
importance was accomplished.

The czar's choice to restore Russia's naval prestige, fell upon
Admiral Makaroff. At about the same time, General Kuropatkin, the
former Minister of War, was charged with punishing Japan for her
insolence. His departure for the Far East was theatrical. After many
genuflexions before sacred eikons, he promised to restore Russia's (p. 280)
prestige by dictating terms of peace in Tokyo.

Makaroff was less enthusiastic, and perhaps more in earnest. It is
asserted that he restored discipline in a sadly demoralized fleet. He
was enticed out of Port Arthur's shelter by a small fleet of the
enemy's cruisers sent out as a decoy. When he discovered Togo's
ironclads he returned to port, but his flagship struck a mine at the
entrance to Port Arthur and sunk. The Admiral, as well as his guest,
the noted battle painter Verestchagin, perished.

With Togo blockading Port Arthur and Admiral Kaminura guarding
Vladivostok, the Japanese secured the freedom of the sea, and began to
pour troops into Korea. This was greeted with acclamation by the
tchinovnik who, after their naval misfortunes, claimed that the
situation would soon be reversed by the army. Some Japanese soldiers
were landed openly at Chemulpo, but the bulk went ashore in a
well-concealed harbor south of the Yalu River. General Kuroki was in
command.

Meanwhile Kuropatkin was in Manchuria busy organizing the army when
not obstructed by Viceroy Alexieff. Such troops as he found were
capable of rendering good service in hunting down Chinese brigands,
but, as the sequel proved, the army had also been nurtured upon that
most indigestible material, prestige. To the wonder of Europe,--and to
a less degree of America,--Kuroki crossed the Yalu and sent the czar's
dreaded soldiers flying before him. (May 1, 1904.)

Once more, and for the last time, did the Russian fleet at Port    (p. 281)
Arthur attempt a sortie. It failed, and its fate was sealed.

While the wreckage of Russia's once proud fleet lay concealed in Port
Arthur's inner basin, the Japanese, after scouring the waters to clear
them from mines, landed troops on the Liaotung Peninsula, claimed by
Japan after the war with China, but despoiled of it by Russia's
peaceful absorption. In 1894, Port Arthur was taken in a day from the
Chinese: the Russians defended the impregnable fortress for six
months. "Our prestige demands that the enemy shall not capture Port
Arthur," cried the tchinovnik, and Kuropatkin was ordered to General
Stoessel's rescue. The attempt failed, and General Nogi could pursue
the siege without being disturbed. (June 14-15, 1904.)

A stolid, ignorant, and densely superstitious people was at war with a
rejuvenated nation keenly alive to the power of education. That is the
secret. Man for man, Russia would have won. But the resourcefulness of
the little brown man more than offset the Russian's physical
superiority. As the year 1905 dawned, the fall of Port Arthur was made
known to the world.

Slowly, but heralded by the marvels it would accomplish, the Baltic
fleet under Rojestvensky sailed to Madagascar, welcome to whatever aid
the French ally could bestow. Japan said nothing, but made a note of
it. She cleaned and scraped her sea-worn, battle-scarred vessels,
under the supervision of grim, silent Togo. Oyama, the Japanese
commander-in-chief, reenforced by the veterans of Kuroki and Nogi, was
playing with Kuropatkin until he had the game in his hand. After   (p. 282)
ten days of hard fighting, the discomfited Russians made a masterly
retreat to the Sha river, after evacuating Mukden, the cradle of the
present Chinese dynasty, (August 26-September 4, 1904.)

Kuropatkin deserved credit for the manner in which he extricated the
remains of the czar's army. Oyama did not feel safe in following up
the pursuit. His game was that of a skillful chess player. First make
sure of the result with mathematical precision, then strike. The
Japanese were deaf to the demand for brilliant dashes.

After the battle of Liao-yang, the armies seemed idle so far as news
from the front went. Oyama attacked his former antagonist on the
Shakhe River and drove the discomfited Russians beyond Tie pass.
General Kuropatkin was superseded by his former subordinate Linievitch
who, however, accomplished nothing to warrant his promotion.

Meanwhile the Baltic fleet left the hospitable shores of Madagascar,
proclaiming its search for Togo, together with the determination to
punish the impertinent Japanese. In the latter part of May, 1905,
Admiral Rojestvensky made a dash for Vladivostok through the Tsu
channel, the southern entrance to the Sea of Japan. Togo intercepted
him, and a battle followed which, in its results, stands unique in the
history of naval warfare. At a cost of three torpedo boats, 113 killed,
and 444 wounded, the Japanese sank 6 Russian battleships, 1 coast
defense vessel, 3 special service boats, and 3 destroyers, besides
capturing 2 battleships, 2 coast defense vessels, and 1 destroyer, The
losses in killed were 8,550 and over 3,000 prisoners, among them   (p. 283)
Admirals Rojestvensky and Nebogatoff, were taken to Japan. As a result
of this one-sided battle, Russia's naval power is broken. (May 27-28,
1905.)

While President Theodore Roosevelt seized this opportunity to approach
the belligerents in favor of peace, pointing out the hopelessness of
continuing the struggle to Russia and appealing to Japan's
magnanimity, the world was startled by the revolt of the Kniaz
Potemkin, a first-class battleship of the Black Sea squadron. The
mutineers found no support, and what might have proved a serious
danger to the house of Romanoff, ended by the ship being sunk in
Roumanian waters. She was recovered by the Russians.

President Roosevelt's efforts toward bringing the two powers together,
proved successful. Washington was agreed upon as the place for the
negotiations, but the plenipotentiaries, Sergius Witte and Baron de
Rosen acting for Russia, met Baron Komura and Minister Takahira, who
represented Japan, at Portsmouth, N. H., where the United States acted
as host.

The incompatibility of Japan's demands and Russia's concessions on
several occasions brought the plenipotentiaries on the verge of
rupture. With the single-mindedness born of an unselfish purpose,
President Roosevelt exerted all the personal influence he could bring
to bear upon czar and emperor with the result that the victor gave the
world an astounding lesson in magnanimity. Japan made peace possible
by withdrawing her demands for indemnity and the cession of territory
beyond that of which Russia had robbed her,--the southern half of the
island of Sakhalin, which will be once more Karafuto for the       (p. 284)
Japanese.

The terms of the Treaty of Peace were agreed upon at Portsmouth on the
29th of August 1905. The war had lasted from the 5th of February,
1904, or 572 days. Russia paid in men 375,000, in money
$1,075,000,000,--all for peaceful absorption and support of prestige.
Cassini's shrewd move, ten years before, in robbing Japan of the
Liaotung Peninsula and Port Arthur, has ended in Japan's obtaining
possession of that key to Peking, with the promise of holding it
beyond the possibility of recapture, until China recovers its manhood.
The Treaty of Peace was signed September 5, at Portsmouth, N. H.

What will be the effect of the war upon the Russian people? While the
plenipotentiaries were discussing the terms of peace, autocracy
launched a ukase calling for a consultative assembly. Russian
thinkers, however, reflect that, so long as autocracy exists and the
tchinovnik admit no other authority but that of the czar, another
ukase may revoke the doubtful boon.

No one knows what the morrow will bring, either to us or to the Slav.
Yet it seems absurd to suppose that, after the lessons of corruption
and incompetence of the present government, the educated Russians will
remain quiescent while the great empire continues on its downward
course. Mediaevalism has come into contact with the spirit of the
twentieth century, and has been found wanting. It seems as if the dawn
of a new era for Russia is at hand.




INDEX.                                                             (p. 285)


  A

  Abdul Aziz, 231.

  Abdul Hamid, 232.

  Alexander I, the Well-beloved, 197.

  Alexander II, the Liberator, 218.

  Alexander III, the Peasants' Friend, 241.

  Alexander of Battenberg, 246.

  Alexander Nevski, 60, 69.

  Alexis Michaelovitch, 141.

  Alexis, son of Peter the Great, 170.

  Andrew Bogolioubski, 54.

  Anne Ivanovna, Czarina, 175.

  Area of Russia, 14.

  Armenians, 255.

  Askold, 30.


  B

  Baskak, Tartar tax collector, 71.

  Bati, Khan of the Golden Horde, 65.

  Battle of the Oka, 102.

  Boundaries of Russia, 15.

  Boyard, noble, 56.

  Byzantium, former name of Constantinople.


  C

  Catherine I, wife of Peter the Great, 169, 171, 173.

  Catherine II, the Great, 183.

  Caucasus, The 264.

  Chouiski, Andrew, 112.

  Chouiski, Czar, 134.

  Christianity, 36, 42.

  Climate of Russia, 18.

  Constantine, 58.

  Council of Florence, attempt to unite the Roman and Greek Churches, 60.

  Crimea The, annexed, 190.

  Crimean War, 215.

  Cyril, 36.

  Czar, king, 112.

  Czargrad, city of the king.

  Czarina, wife of the czar.


  D

  Dagh Bog the sun god, 20.

  Diak, secretary, 107.

  Dir, 30.

  Dmitri Donskoi, 87.

  Dnieper, 20.

  Donskoi, of the Don, surname of Dmitri, 91.

  Douma, council of nobles, 131.

  Drujina, body-guard, 32.

  Duena, 20.

  Dvor, inclosure, 27.

  Dwina, 20.


  E

  Eikon, image of a saint, 44, 55.

  Elizabeth, Queen of England, 118.

  Elizabeth, Czarina, 178.


  F

  Feodor (Theodore), Son of Ivan the Terrible, 129.

  Feodor Alexievitch, 144.

  Finland, 26.

  Finns, 26.

  Frederick the Great, 188.


  G

  Galitch, Southwest Russia, 61.

  Gedimin, 80.

  Genghis Khan, 64.

  George Dolgorouki, 51.

  George, Grand Duke of Moscow, 83.

  Godounof, Boris, Czar, 129.

  Gosti, guest, Russian for merchant, 124.

  Goubernii, Government or province, 226.

  Greece, independence of, 209.

  Greek Church, 42.

  Gustavus Wasa, 119.


  H

  Hetman, chief of Cossacks.


  I

  Iarlikh, patent or written authorisation from the khan, 73.

  Iaropolk, 41.

  Iaroslaf II, 44.

  Igor, son of Rurik, 30, 32.

  Iouri, George, 111.

  Isiaslaf, 50.

  Ivan Kalita, 85.

  Ivan II, 88.

  Ivan III, the Great, 97.

  Ivan IV, the Terrible, 111.

  Ivan Alexievitch, 145.

  Ivan Ivanovitch, 177.


  J

  Jagellon, 80.

  Jews, persecution of the, 242.


  K

  Kalita, alms-bag, 87.

  Kazan, 119.

  Khanates, the, 265.

  Kholop, slave, 123.

  Kief, 41.

  Kirghiz Steppe, 264.

  Kniaz, duke, defender, prince, 30, 45.

  Kosciusko, Thaddeus, 191.

  Kostroma, 19.

  Kublai Khan, 68.

  Krestianine, true Christian, surname given to the peasants during
    the Tartar yoke.


  L

  Leo the Deacon, historian, 37, 39.


  M

  Mangou, grandson of Genghis Khan, 67.

  Mazeppa, 147, 158.

  Methodius, 36.

  Metropolitan, Head of the Greek Church, 56.

  Michael, Grand Duke of Tver, 75.

  Michael, first czar of the present dynasty, 135.

  Mindvog, 79.

  Minine, Kouzma, a Russian patriot, 134.

  Mir, communal village, 27.

  Moscow, Burning of, 202.

  Moujik, lit. Manikin, contemptuous word for peasant, 34.

  Mstislaf the Bold, 58.

  Mstislaf the Brave, 55.

  Murad V, 231.

  Muravieff Amoorsky, 267.


  N

  Namiestnik, ducal delegate, 106.

  Napoleon I, 197.

  Napoleon III, 213, 229.

  Nicholas I, 207.

  Nicholas II, 251.

  Nicon, Reformer, 144.

  Nihilism, 234.

  Nestor, Russian historian, 29, 32.

  Novgorod, Republic of, 29, 97.


  O

  Oktai, khan, 69.

  Olga, 42.

  Olgerd, 80.

  Oleg, 30, 41.

  Olmutz, Battle of, 198.

  Oulogenia, Code of Laws under Ivan III., 105.


  P

  Pan-Germanism, 246.

  Pan-Slavism, 245.

  Paul I, 194.

  Peace Congress, 256.

  Peipus, Lake, Battle on the Ice, 70.

  Perun, god of thunder, 27.

  Peter the Great, 145.

  Peter II, 174.

  Peter III, 179.

  Philarete, Metropolitan, father of the first Romanof, 135.

  Plemia, confederacy of tribes, 28.

  Poland, Partition of, 188.

  Poliessa, forest region, 20.

  Poniatowski, Stanislas, 187.

  Portsmouth, Peace treaty at, 284.

  Possadnik, burgomaster or commandant, 52.

  Prestige, Russia loses her, 277.

  Pskof, Republic of, 51.

  Pultowa, Battle of, 81.


  R

  Raskol, plur. Raskolnik, Religious Madmen, opponents to Nicon's
    reforms, 146.

  Roman, Duke of Volhynia, 61.

  Romanof, Anastasia, wife of Ivan the Terrible, 114.

  Romanof, Michael, elected czar, 135.

  Rurik, 29.

  Russkaia Pravda, Russian Right, 45.

  Ryndis, young nobles, 110.


  S

  St. Petersburg founded, 168.

  Sarai, Capital of the Golden Horde, 68.

  Schamyl, 209.

  Scythians, 23.

  Simeon, first Grand Duke of All the Russias, 88.

  Sineous, 29.

  Slavophil, Friend of Slavs, 230.

  Slavs, 25.

  Smerd, boor, lout.

  Sophia, Autocrat of All the Russias, 145.

  Starost, elder or mayor, 52.

  Streltsi, national guard, 121.

  Stri Bog, god of the winds, 27.

  Sviatopolk, 44, 49.

  Sviatoslaf, 35, 41.


  T

  Tamerlane, 92.

  Tartars or Tatars, 63.

  Tartartchina, Tartar Yoke, 73.

  Tcherne. Black people, name applied to the people by the nobles, 77.

  Tchelobitie, Beating of the forehead, i. e., petition, 123.

  Tchin, plur. Tchinovnik, lit. Gentlemen, now Officials, 164.

  Tilsit, meeting at, 199.

  Transcaspia, 264.

  Treaty of Berlin, 234.

  Treaty of Paris, 220.

  Truvor, 29.

  Turkestan, 264.

  Turks, 94, 231.

  Turkey, war with, 232.

  Tysatski, commandant of the militia, 52.


  U

  Ukase, imperial edict equal to law Ural Mountains, 18.

  Uzbeck, Khan, 68.


  V

  Valdai Plateau, 19.

  Varingians, Norsemen, 29.

  Vassili the Blind, 93.

  Vetche, Municipal Council, 27.

  Vitovt, 81.

  Vladimir Monomachus, 49.

  Vladimir, Saint, 41.

  Voievod, governor of a fortress, 33.

  Volga, 119.

  Voloss, god of the flocks, 27.

  Volost, county or canton, 28.

  Vsevolod, 57.


  Z

  Zemstvo, Assembly, 226.

  Zimisces, John, 38.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Russia, by R. Van Bergen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF RUSSIA ***

***** This file should be named 20880.txt or 20880.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/8/8/20880/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Christine P.
Travers and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
