The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Young Treasure Hunter, by Frank V. Webster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Young Treasure Hunter
       or, Fred Stanley's Trip to Alaska

Author: Frank V. Webster

Release Date: March 28, 2007 [EBook #20922]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNG TREASURE HUNTER ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net












The Young Treasure Hunter

Or

Fred Stanley's Trip to Alaska

BY

FRANK V. WEBSTER

AUTHOR OF "ONLY A FARM BOY," "THE NEWSBOY PARTNERS," "THE BOY FROM THE
RANCH," "BOB THE CASTAWAY," ETC.

ILLUSTRATED

          NEW YORK
          CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY
          PUBLISHERS

[Illustration: "The moose plunged on"

_Page 85_]


BOOKS FOR BOYS

_By FRANK V. WEBSTER_

12mo. Illustrated. Bound in cloth.


          ONLY A FARM BOY, Or Dan Hardy's Rise in Life
          TOM THE TELEPHONE BOY, Or The Mystery of a Message
          THE BOY FROM THE RANCH, Or Roy Bradner's City Experiences
          THE YOUNG TREASURE HUNTER, Or Fred Stanley's Trip to Alaska
          BOB THE CASTAWAY, Or The Wreck of the Eagle
          THE YOUNG FIREMEN OF LAKEVILLE, Or Herbert Dare's Pluck
          THE NEWSBOY PARTNERS, Or Who Was Dick Box?
          THE BOY PILOT OF THE LAKES, Or Nat Morton's Perils
          TWO BOY GOLD MINERS, Or Lost in the Mountains
          JACK THE RUNAWAY, Or On the Road with a Circus

_Cupples & Leon Co., Publishers, New York_




          Copyright, 1909, by
          CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY

       *       *       *       *       *

THE YOUNG TREASURE HUNTER

Printed in U. S. A.




CONTENTS


          CHAPTER                             PAGE

              I. IN NEEDY CIRCUMSTANCES         1
             II. SEEKING A JOB                  9
            III. THE BURIED TREASURE STORY     18
             IV. FRED HAS HOPES                24
              V. MRS. STULTS CONSENTS          30
             VI. THE OLD GOLD HUNTER           38
            VII. OFF FOR ALASKA                45
           VIII. AMID FROST AND ICE            53
             IX. INTO THE INTERIOR             61
              X. ATTACKED BY WOLVES            71
             XI. SHOOTING A MOOSE              78
            XII. LOST IN THE SNOW              86
           XIII. IN THE WILDERNESS             92
            XIV. THE LOST MAP                 100
             XV. IN THE CAVE                  108
            XVI. DIGGING FOR TREASURE         116
           XVII. THE SPYING INDIAN            125
          XVIII. FOLLOWED BY THE ENEMY        131
            XIX. THE ATTACK                   137
             XX. BURYING THE TREASURE         146
            XXI. CAPTURED                     153
           XXII. ANXIOUS HOURS                161
          XXIII. CALLACK'S CRUEL THREAT       168
           XXIV. DOUBLE HARDSHIP              174
            XXV. THE RESCUE--CONCLUSION       193




The Young Treasure Hunter




CHAPTER I

IN NEEDY CIRCUMSTANCES


"How are you feeling this morning, father?" asked Fred Stanley as his
parent came slowly into the dining-room, leaning heavily on a crutch.

"Not so well, Fred. My leg pained me considerable last night, and I did
not sleep much. You are up early, aren't you?"

"Yes. I am going over to the new diggings and see if I can't get a job,
so I want to start soon."

"Where are the new diggings, Fred? I hadn't heard of any. But that is
not surprising, as I don't hear news as I used to before the accident,
when I could get around among the miners."

"Why, there is a rumor that several prospectors have struck it rich near
Cartersville. They've formed a settlement and called it New Strike. I
heard they wanted boys to drive the ore carts, and I thought I'd go over
and try for a place."

"It's too bad you have had to stop school, Fred, and go to work. If I
wasn't crippled I could make lots of money at mining."

"Never mind, father. When you get well again you'll make more than ever.
And I don't mind giving up school--very much."

The last words Fred added in a lower tone of voice, for the truth was,
he greatly liked his studies, and it had been quite a sacrifice for him
to stop going to school. But when his services were needed at home he
did not complain.

Norman Stanley, Fred's father, had been injured in a mining accident
about six months before this story opens, and, though he was now
somewhat improved, he could not walk without the aid of a crutch. The
physician said he would eventually get entirely well, but the process
seemed very slow, and at times Mr. Stanley was almost discouraged.

The Stanley family, of which Fred was the only child, lived in the town
of Piddock, California. It was not far from a mining region, and within
a short distance of the coast. Mr. Stanley had been in good
circumstances when he was able to work, but since his accident, having a
large doctor bill to pay, his savings had been used up. As he could not
earn any more, the family was in needy circumstances, though,
occasionally, Fred was able to make small sums by doing odd jobs here
and there. Mrs. Stanley took in sewing, and they just managed to get
along, paying a small rent, and eating only the most common food, though
the doctor had said Mr. Stanley would recover more quickly if he could
have a special diet.

"Well, Fred," went on Mr. Stanley, "I hope some day I can send you back
to school, and perhaps to college. If only my leg would get better," and
he uttered a sigh.

"Don't worry, father. We'll get along somehow. But where is mother? I
would like to get my breakfast and hurry over to New Strike. All the
best jobs may be taken, and I'll only get a chance to be superintendent,
or something like that," and he laughed at his joke, for Fred was not a
gloomy-spirited boy.

"Your mother is not up yet, Fred," said Mr. Stanley. "She was sewing
quite late last night, and I told her to take a rest this morning. She
needed it. I thought maybe you and I could get our own breakfast."

"Of course we can, dad. It won't be the first time I have done it, for
when I went camping with the fellows I used to be cook part of the
time."

"And I haven't forgotten the time when I was prospecting in the
mountains and used to have to get my own flapjacks and coffee," added
the former miner. "I guess we can make out all right, and then you can
go see if you can strike a job. If they insist on making you part owner,
or manager of a good mine, I suppose you will have to take it."

He smiled at his son in spite of his rather gloomy feelings. But he was
sad at the thought of how hard his wife had to work to earn a little
money, while he, a strong man, save for his injured leg, could do next
to nothing.

"Oh, I guess I can stand it to take half shares in a new lead," replied
Fred. "Now if you'll set the table, dad, I'll put the kettle on, make
coffee and fry some eggs."

Mr. Stanley could manage to move slowly about the room with the aid of
his crutch, and by degrees he had the table set. Meanwhile Fred had made
a fire in the kitchen stove, and the kettle was soon humming, while he
ground the coffee, cut some slices of bacon, and got the fresh eggs from
the cupboard.

In the midst of these operations Mrs. Stanley, a little woman with
slightly gray hair, but a sweet face and kindly, laughing blue eyes,
came downstairs.

"Well!" she exclaimed. "You're ahead of me this morning, aren't you?"

"I thought you would like to rest a bit," said her husband. "That is why
I did not call you."

"Oh, I'm not so tired. I slept well, and I wanted to be up early and get
Fred's breakfast, for he has quite a journey ahead of him."

"I wish he didn't have to take it," murmured Mr. Stanley to his wife
when Fred was out of the room. "If I only could get back to work
myself."

"Now, Norman, I thought you promised me you wouldn't worry."

"I'm not, but----"

"Yes, you are. Now please don't do it any more. We are getting on very
nicely, and I think Mrs. Robinson will pay me well for the sewing I did
for her last night. She is very much pleased with my work."

"I wish you didn't have to work."

"Oh, my! I don't! What a queer world it would be if no one had to work.
I just love to be busy," and she laughed joyously, though, to tell the
truth, she was still weary from her toil of the night before. Fred heard
his mother's voice and looked in from the kitchen.

"Breakfast will soon be ready, Mrs. Stanley," he said in imitation of a
servant girl they had had when they were in better circumstances. "The
water is jest comin' on to a bile, ma'am, an' the eggs am almost done,
ma'am."

"That's just what Sarah used to say," remarked Mrs. Stanley. "It sounds
quite natural. Now, Fred, you come in and sit down and I'll finish
getting the meal."

"No, indeed, mother, let me do it. Pretend you are a visitor, and I'll
bring the eggs and toast in, piping hot for you."

"No, Fred. I'll do it."

The boy was so much in earnest that his mother gave in, and with a laugh
seated herself by her husband's side, while Fred rattled away among the
dishes out in the kitchen as if he was a regular Chinese cook, which
many families in California keep in preference to a woman.

"Do you feel any better this morning, Norman?" asked Mrs. Stanley.

"Not much. Perhaps a little. It is very slow."

In spite of herself tears came into the eyes of Mrs. Stanley at her
husband's misfortune, but she turned her head away so he would not see
them.

"Here we are!" cried Fred suddenly, as he came in with a platter of
bacon and eggs in one hand, and some nicely browned toast, on a plate,
in the other.

"Grub call!" he added, in imitation of the camp cry.

"Well, you did get up a nice breakfast," complimented his mother.

"I'll bring the coffee in a minute," added the boy as he went back to
the kitchen. "You dish out, mother."

The little family gathered around the table, and soon Mr. Stanley had
temporarily forgotten about the pain in his leg, while he told Fred
something of how to drive an ore cart.

"Perhaps I'll not get a chance at one, dad."

"Oh, yes, you will. If you see any old miners there, at the new
diggings, just mention my name, and they'll help you. They all know me,
for I've prospected with a number of them, and grub-staked lots of 'em.
Yes, and some of them have grub-staked me."

Grub-staked, it may be explained, means that a man with money provides a
poor miner with food or "grub" and an outfit to hunt and dig for gold.
If the miner finds a good lead, or mine, a large share of it goes to the
man who grub-staked him.

Mrs. Stanley placed two eggs and some toast on her husband's plate, and
was about to help Fred to the same quantity, when she noticed that her
son was engaged on a big dish of oatmeal.

"Don't you want some eggs?" she asked.

"Don't care for 'em," replied Fred quickly. "I'd rather have oatmeal. It
will stick by me longer, if I get a job to-day."

The truth was there were only four eggs in the house, and no money to
send out and buy more. And Fred wanted his mother to have the remaining
two. So he took oatmeal, though he did not like it.

"Why, Fred!" exclaimed his mother. "You always used to like eggs. Why
don't you take them? I don't feel very hungry."

"Those eggs were cooked especially for you, mother," said the boy. "If
you don't eat them I'll think you don't like my way, and I'll leave."

His mother laughed, but, once more, there came a mist of tears to her
eyes. Slyly she tried to put one of the eggs on Fred's plate, but he
would not let her.

"This toast is fine, if I did make it myself," said Fred, "and the bacon
isn't half bad," he added as he took several slices, for there was
plenty of that. "Guess I'll take some along for my dinner, as I'll not
come back until night--if I get a job."

"That's so, Fred, I must see if there is anything in the house for your
lunch. I--I don't believe I'll have any money until Mrs. Robinson pays
me. I'll take her work home right after breakfast."

"A light lunch will do for me, mother. I can get some grub from one of
the miners, if I run short."

This was true enough, for the gold-diggers would share their last crust
with a hungry traveler.

The meal was soon over, and, with a small package of bread and bacon,
and a piece of pie, saved from the day before, Fred Stanley started off
to look for work.




CHAPTER II

SEEKING A JOB


From Piddock, where Fred lived, to New Strike was about eight miles,
over the mountains. It was a hard journey, but the boy set off on it
with a light heart, whistling merrily, for he was hopeful of getting a
job, and he knew that if he did, there would be more happiness at home,
since there was a dire shortage of money.

"I ought to get at least five dollars a week and my board," thought
Fred. "If I do, I can save nearly four and send it home, and that will
help out a lot. Poor dad, it's hard for him to be crippled the way he
is. And I wish mother didn't have to work so hard. She is getting more
gray than she ought to. I wish there was some work in Piddock. If I get
a job over here I'll have to stay all the week, and can only go home
Saturday night. But there's not much doing in Piddock."

This was true. The town had once been quite an important one, but the
diggings near it had been exhausted, and the mining population had, in
a large part, moved away. There were some mines in the vicinity, that
were still worked, but they did not pay very well.

Shortly after Mr. Stanley's accident Fred had secured a place in the
general store in Piddock, but, when the population diminished there was
hardly enough work for the proprietor himself, and he had to discharge
Fred, though he regretted it, for the boy was bright and quick, and a
great help to him.

After that Fred tried in vain to get a steady position. He worked for a
few days driving a team for a man, and occasionally did odd jobs for one
of the merchants in town, or for some of the residents, but the pay was
poor, and he seldom had three full days' work a week.

He had heard of the unexpected prosperity that had come to New Strike,
and, knowing that there is usually plenty of work in a new mining camp,
he determined to go there and see what he could find.

As Fred reached the mountain trail, leading to New Strike, he saw that
it had been well traveled. On both sides of the narrow road were
evidences that many teams had passed that way recently, for the refuse
of camp stuff, broken boxes and barrels, and things that the miners had
thrown away as useless, littered the ground.

As Fred made a turn in the road, he saw, just ahead of him, an old man,
mounted on a small donkey. The man's legs were so long, and the donkey
so little, that the rider's shoes nearly touched the ground.

Either the animal was lazy, or it was unable to carry the load on its
back,--for the man had a big bundle on the saddle before him,--and the
donkey went at a very slow pace. So slow, in fact, that Fred soon caught
up to the rider.

"Good-morning," the boy said.

"Ah, stranger, good-morning," was the man's answer. "I see you are
headed for the same place I am."

"I don't know whether it's the same place or not, but I'm going to New
Strike," said Fred.

"So am I, if this donkey lasts the trip out. He's awful slow, stranger.
What might your name be?"

"Fred Stanley."

"Where you from?"

"Piddock."

"Hum. Well I'm Bill Gardner. Old Bill Gardner, they mostly calls me."

"And where are you from?" asked Fred, thinking it only polite to
manifest some interest in the rider.

"Me? Oh, I ain't from nowhere in particular. I make my home wherever I
happen to drop my pick and shovel. I'm a prospector," and Fred noticed
that, in addition to his bundle, the old man had a set of mining tools.

"Are you going to locate at New Strike?" asked Fred.

"That's what I am. I heard there was some rich pockets there, and I want
to get my share. G'lang there, you jack rabbit!" and the man jerked the
donkey's reins.

"That's a queer name for a donkey," commented Fred.

"Well, this is a queer donkey. I call him a jack rabbit because he's so
different. He wouldn't jump if you fired a cannon off right under him."

"Did you ever try it?"

"No, but he stood right near a blast one day, when it went off before I
was ready for it, and all he done was to wiggle one ear a bit, as though
a fly had bit him. Oh, he's the slowest donkey I ever saw, and I've seen
some pretty lazy ones. But do you expect to do any prospecting in New
Strike? Where's your outfit?"

"I haven't any."

"Guess you'll find it pretty hard to pick up one in the camps. Every
man'll want his own."

"Oh, I don't expect to look for gold."

"What are you going to look for then?"

"A job. I heard they wanted drivers for the ore carts at the stamp
mills, and I thought I might fill the bill."

"I guess you could, if the places aren't all taken. But, why don't you
try mining?"

"I don't believe I'm old enough."

"Oh, yes, you are. I came to California, 'way back in '49, when I was
only a boy, and I've been mining ever since."

"My father was a miner," said Fred.

"Was he? What's his name?"

"Norman Stanley."

"What! Norman Stanley, who used to work in the Eagle's Claw mine?"

"Yes," replied the boy, who had often heard his father speak of the mine
mentioned.

"Well, well! I know him like a brother. Just tell him you met old Bill
Gardner, and he'll remember me all right."

"I will."

"And I'll speak a good word for you when we get to the new diggings,"
went on the old man. "I know every miner in these parts worth knowing.
G'lang there, Kangaroo."

"I thought you said the donkey's name was Jack Rabbit."

"No, that's not his name. You see I call him something different every
time."

"Why?" inquired Fred.

"Well, I think one name gets sort of tiresome for an animal. And then I
think, if I call him a different name every time, he'll think maybe I'm
somebody else, and he'll go faster. He knows me so well he won't pay any
attention to me, and he knows I won't hit him. But if I call him a
different name, he may think there's a different man on his back, and he
may run a bit."

"He doesn't seem to be going to."

"No, I guess not. G'lang there, Hippopotamus!"

That name seemed to have no effect, either, and, with an exclamation of
disgust, the old miner settled back in the saddle and let the donkey
take its own time.

Fred found he could easily keep up with the small animal, and the miner
chatted pleasantly until they came to New Strike. Then, at the
suggestion of Mr. Gardner, the boy went to the superintendent of the
stamp mills, to apply for a job.

"Let me know how you make out," said the miner, as he was about to part
from the boy.

"Where will I find you?"

"Oh, I'm going to put up at the hotel. There's only one, so you won't
have much trouble finding me. Just ask for Old Bill Gardner, and
anybody'll point me out. Well, good luck."

"Thank you," answered Fred, as he started toward the stamping mills, the
thundering noise of which could be heard for a long distance.

"Well, what can I do for you?" asked the superintendent sharply, as Fred
entered the office.

"Do you want any boys to drive ore carts? I heard you did."

"We did, but we filled the last place about an hour ago."

Fred's heart sank. If he had been a little earlier, or if he had started
sooner, he might now have had a good job.

"Is there anything else to do around here?" he asked. "I would be glad
to get work of any kind."

"I'm afraid I haven't anything for any one as young as you."

"I am quite strong, though I am only seventeen years old."

"Yes, I must admit you seem a sturdy lad, but, I am sorry to say, I
can't give you any work. If you leave your name and address I'll send
for you, when there is anything."

"Thank you," replied Fred, and he wrote them on a piece of paper the
manager gave him.

"If you were a man now, I could give you work in the mine. But I can't
put boys in there. Have you had any experience in mining?"

"No, but I know something about it from hearing my father tell about it.
He is a miner."

"What is his name?"

Fred told him, and found that, while the manager did not know Mr.
Stanley, he had heard of him.

"I wish, for your father's sake, I could give you work," he said. "I'll
keep you in mind, and you shall have the first job that is open."

"Thank you. I shall try some other places here."

"I would, if I were you, and you can refer to me."

"That is very kind of you."

Fred bade the manager good-morning, and started off to see if there was
not work elsewhere for him. But he found that either all the places were
filled, or that, when there was work, it was of such a nature that he
could not do it.

Somewhat discouraged, he sat down in a shady place to eat his simple
lunch, and, after a drink from a spring, he felt refreshed.

Early that afternoon he had exhausted the possibilities of work in New
Strike.

"I think I'll start back home," he said. "There's no use bothering to
look up Mr. Gardner."

The truth was he disliked to tell the old miner he had not succeeded in
getting work. So Fred started off on his long tramp back to Piddock.

But, as he was passing along the main, and, in truth, the only street of
the town, a voice hailed him.

"Hold on there, Fred," was the cry, and he turned to see the old miner
beckoning to him, from in front of the "Imperial Hotel," as a sign in
front of the one-storied building indicated it to be. "Wait a minute. I
want to speak to you!"




CHAPTER III

THE BURIED TREASURE STORY


Fred turned and walked toward the hotel, the old miner advancing to meet
him.

"Well," asked Mr. Gardner, "how'd you make out?"

"I didn't make out at all."

"Pshaw! That's too bad. What are you going to do now?"

"Go back home."

"I wish I could help you. Do you need work very much?"

"Well, I have to help support the house since my father met with that
accident."

"That's so. Shucks! Why ain't I rich? Then I could help my old friend."

"I don't think my father would take money that he or I did not earn."

"No, that's right, he wouldn't. But if I was rich I could give you a
job. As it is I can't do any more than offer to grub-stake you, or let
you come prospecting with me."

"Thank you very much for the offer, but I don't believe I could do it.
We need money right away, and I must earn it--somehow."

"But how are you going to?"

"That's what I don't know," and Fred spoke a little discouragedly. "I
must try some other camp, I suppose."

"Yes, I guess that's the only way. But say, won't you come in and have
some lunch with me? I'm just going to sit down."

"No, thank you. I must be getting home. I have quite a long walk."

"Oh, come on. It won't take long, and you'll feel all the better for
having eaten something. They don't set a very good table here. Everyone
is too busy thinking about gold mines, to care much about grub. I'd lend
you my elephant to get home on, only you can walk faster than he'll
carry you."

"Your elephant?"

"Yes, that's my latest name for the donkey."

"Oh, I understand."

"Come on in and have lunch," insisted the old miner again.

Fred did not need much urging. The truth was he was quite hungry, for he
had not eaten a hearty breakfast, and his lunch was not very
substantial. So he followed Mr. Gardner into the hotel, or what answered
for one, and soon they were seated at a rough table, where the food, if
not very dainty, was good, and there was enough of it.

"So your folks need money, do they?" asked Mr. Gardner when they were
drinking their coffee.

"Well, I fancy it would come in handy in 'most any family," answered
Fred with a smile.

"That's what it would. I could use a bit more myself. But I may strike
it rich here. If I don't, I may have a try for the Stults treasure. I
sure would, without stopping here, if I wasn't so old and stiff, and
wasn't afraid of the cold."

"The Stults treasure?" asked Fred. "What's that, and where is it? Is
there any chance of me getting a share?"

"I don't know. There might be," replied the miner, more seriously than
Fred thought he would answer, for, at first, the boy thought his
companion was joking.

"Is there really a treasure hidden around here, Mr. Gardner."

"Around here? No, only the gold in the mines, and that is hard to get
out. The Stults treasure, that I referred to, is many miles away."

"Where is it?"

"In Alaska."

"Alaska?"

"Yes, and the coldest part, too. I'll tell you what I know of it, but
don't hold me responsible."

"I'll not."

"Very well then. The story is more or less known, but I can't say as
much for the location of the treasure. Several have tried their hand at
locating it, but had to give it up.

"It appears that an old miner, named Max Stults, went to Alaska, in the
early days of the gold discoveries there, with a few companions. They
made their way up the Yukon river as far as where Circle City now is.
Then they went off into the mountains, for, it seems, the old man had a
curious dream that he would find gold in a certain place.

"His companions laughed at him, for it was outside the gold-bearing
region, and, finally, they all deserted him. Nothing more was heard of
Stults for a long time. One day, so the story goes, a man, half dead
from exposure, staggered into the camp, which was the beginning of what
is now Circle City.

"This man, who turned out to be Stults, told a strange story. He said he
had discovered a wonderful treasure of gold, in the bed of a river that
had changed its course. There were many big nuggets of the pure metal he
had picked up, he said."

"Why didn't he bring it with him?" asked Fred.

"He tried to, but he was attacked by a band of savage Alaskan Indians,
who tried to get the gold away from him. He had it in the mountains, and
managed to escape, coming to the camp for help."

"Did they give it to him?"

"They would have, but, unfortunately, just as they were setting out to
find the buried treasure, Stults died."

"And they never found the gold?"

"They never found it. Stults had a sort of map, showing the location of
it, but no one could make head or tail of that map after he was dead.
Several parties made the attempt, but they all failed. Some were frozen
to death, and others were driven from the country by the savage Indians.
So, up to the present time, no one has found the Stults treasure, as far
as I know."

"What became of the map?"

"Oh, that, and a few personal belongings of the old German gold hunter,
were sent to his widow. I heard that she raised money and sent out an
expedition after the gold, for she was familiar with her husband's
handwriting and understood what certain words on the map meant, which
was more than those who first saw it knew. But it fared no better than
the others. So the treasure must be there still. Now if you only had a
share of that, you and your folks wouldn't have to worry."

"No, indeed, but I guess the chances are very small for me finding that
gold, even if I could go to Alaska, which is impossible."

"Yes, I am afraid so. Still, when you grow up you may want to have a try
for it. I think Mrs. Stults is living yet, and, I understand, she has a
standing offer of half the treasure to whoever will find it."

"Is that so? Where does Mrs. Stults live?"

"The last I heard she was in Denville, California."

"Denville? Why that is not more than twenty-five miles from Piddock!"
exclaimed Fred, a sudden idea coming into his mind.

"So near as that? Well, why don't you go and see her, get a copy of the
map, and hunt for the gold?" and the old miner laughed as if it was a
joke.

"Maybe I will," replied Fred, in a curiously quiet voice, as he rose to
leave the dining-room of the hotel.




CHAPTER IV

FRED HAS HOPES


"How long will it take you to get home?" asked Mr. Gardner of Fred, as
he accompanied him toward the street.

"Oh, about three hours. I'm a pretty fast walker, and it's mostly down
hill."

"Then you'd better take my tame snake."

"Your snake? Oh, you mean the donkey."

"Yes, I think he would go pretty well down hill. He could slide most of
the way. Better let me get him for you. You can send him back whenever
you get ready. I shan't want him for a week or so."

"Thank you very much, but I think I'll walk."

"Well, maybe you'll get home a little sooner, even if it is down hill.
Stop and see me whenever you're in this direction. I don't expect to go
to prospecting right away, and I'm going to make this hotel my
headquarters."

"Thank you, Mr. Gardner, I will."

"And give my regards to your father. I'd like to see him."

"I will do so, but I'm afraid you can't see him unless you call. He is
not able to get very far from the house."

"Then I'll try to call. Don't forget to say that Old Bill Gardner was
asking for him. And if he wants to have a try at the Stults treasure,
why, I'll give him a letter of introduction to the widow. I know her."

"Do you?" asked Fred eagerly. "Then perhaps you would give me a letter?"

"Give you one? Why, you don't expect to have a try for it; do you?"

"I don't know," replied the boy seriously. "I would like to talk to my
father about it. But I have another scheme in mind. If I had a letter to
Mrs. Stults, she might be able to tell me where I could get work. I
believe you said she had an interest in some mines."

"She has, and she might be able to get you a place. I did not think of
that. But Denville is quite a way off."

"Well, I may have to go quite a distance before I can get a job."

"All right. Wait a few minutes and I'll write you a letter of
introduction to Mrs. Stults. She is rather a peculiar German woman,
slow-going, and she doesn't make her mind up in a hurry."

"Then I will give her plenty of time to consider matters, Mr. Gardner."

In a little while, charged with messages of remembrance to his father,
and bearing the letter of introduction to the widow, Fred was on his way
home. He stepped out at a quick pace, for in spite of his long walk that
morning he did not feel tired, as he was busy thinking of a certain
matter.

You have probably guessed that it was the buried treasure, though Fred
had only the most hazy notion where it was, and he knew that it was
almost entirely out of the question for him to go in search of it.
Nevertheless, as do all lads, he had hopes, and it was these hopes which
made the way seem short to him, so that he did not mind the long
mountain trail.

"Well, Fred, any luck?" asked his father, when he got home, about dusk.

"No, dad," yet the answer was not given in a despondent tone.

"I was afraid you wouldn't have. A new digging is usually quickly
overrun with miners, and there are two applicants for every place."

Fred described the incidents of the day, and gave his father the message
from Mr. Gardner.

"Yes, I remember him very well," said the miner. "He was a peculiar
man."

"He is yet," and Fred told of the various names applied to the little
donkey.

"That's just like Old Bill Gardner," commented Mr. Stanley.

"You'll not have to go without your supper, Fred," said his mother,
coming in at that moment. "I have a nice meal for you."

"That's good. I have a fine appetite."

"I'm glad of it. Mrs. Robinson paid me more for the sewing than I
expected, and I got a little treat for you. I made some tapioca pudding.
We haven't had any in a long time."

"That's so, mother, but I can get along without it."

"You'll not have to, to-night."

Mr. Stanley's face flushed. He keenly felt the position he was in--that
of a man unable to support himself, much less his family. If only his
lameness would leave him! For there was no work for a lame man in
Piddock.

During the meal Fred was so busy thinking that several times his mother
had to ask him the same question twice. When this occurred, after she
had asked him if he was ready for the pudding, a dish of which he was
very fond, she exclaimed:

"Well, Fred! Something must be the matter. You are not ill; are you?"

"No, mother."

"Then of what are you thinking?"

"I'll tell you," said Fred, with sudden determination. "I am thinking of
a curious story I heard to-day."

"A story? What about?"

"About treasure, buried in the mountains of Alaska."

Then Fred told what Mr. Gardner had related to him about the gold left
by Stults.

"I have heard that story several times," said Mr. Stanley, when Fred had
finished the account, "but it was always from men in whom I could place
no confidence."

"Do you think Mr. Gardner is telling the truth, father?"

"I place more reliance on the story now than I ever did before," replied
the old miner. "You can generally depend on what Old Bill tells you."

"Then you think there might be treasure there?"

"I believe there might have been. Whether it is there still is another
question. Why, Fred, you weren't thinking of going after it; were you?"

"I was, father."

Though the boy spoke quietly the words startled his parents.

"You were!" exclaimed Mr. Stanley.

"What, Fred! Go away off to Alaska, and freeze to death on an iceberg?"
asked his mother.

"Oh, I guess I could stand the cold, mother. I could wear a fur suit,
like the Eskimos. But whether I could find the gold is, as father says,
another question. How much do you think would be there, dad?"

"It is utterly impossible to say. I have heard various amounts
mentioned, from as high as a million to as low as a thousand dollars.
But I think, from the stories current at the time of the death of
Stults, that it must be many thousands of dollars."

"So do I, father, and I would like to go after it."

"You don't appreciate what that means, Fred," said Mr. Stanley. "In the
first place the treasure, if there is any, is in a desolate place, hard
to get at, once you are in Alaska. Then Alaska is no easy place to
reach, and it takes more money to get there than we shall ever have, I'm
afraid. Another thing: you would have no right to go after the treasure.
It belongs to the widow of Stults."

"I would have a right to search for it, if she gave me permission, as
she has others."

"Yes, but you do not know her, and I doubt if any one knows where she
is. No, Fred, it is out of the question."

Fred drew something from his pocket.

"I admit it may be impossible for me to go after the treasure," he said,
"but part of the objections can be overcome. I know where Mrs. Stults is
now, and I have a letter of introduction to her," and he showed the
epistle given him by Mr. Gardner.




CHAPTER V

MRS. STULTS CONSENTS


Fred's announcement took his parents completely by surprise. Mr. Stanley
extended his hand for the letter, and read it over slowly.

"That ought to get you a hearing, at any rate," he said at length. "I
understand that Old Bill Gardner is quite well acquainted with the widow
of the man who buried the fortune to save it from the Alaskan Indians.
But, Fred, don't build your hopes too high. I don't see how you are
going to get to Denville, and, even if Mrs. Stults should consent to
allow you to hunt for the treasure, how are you going to do it?"

"I thought I might get some of your friends interested, father, and we
could form an expedition to go to Alaska."

"But that will take considerable money."

"So it does to start a mine, and this is just as sure as a mine is."

"I admit that. But whom could you get?"

"I thought you might be able to propose some one. You see, father,
there is no use of me staying around here. There is no work to be had in
Piddock, and if I have to go off some distance to look for a job, I
might as well go a little farther, and hunt for the treasure."

"But Alaska is a good way off."

"Not so very far."

"You'd think so, if you had to walk," added his mother. "Besides, Fred,
I hate to think of you going off to that terrible place."

"But think of it, mother! I might come home with a fortune in gold! Then
you wouldn't have to work any more, and dad could have better treatment,
so he would get well."

Fred spoke earnestly, and there were tears in the eyes of his father and
mother at his words. He wanted so much to help them, yet he could do so
little.

"It might be done," said Mr. Stanley, musingly, after a pause. "I
suppose I could talk to some old miners I know, and get them interested.
They place a good deal of confidence in me, and they would believe
anything Old Bill Gardner said. But I don't see, at present, Fred, how
you are going to get to see Mrs. Stults. The railroad fare costs more
than we can afford."

"I can walk it, father."

"What? Walk twenty-five miles--yes, fifty, for it would mean that."

"Oh, I could do it. But I may be able to get some work, and earn my
car-fare."

"Well," said Mr. Stanley, after thinking it over, "the matter will have
to be discussed considerably more at length, before I can consent to let
you do anything."

"May I go see Mrs. Stults, dad?"

"Yes, if you can arrange it. I have been promised a little job as
watchman at the old Owl mine. There is a lawsuit over it, and the court
has ordered that it be guarded, pending a settlement. The wages are not
much, but it is about all I can do. The offer only came to me this
afternoon. With what I can earn there, and with what your mother takes
in, I think we can spare you for a few days, if you want to try and see
Mrs. Stults. But, if you walk, you must take at least two days at it. I
don't want you to get sick."

"I don't either, dad. I'll go slow, so I'll be in good shape to start
for Alaska with the expedition."

"I'm afraid it will be a good while before the expedition starts, my
son."

But Fred had no doubts to worry him. He felt confident that he would
succeed, and he did not consider the many obstacles in the way. He only
looked ahead, and saw himself, in fancy, bringing home a great treasure,
to delight his father and mother.

Fred mapped out a plan for himself. Now that his father had a little
work, the boy did not worry so much about matters at home. He decided he
would try, harder than ever, to get odd jobs to do, so that he might
earn money enough for his railroad fare to Denville. In this he was more
successful than he hoped. In about a week he had the necessary cash, and
then, on second thoughts, as there was no great hurry, he decided to
walk after all.

So, taking only part of the money he had earned, and giving the rest to
his mother, he set out, one fine morning, on his long walk.

He had cash enough to buy his meals, and he knew he could find sleeping
places in the mining camps, where he would have to pay nothing. In this
way, should his mission prove a failure, as far as the widow was
concerned, he would not be out much.

Fortunately for Fred the weather continued good, and, in less time than
he had calculated, he arrived at Denville. Everyone knew where Mrs. Max
Stults lived, and, after having had his breakfast, on the third day
after leaving home, Fred called at the house.

"Vell, vot it is?" asked Mrs. Stults, when he introduced himself.

"I have a letter of introduction from Mr. William Gardner," said Fred,
extending the missive.

"I don't knows such a man as dot."

"Don't know Mr. Gardner--Old Bill Gardner?" and Fred began to feel
disappointed, thinking he had made a mistake.

"Oh, so! You means dot Old Bill! Ach! Yah! I knows him vell. Vot you
say, he has wrotten me a letters?"

"It's about that Alaska treasure."

"Oh, dot treasure! I wish I never hear of him! He kill mine poor
husband, und he is more bodders to me as everyding; dot treasures! Vait;
I reads der letter."

Slowly adjusting a large pair of glasses, she carefully spelled out the
missive. Her face took on a more kindly look, and, when she had finished
it, she said:

"Vell, Fred, I do 'most anyding for you, after I read dot letter from
Old Bill. My husbands vos very fond of Bill. Vot it is you vants?"

"I would like to get a map of where the treasure is buried, and have you
tell me all you can about it."

"So? Vell, I don't know vere it is, only vot der map says. But listen,
how is a boy like you going to hunt for dot treasure? Maybe it don't be
dere no more. Maybe dose Indians vos took it. Ach! My poor husband! Dot
treasure vos der death of him, und I don't vant to see it kills any
more beples."

"Well, I shall have to take that chance, I suppose," said Fred. "But are
you willing I should hunt for it?"

"How can a boy like you vos, all alone, find somedings vot lots of mens
has failed to find?"

"I expect to have some men help me. My father is an old miner, and he
will advise me. Probably he would go, only he is lame."

"So? Dot's different alretty yet, if your fader vos a miner. Den you
knows somedings about der trouble. Und maybe you could get a party to
hunt it, only der last party vot vent for it vos frozen prutty bad, und
dey comes back midout der gold."

"Have you the map?" asked Fred, anxious to see the document.

"Yah, but if I consents to let you search, I vill only give you a copy.
If you don't come back, my map vould be lost. Maybe it vould be better
if it vos lost, den noboddies vould try for dot treasure, any more."

"If it's there it ought to be found, Mrs. Stults. The gold is no good
buried out of sight."

"Dot's so. Vell, maybe I gives you a copy of der map. I have to dink it
ofer. You comes back in an hour, und I lets you know."

Fred was anxious to know right away, but he could not very well urge
the widow to hasten her decision. So he went out and wandered about the
streets, occasionally looking at a clock in a jeweler's window, to see
if the hour was not up. He was back probably a minute or so ahead of the
time.

"Vell," said Mrs. Stults slowly, after she had admitted him, "I haf
considered it, und I am villing dot you should haf a try for der
treasure."

"And can I have a copy of the map?"

"Yah. Widout it you could do noddings. I vill haf my lawyers draw up a
copy for you, und you also has to sign a papers."

"What kind of a paper?"

"You must promise to bear all of der expenses of der expedition, you und
your friends, und I must have half der treasure, if you finds him. Vill
you do dot?"

"That I will, Mrs. Stults."

"Den come here dis afternoon, und I vill haf der map copy und der papers
ready for you. You vos a smart boy. Maybe you vos succeed vere der oders
fail. Anyhow I trust you, because of der letter from Old Bill. Now come
back dis afternoon. Good-by, Willy. Vos dot your name?"

"No, my name is Fred--Fred Stanley."

"Vell, Fred, den. Vos you any relations to dot man vot discovered many
t'ings in Africa?"

"You mean Henry M. Stanley?"

"Yah."

"No. I think not."

"Vell, anyhow, maybe you vos be as better a discoverer as him. Come dis
afternoon."




CHAPTER VI

THE OLD GOLD HUNTER


Fred thought the hour would never arrive when he might again call on
Mrs. Stults. But, of course, it came around in due course, and he was
there on time. He found the widow seated in her parlor, with a bundle of
papers on a table near her, and a man sitting in a chair by a window.

"Here is dot Fred boy, vot I tell you about," said Mrs. Stults to the
man.

"Ah, yes. He seems quite young to undertake such work as hunting for the
lost treasure."

"Dot's vot I tells him."

"I'll grow older," remarked Fred, with a smile, "and I am used to hard
work and exposure. I have done considerable camping out."

"Yes, but not in such a cold country as Alaska, young man."

"No, sir, but I expect to prepare for it."

"Dis is mine lawyer," explained Mrs. Stults, "Mr. Ackerman. He vill make
out der papers."

"Mrs. Stults has told me what you want to do," went on Mr. Ackerman. "I
see no objection to it, provided you can get your father or some other
men interested. I have drawn up an agreement by which you are required
to give Mrs. Stults half the gold you discover."

"I am willing to do that."

"Then if you will sign it, I will give you a copy of the map, and such
directions as the late Mr. Stults left. I must warn you that they are
not very clear, and, even with the aid of the map, many men have tried
to find the gold, but have failed."

"I may fail also," admitted Fred, "but I am going to try."

"That is the right spirit. I wish you all success."

The papers were signed, a duplicate being given Fred. Mrs. Stults
affixed her name, the lawyer put his down as a witness, and Fred
received a copy of the map, and some directions how to find the gold. He
glanced over the latter, and had to admit that they were rather vague.
He hoped, however, when he was on the scene, to make them available.

"I'll let you know when we start, Mrs. Stults," he said. "I can't tell
how soon I can get some men interested."

"Oh, dot's all right," replied the German widow. "It don't make so much
difference ven you vos start, as it does ven you comes back. Dot's vot
I vant to know--ven you comes back, mit der gold."

"Yes, that is the main part," added the lawyer. "Mrs. Stults has allowed
several persons to hunt for the gold, but, so far, not one has come
anywhere near finding it."

"Maybe I'll have better luck," said Fred, as he bade the lawyer and the
widow good-by, and took his departure for home.

He had been more successful than he dared to hope, in getting the map,
and his first thought was that he would use what little remaining money
he had, and ride as far on the railroad as it would take him. He wanted
to get home quickly with the news.

Then he reflected that there was no special hurry; that it would take
some little time to organize an expedition, and he would need all the
money he had. So he decided to walk back, taking his time, so as to
arrive in good condition.

But, unconsciously, perhaps, the thought of the treasure and the fact
that he was now in a position to start after it, quickened his steps,
and he made the return trip in much less time than he had spent on the
first half of his journey.

"Well, Fred!" exclaimed his father, as his son entered the house, "we
didn't expect you until to-morrow. I suppose you couldn't reach any
agreement with the widow, and had to come back."

"No, dad, I was successful."

"You don't mean to say she gave you the map?"

"Not exactly the map, but a copy of it, which is just as good."

"And permission to hunt for the treasure?"

"Yes, dad."

"Oh, Fred! Are you going off to that terrible cold country?" asked his
mother, who came into the room just then, and heard the closing part of
the conversation.

"Well, mother, don't you think it's worth trying for? Think of getting
thousands of dollars in gold!"

"Yes, but it wouldn't make up for being frozen to death."

"No, mother--but I don't expect to freeze to death. We will take
fur-lined clothes along."

"Where are you going to get them? I used to have a fur-lined cloak once,
but the moths ate it up."

"I'm afraid it would hardly have answered, if you had it now, mother.
But of course that's a part I've got to talk over with father--about
fitting out the expedition."

"And I'm afraid you'll have trouble," remarked Mr. Stanley. "Oh, if I
was only well and strong I'd ask nothing better than to go along!"

His words caused a little feeling of sadness, but it soon passed away,
and Fred's father and mother listened with interest to his account of
the trip to Denville.

"Now, father, what would you advise me to do?" asked Fred, when he had
concluded. "We need to get some man, who has money, interested in this
venture, for it will cost something to fit out the expedition. Do you
know of any one among your acquaintances, who would take the risk?"

Mr. Stanley was silent for several seconds. He was in deep thought. Then
he suddenly exclaimed:

"Fred! I believe I know the very man."

"Who, dad?"

"Simon Baxter. He is an old gold hunter, as well as a miner. He has gone
on several expeditions of this kind, and he has traveled in the far
north. He would be the very man."

"Is he well off?"

"Yes, he is quite rich."

"Do you think he would go; and provide the money?"

"Ah, that is another question. But it would do no harm to see him, and
find out. He lives about five miles from here, with his son Jerry, who
is about your age, Fred."

"Perhaps Jerry would go along. Then he and I could have a good time
together."

"He might. He is a strong, hearty lad, about your build. I will write a
letter to Mr. Baxter, and you can take it to him. You were so
successful with the widow Stults, where I did not think you would be,
that, perhaps, you can prevail on this old gold hunter to finance the
expedition. He and I are old friends, though I have not seen him in some
time."

"Write the letter at once, dad, and I'll take it to him."

"Aren't you tired, after your long tramp?"

"No. Besides, I am so anxious that I can't rest."

"Very well. I'll write the letter at once."

After dinner Fred started out, this time on a shorter journey, bearing a
letter to Mr. Baxter, explaining matters.

Fred found the old gold hunter in his garden, pulling weeds from an
onion patch.

"Well?" he asked, as Fred came up the walk.

"Here is a letter for you, Mr. Baxter."

The old miner read it through slowly. Then he started on it a second
time. Finally, when he had again gotten to the end, he asked:

"Are you Fred Stanley?"

"I am, sir."

"And you want me to leave my quiet life here, let my garden all grow up
to weeds, and go chasing off to Alaska after a lot of gold that we'll
probably never find."

"We might find it; and, as for the garden, isn't there some one you can
leave in charge?"

"Nobody knows how to take care of my garden but myself," said the man.
"Especially my onion bed. I'm very fond of onions. Are you?"

"No, sir, I don't like them."

"Great mistake! Great mistake! Everyone ought to eat onions. They're the
healthiest vegetable that grows. Guess I'll have one now," and he pulled
a green one from the ground, wiped the earth from it, and chewed it with
every indication of satisfaction.

"But--about the gold expedition," said Fred, thinking the old man had
forgotten all about it.

"The gold? Oh, yes. I was thinking whether I hadn't better plant more
onions. It hardly seems enough to tide me over the winter, but I'll have
to make 'em do. The gold, hum--let me see."

He got up from his knees, read Mr. Stanley's letter over again, folded
it carefully, placed it in the envelope, placed the envelope in his
pocket, and then said:

"Come into the house, young man."




CHAPTER VII

OFF FOR ALASKA


Striding on ahead, Mr. Baxter led the way to the porch of a fine country
house. Fred followed, hardly knowing what to think. Certainly the man's
manner was not very encouraging, but the boy had not yet lost hope.

"Sit down," said the old gold hunter, indicating a big chair on the
porch. Fred took it, and Mr. Baxter seated himself near the boy. Then he
read the letter over again.

"How's your father?" he asked suddenly, as though that was the chief
matter in his mind.

"Not very well."

"I'm sorry to hear that. He's a fine man."

Then Mr. Baxter seemed lost in thought.

"How much gold did Stults bury?" he asked at length.

"I don't know, sir."

"Hum. I'm glad you said that. I was afraid you might have an idea that
it was a million or more. I've heard all sorts of stories about the
Stults treasure, but I never took any stock in 'em. Now it begins to
look as if there was something in it. Tell me all you know about it."

Fred did so to the best of his ability, taking in from the time Mr.
Gardner first related the story to him to his interview with Mrs.
Stults.

"And you want me to finance the expedition, eh?" asked the old gold
hunter.

"My father hoped you might be willing to."

"What was your idea of how much my share should be in case we found the
gold, young man?"

"I hadn't thought of that. Of course Mrs. Stults will get her half."

"Yes. And how much would you get?"

"I'd be willing to leave that to you."

"You wouldn't want all the other half then?" asked Mr. Baxter, but, by
the smile on his face, Fred knew the old man was only joking.

"I'll leave it to you," he repeated.

"Hum. Well, I've been thinking this thing over in the last few minutes,
and I don't know but what I'll go in with you."

At these words Fred's heart gave a bound. He already saw himself
possessed of several thousand dollars, and his father and mother placed
beyond the necessity of worrying over money matters.

"Thank you!" he exclaimed.

"Wait a bit," advised Mr. Baxter. "I haven't finished. I am willing to
finance the expedition and go after the gold. I think I'll take my son
Jerry along, and we'll need another man, or maybe two."

"Can't I go?" asked Fred, fearing he was to be left behind.

"Yes, I am coming to that. You can go along, and your share will be
one-third of half the treasure."

"I'm satisfied with that."

"It may seem that I am taking the larger part," went on Mr. Baxter, "but
that is not so. It will cost quite a sum to fit out the expedition, and
then there is the risk of failure. If we find the gold we will set aside
one-half for the widow of the man who hid it. The remainder we will
divide into three parts, and you shall have one. I calculate another
third will pay for the expedition, and cover my expenses and the hire of
whatever men I may have to engage. That will leave one-third clear for
me, so, you see, I am really going shares with you. Is that
satisfactory?"

"Indeed it is, Mr. Baxter."

"I am glad you think so. Of course, there is a big risk involved. We may
fit out an expensive expedition and end up in failure. But I am willing
to take that chance. I have hunted for buried treasure before. Sometimes
I have been successful, and more often I have failed. I am getting
along in years, but I don't want to retire just yet. So we will go to
Alaska for the gold."

"Hurrah!" cried Fred, unable to restrain his feelings.

"Hello, dad! What's up? Fourth of July celebration?" asked a lad, coming
around the corner of the porch. Fred looked at the newcomer. The youth
was about his own age, perhaps a bit bigger and stronger.

"No, Jerry, it isn't Fourth of July," replied Mr. Baxter. "This is Fred
Stanley, son of an old friend of mine. I have just made a contract with
him to go treasure hunting up in Alaska."

"Treasure hunting! In Alaska! Oh, dad! Can I go?"

"I expected that," said Mr. Baxter dryly. "Do you think you can stand
the pace, Jerry?"

"Of course, dad. Wasn't I with you in Hudson Bay last year?"

"That's so; you were. Well, I reckon you can go. Now let's get down to
business."

Mr. Baxter introduced his son to Fred, and the three were soon deeply
interested in arranging for the prospective expedition. As an old miner
and hunter, Mr. Baxter knew just how to set about fitting out the party
and about what it would cost.

"Are we three the only ones going?" asked Jerry.

"No, I think we'll need another man," said his father. "We'll have hard
work, and those Alaskan Indians are not the most pleasant customers in
the world. With another man I'll feel safer. But leave that to me.

"Now, Fred, I think the best thing for you to do would be to go home and
get your outfit ready. I'll tell you what you'll need in the way of
clothing. That is, the ordinary garments. Of course, those for use in
the cold--the fur garments--I'll supply with the rest of the things.
I'll get the guns, ammunition, picks, shovels and all that. We'll have
to take a warm tent along, for I think we'll have to do some camping
out."

"When can we start?" asked Fred.

"It will take about two weeks to get everything in shape. In the
meanwhile don't talk too much about the trip. The fewer that know about
it the better it will be."

"I'll be careful."

"Now I'll write a list of what you can take from home and then you can
go. I'd ask you to stay and spend a few days with us, only I'm going to
be so busy that you wouldn't enjoy yourself. Give my regards to your
father."

Fred promised to do this, and then, with a list of the things he would
need (none of which would have to be bought, he was glad to note, for he
had them all at home) he took his departure.

"Take good care of that map," cautioned Mr. Baxter. "If that's lost the
whole expedition will be up the flume, as we miners used to say."

"I'll be careful of it," replied Fred.

Mr. Stanley was delighted with the success of Fred's visit to the old
gold hunter. Then, for the first time, he really began to look on the
trip to Alaska as a settled thing. Mrs. Stanley, also, who had been
hoping that nothing would come of it, began to be alarmed. She spoke
seriously to her husband when Fred was out of the house.

"Do you really think, Norman," she said, "that it will be safe to let
Fred make this trip?"

"Well, my dear, why not?"

"Oh, there are so many dangers. Think of the icebergs, the polar bears,
the great sea lions, the terrible cold, and all that."

"There are no icebergs to be met with on land, and I don't believe
they'll meet with any wild animals worse than wolves or wild dogs.
They're not to be feared as long as one has a gun. Of course it's bound
to be cold, but Fred is hardy, and, with plenty of fur garments, he can
be almost as comfortable as here at home. Then, my dear, you must think
of the chance for making a large sum of money, and we need it very
badly. It grieves me very much to see you sewing so often."

"I shouldn't mind that in the least, Norman, if only we could keep Fred
home."

"Aside from the chance of finding the treasure, I am not sure but what
it will be a good thing for the boy to go. It will teach him to rely on
himself, and he will gain many new and valuable experiences. I know I
can trust Mr. Baxter, who will take as good care of Fred as if he was
his own son."

"Are you sure of that?"

"Positive. Besides, Fred and Jerry will be together, and they can help
each other."

"Well, I suppose he'll have to go then, but I wish he was safe back."

"So do I, and with the treasure in gold. But don't worry."

"I'll try not to, but I can't help it."

Fred got his clothes together, and was waiting word from Mr. Baxter. The
latter, as he informed Mr. Stanley in a letter, had not been idle. He
had arranged for the passage of himself, his son, Fred, and a big
colored man, named George Johnson, on a steamer sailing from San
Francisco to an Alaskan port, and they were to start soon. Such supplies
as they would have to take on the steamer were purchased, the remainder
it was planned to buy in Alaska.

Fred had told none of his acquaintances about the trip, merely stating
that he was going on a journey. Mr. Baxter, on his part, was equally
reticent, so, aside from the immediate families, and Mrs. Stults and
her lawyer, no one was aware of the gold-hunting expedition.

On the appointed day Mr. Baxter and his son Jerry called for Fred at the
latter's home. George Johnson had gone on ahead to San Francisco in
charge of the baggage.

"Well, are you all ready?" asked the old gold hunter of Fred after
greeting Mr. Stanley.

"All ready, sir."

"So are we. Our passage is booked in the steamer _Sea Lion_, a good
name, I think. So, if you have everything packed, we'll start for San
Francisco."

Good-bys were said, Mrs. Stanley clasped her son in her arms and shed a
few tears, though she tried to bear up, and then, with a waving of
hands, the little party of adventurers was off for Alaska.




CHAPTER VIII

AMID FROST AND ICE


The railroad journey to San Francisco did not occupy a great while, and
that same day Fred and his friends went aboard the _Sea Lion_ as she lay
at her dock, waiting the stowing of the cargo before putting off for the
frozen north.

There was a big crowd aboard, for the stories of gold being found in
that wonderful northern land were wilder than ever, and many thought
they had but to take a trip there, walk along the coast, stuff their
pockets with yellow nuggets and return wealthy forever. How different it
was from this they soon found to their sorrow.

But our young treasure hunter and his friends had no such delusions. Mr.
Baxter was an old hand at the game, and, though he had been in Alaska
but once before, he knew that any gold that was to be obtained by miners
would be found only after hard work and much suffering. Hunting a
treasure was different, and probably more hazardous and uncertain.

George Johnson proved to be a big jolly colored man, used to hardships
of all sorts, though he had never been very far north. He was of immense
strength, which was the principal reason why Mr. Baxter had selected
him.

The ship was almost overcrowded, so great was the rush to the gold
fields. On all sides was heard only talk of great "strikes," of finds of
fabulous wealth, and of how men who barely had enough to buy an outfit
and pay their way to Alaska had become millionaires in a night.

"Don't believe all you hear," cautioned Mr. Baxter to his son and Fred.
"If you do you'll go half crazy dreaming of gold."

"Johnson is taking it all in," remarked Jerry.

"Yes! If his eyes get much bigger they'll fall out of his head," added
Fred. "One miner told him the streets in Nome were paved with gold, and
he thinks all he has to do is to take up a few of the yellow blocks to
make him rich."

"That's the trouble with a new gold field," said Mr. Baxter. "They
circulate wild stories about it. Of course there's lots of gold in
Alaska. The thing is to find it. Fred, I hope you have that map safe?"

"Yes, sir."

"Better let me have it. I think I can take better care of it than you
can. If some one should steal it and get ahead of us we'd be in a queer
pickle."

"That's so, dad," spoke up Jerry. "I wonder how soon this steamer
sails?"

"Early to-morrow morning. That's why we came on board to-day. I don't
like to get up early to catch a boat and run the chances of getting
left."

The four treasure hunters occupied one stateroom with four berths, as
they wanted to be together.

Fred was awakened in his berth the next morning by an uneasy motion. At
first he could not understand what it was, but he soon knew that it was
caused by the action of the waves on the ship.

"Are we off?" he cried.

"That's what we are," replied Mr. Baxter.

Fred and Jerry dressed and hurried out on deck. They were out of sight
of land, for the steamer had sailed before daybreak, and it was now
about eight o'clock.

"We're headed for Alaska!" cried Fred enthusiastically.

"Aye, aye!" answered Jerry, sailor-fashion. "And there's no telling when
we'll be coming back."

"I don't want to until we get that treasure," went on Fred.

"Hush! Don't speak about it," cautioned Jerry.

At that moment a man, who, from a peculiarity in his look, was seen to
have one glass eye, passed the two lads. He glanced sharply at Fred,
and the boy regretted he had mentioned the treasure.

"Do you think he heard me?" he asked Jerry in a low tone.

"I'm afraid so. But I guess it doesn't matter. He can't know what you
meant, and there is any amount of treasure in Alaska. Still, it's better
not to speak of it on the ship."

"I'll not after this. Say, this air makes me hungry."

"Same here. Let's go to breakfast."

Little happened on the days that followed. The _Sea Lion_ steamed
steadily north, and the boys were not the only ones counting the days
until they should arrive on the Alaskan coast, for there were many who
were taking the voyage in the hope of bettering their fortunes.

The man with the glass eye was frequently seen on deck, but, as Fred and
Jerry were careful not to mention the treasure again, they paid little
attention to him. Once the man, whose name Fred learned was Jacob
Callack, tried to get into conversation with the lad.

"You and your friends going to prospect or buy up some claims?" asked
Callack.

"Prospecting," replied Fred, for surely hunting for a buried treasure
was "prospecting" for gold if anything was.

"Whereabouts?"

[Illustration: "The glittering pinnacles towered high in the air"

_Page 57_]

"We haven't quite decided," said Fred, truthfully enough, and then,
seeing Mr. Baxter coming, he went to join him.

"Oh, you think you'll throw me off the track," murmured the man with the
glass eye as Fred left him. "But I'll find out yet. Jake Callack can see
more with his one eye than some folks can with two. You can't lose me so
easily as all that."

As the days passed there was a noticeable change in temperature. The
winter was just setting in, and winter in the northern regions means
something very different from what it does in the United States.

When Fred and Jerry came on deck one morning there was a sharper tang
than usual in the air.

"We'll sight ice to-day," remarked one of the sailors.

"Do you mean an iceberg?" asked Fred.

"That's what. I can tell by the smell. We'll sight a big one before
night."

The sailor proved a good prophet, and that afternoon the steamer passed
an immense berg, the glittering pinnacles of which towered high into the
air. The presence of it added to the cold, which was becoming sharper
every hour.

"Time to get out our fur garments, I guess," said Mr. Baxter that night,
and from the baggage he had Johnson take out thick fur coats, caps and
mittens, while heavy fur-lined boots were gotten in readiness for the
journey on land, which would soon begin.

If there had been confusion on the dock in San Francisco over the
sailing of the ship, there was more when she arrived at her destination
and proceeded to land the passengers and stores. The _Sea Lion_ went up
the Yukon River as far as it was navigable for her and there docked.

There was a settlement on shore, but even in the wildest mining region
of California there was nothing to equal it.

A fierce snowstorm the day before the ship arrived had covered
everything with a coat of white. The cold was bitter, and even in their
fur garments the little party of adventurers felt it keenly.

On every side there was a rush and confusion. Almost as many as had come
on the ship wanted to take passage back in her. Some had made their
fortunes and were returning happy. Others had failed to find any gold,
or had lost it by theft or gambling. Some had barely enough to pay their
way home.

There were only the rudest kind of shacks, which served for houses,
stores and hotels.

With the help of Johnson, whose great strength stood the travelers in
good stead, the baggage of the four gold hunters was landed. It was
piled up on the wharf, together with that of scores of other
adventurers, for so great was the gold rush that there were no
facilities for caring for freight as it should be.

"What are we going to do, dad?" asked Jerry as he and Fred gazed in
wonder at the scene of confusion about them.

"Well, we'll see if we can't find quarters in some hotel, or what passes
for one here. Then I'll have to see about getting guides and dog teams."

"Are we going to travel with dogs and sledges like the Eskimos?" asked
Fred.

"That's about the only way we can travel where we're going," replied Mr.
Baxter.

"Let's discover the north pole while we're at it," suggested Jerry
jokingly.

"I'd rather discover a warm place where I could get something to eat,"
remarked Fred.

"Come along," invited Mr. Baxter. "If we don't hurry all the places in
the hotels will be taken, and we'll have to camp out our first night
here."

Fred was scarcely able to realize that he was really in Alaska; that
wonderful land of gold, of which he had heard so much, and which might
hold for him a great treasure. Would they find it? Would they get it
safely home?

These were questions that came to the young treasure hunter, and he
tried to find a hopeful answer to them as he followed Mr. Baxter and
Jerry. As they turned away from the wharf, leaving Johnson in charge of
their goods, the man with the glass eye arose from behind a pile of
boxes.

"I must keep my one good optic on you," he muttered. "I think you're up
to something besides prospecting."




CHAPTER IX

INTO THE INTERIOR


With all the assurance of an old campaigner Mr. Baxter made his way
through the throng of miners and others, down the single street of the
settlement which ran along the river until he saw a hotel he thought
would answer. On making inquiries he found that there was only one room
left.

"We'll take it," he said promptly.

"But, dad, can we four sleep in one room?" objected Jerry.

"We'll have to, son, and we ought to be glad to get it. Many persons
will have to sleep in tents while this rush is on. How much is the
room?" he asked the clerk.

"Thirty dollars a day."

"Thirty dollars a day!" exclaimed Fred.

"Yes, and if you don't want it say so," snapped the clerk. "There are
plenty that do."

"Oh, we'll take it," said Mr. Baxter quickly. "That's cheap, according
to some prices they're asking," he added. "When ordinary meals are five
dollars each, the cost of living soon runs up."

"But if our expenses are going to be so high, how can we stand it until
we discover the----" began Jerry.

"Hush!" interrupted Mr. Baxter. "Don't say a word about what we're
after. There are too many rascals in this locality. I'll manage about
the expenses."

"But meals at five dollars each!"

"Don't worry. We'll not pay that long. The prices are high because there
is a big crowd just in off the steamer, and the dealers want to make hay
while the sun shines. Things will go down in a day or so, when the
miners begin to travel into the interior."

"But won't it cost a lot to buy our provisions at that rate?"

"It would if we had to buy them, but I brought them along with me. We
will have to buy very little. The principal things we will need are
dogs, sledges and guides for a certain distance. We will stay here a day
or so until I can arrange about them, and then we will start for the
interior."

Mr. Baxter had signed his own name and those of the two boys on the
hotel register, and had taken them into a comparatively quiet corner to
impart this information.

"Now, Jerry," he said, "if you and Fred will go help Johnson get our
stuff up here to our room, I'll go see if I can hire some guides and
sledges. Pile the stuff right in our room. That's the only place it will
be safe. We'll have to rough it for a night or so, but we can stand it,
I guess. My, but it's getting cold out," he added as he glanced from the
window at a thermometer hanging on the side of the hotel.

"How much?" asked Fred.

"Twenty-two degrees below zero."

"Twenty-two below!"

"That's nothing. Wait until it goes to forty and fifty below. Then the
mercury in the ordinary thermometer freezes solid, and only spirit
gauges are of any use. Then you'll feel the cold. There is no wind,
fortunately, or you'd notice it even in here, with the big stove going."

They had taken off their fur garments while in the warm hotel, but, as
Fred and Jerry had to go out to see about their goods, they donned them
again.

It was getting dark, for, though it was early, the winter season had
begun, when the sun would shine but for a little time each day, and
farther north not at all for six long months.

"I should say it was cold!" exclaimed Fred when he and Jerry were
outside. The keen air cut his face like a knife, and he was thankful for
the thick fur garments, the heavy fleece-lined boots, and the big
mittens he wore. Burying his face down below the collar of his coat, an
example which Jerry followed, Fred started back to the steamer dock,
while Mr. Baxter went off to see about getting guides and sledges.

The boys found Johnson still on guard, but the colored man was racing up
and down to get warm, and whipping his long arms about his body to keep
up the circulation.

"What's the matter?" asked Jerry with a laugh.

"Matter, Massa Jerry? Why, it feel laik somebody done gone an' stick a
icicle down mah back, that's what it do, fo' suah! It suttinly am
terrible cold."

"Well, you'll soon be warm," spoke Fred. "We're going to take the things
to a hotel."

"A real hotel, where dey has real things t' eat, Massa Fred?"

"Yes, real things to eat. They charge five dollars a meal."

"Five dollars a meal! Den I reckon dis coon'll git a small po'tion ob
dessert fo' his share," and the colored man laughed so heartily that he
felt no necessity of whipping his arms about.

"Well, come on, let's see if we can't hire a small truck and wheel our
stuff up," suggested Jerry. They were able to, but they had to pay a
good price for the little vehicle, which they got from one of the men on
the dock. Indeed, it seemed that you had almost to pay the weight of
anything in gold in Alaska, as there were so many who wanted the same
article.

It took several trips by the boys and Johnson to get all the things to
the hotel. There was quite a quantity of canned stuff, plenty of bacon,
sugar and tea, for those are staple articles of diet in cold countries,
arms and ammunition for all four, an extra supply of fur garments and
sleeping bags, a heavy tent, a portable alcohol stove, cans of alcohol
for fuel, and other needful supplies.

It was quite dark when they had everything in their room, and there was
little space left to lie down. There were four cots in the apartment,
and no bedclothes of any kind, but they expected to sleep in most of
their clothes because of the cold. Mr. Baxter came back in time for
supper, and it must be said, in spite of the high prices for meals, they
were not very good. There was no use of finding fault, however, as there
were others only too anxious to get the accommodations our travelers had
secured at the hotel.

"Did you get the dogs, sleds and guides, dad?" asked Jerry when they had
gathered to look over their supplies that night in their room.

"Yes, but I had to pay higher than I calculated on. It seems there has
been a new strike made, and there is a great rush of miners to it.
Guides can get whatever pay they ask, and as for dogs and sleds, you
might almost as well buy them as hire them, only no one will sell. But I
guess we'll get along."

"When do we start for the for----" began Fred.

"Fred, you must be more careful," cautioned Mr. Baxter in a whisper.
"Don't mention the word treasure," he added in a low voice. "These
hotels are constructed in a very flimsy manner, and what is said in one
room can be heard in another. If any one gets an idea we are after a
store of hidden gold we may be followed by some rascals who would try to
steal it from us. There is practically no law in this country yet. We'll
have to wage our own battles, and I don't want to get into a fight with
any desperadoes, of whom there are many here, only too anxious to take
advantage of any one who has gold."

"I'll be more careful," Fred promised. "When are we to start for the
interior?"

"To-morrow afternoon. It will take us until then to get the dogs and
sleds here and have our stuff packed for the trip. I have also to buy a
few more supplies. Now I advise you three to stay in the room until I
return. I have to go out to transact a little business, and this
settlement is not a nice place for boys after dark. I'll leave you in
Johnson's care."

"An' if anybody tries t' do any funny work, I'll squeeze 'em laik a
grizzly bear!" threatened the colored man, stretching out his long,
powerful arms.

The cold to which they had been exposed made the boys sleepy, and they
soon dozed off. Johnson likewise fell into a slumber, from which he was
awakened by a pounding on the door.

"Who's dat?" he asked suspiciously.

"It's me. Mr. Baxter," answered the old gold hunter. "I guess I'll turn
in now. Everything is all ready for to-morrow."

They all slept soundly, though there was much noise and excitement all
night, for a lawless element was abroad, and there were several shooting
affrays among the gamblers and miners, but fortunately no one was
seriously hurt.

Soon after breakfast, which was not much of an improvement on the
supper, a sled arrived with some supplies which Mr. Baxter had purchased
at one of the stores. The things were piled up outside the hotel,
together with the goods they had brought from San Francisco, and a
little later several Alaskan Indians, driving four dog teams, attached
to long, low wooden sleds, came down the snow-covered street.

"That's our outfit," announced Mr. Baxter. "I see Holfax is on time."

"Who's Holfax?" asked Fred.

"He's the chief guide, and seems a fairly decent chap. I can't say as
much for the others."

Certainly none of them would have taken a prize in a beauty contest.
They were typical Alaskan Indians, short and stout, not too clean, but
of that one could not judge very well, for they were so wrapped up in
furs that only their noses and eyes were visible.

There were eight Indians, two in charge of each sled, to each of which
was fastened eight dogs by thongs of reindeer hide. The animals were
snarling and snapping in an ugly manner, and the Indian drivers called
harsh words to them, or struck them with the long lash of the whip,
which they used with great skill, being able to touch a particular dog
on any available spot from the farthest end of the sled.

"Load up, Holfax," ordered Mr. Baxter, indicating the goods.

"We load. Pretty soon go quick," replied the head Indian. Then he called
something to his companions in the native tongue, and they began to lash
the supplies on the sleds.

"Are we going to ride or walk?" asked Fred.

"Ride," answered Mr. Baxter. "There are only four Indians going with us.
The rest came merely to help load, as that is a matter which must be
carefully attended to. The dogs will be able to pull two persons on each
sled, in addition to the load. I am afraid we are going to be in for
some cold weather. The thermometer is still going down. It's thirty
below zero now. Be careful not to expose your fingers, boys, or they'll
be frozen inside of five minutes. And look out for the end of your
nose."

The loading was rapidly proceeded with, quite a crowd of men gathering
to see the expedition leave. It was no great novelty, but one so well
equipped and so large did not often start from that settlement. When the
last package had been lashed on the sleds, and when Mr. Baxter, Johnson
and the boys, with their rifles under their arms, were ready to get on,
a man came strolling up the street. He was the man with a glass eye,
though his face was so deep down in his fur collar that this defect
could hardly be seen.

"Off for the gold region?" he asked Mr. Baxter, and at the sound of the
voice Fred knew the man was the same one who had questioned him on the
ship--Jake Callack.

"Yes, we're off prospecting, stranger."

"Well, good luck."

"Thank you."

"Get on, boys," said Mr. Baxter, taking his place.

Fred, Jerry and Johnson sat on the big sleds in little hollows left at
the rear when the goods were packed on. Mr. Baxter did likewise. The
Indian drivers sitting in front yelled to the dogs and cracked their
long whips. At that moment the man with the glass eye leaned over and
said something in a whisper to Zank, one of the guides, the one on the
leading sled, on which rode Johnson.

The Indian looked up, nodded, and then, with a louder yell to his dogs,
set them off at a fast pace. The treasure hunters were on their way to
the interior after the store of buried gold.




CHAPTER X

ATTACKED BY WOLVES


After a careful examination of the map, which he had studied while
aboard the ship, Mr. Baxter decided that the treasure had been hidden by
Stults in a certain mountain range about three hundred miles away from
the settlement where they had outfitted. These mountains lay in a
northwesterly direction from the town, and were in a desolate region,
where, now that winter had set in, there was much snow and ice.

It was Mr. Baxter's plan to proceed to this mountain range by the most
direct way and then to make a camp. From this camp, after a more careful
study of the map, while actually in the region it referred to, he could
start out after the treasure. Just where it was located of course he did
not know. The map showed a small stream flowing down the side of the
mountain, and there was a waterfall about midway of the course. It was
near this fall that Stults said he had hidden the gold in a natural
cave.

But, as he had buried it during the summer, and as a winter scene is
very different from a summer one, and as the stream would be frozen and
probably covered from sight with snow, finding the gold was not going to
be a very easy task, Mr. Baxter feared.

The dogs drew the party swiftly onward, for, though the sleds were
heavily laden, the runners slipped easily over the frozen surface. It
was becoming colder, and the wind created by their speed cut into the
faces of the travelers.

The Indians did not seem to mind the wind, but kept yelling and shouting
to their dogs, urging them to still faster speed. Perhaps this shouting
and the swinging of the long whips kept the Alaskans warm. But Mr.
Baxter, the boys and the colored man felt the cold very much in spite of
their thick garments as they sat on the sleds.

"I should think those Indians would freeze down inside, they keep their
mouths open so much, shouting," remarked Fred.

"It is a wonder they don't," agreed Jerry. "Whenever I open my mouth it
feels as if some one had stuffed an icicle in."

"By the way, boys," said Mr. Baxter as his sled came opposite Fred's and
Jerry's, "did it strike you that there was anything familiar about that
man who wished us good luck as we were coming away?"

"Yes, he's the man with the glass eye who tried to get some information
from me while we were on the ship," answered Fred.

"I thought so."

"And I think he said something to the driver of Johnson's sled," went on
Fred.

"That's what I thought, too," said Jerry's father. "I wonder what it
meant? I don't like that man's actions. I hope we can trust our guides."

"Why, are they liable to do us any harm?" asked Fred.

"Well, there are good Alaskan Indians and bad ones. I tried to hire good
ones, but there are many thieves among them, and, now that they know the
value of gold, they are as wild after it as any white men."

"Do you think you can trust our men?"

"I hope so. I am sure Holfax is all right, for he was recommended to me
by an old miner whom I know. As for the others, I'll have to be on the
lookout."

"Johnson's driver seems to be hanging back, as if he wanted to find out
what we are talking about," said Fred suddenly.

"So he does. Holfax," said Mr. Baxter quickly, "make go fast--run dogs,"
and he motioned to Zank, whose team of snarling animals was going very
slowly.

Holfax, who was in charge of the other Indians, called out something.
Zank answered in what seemed to be angry tones, but he shouted to his
dogs, and once more they took the lead.

"We'll have to watch that fellow," murmured Mr. Baxter.

Their way now lay over a small range of hills, and as they got on top
the cruel cold smote them more and more. The day was a cloudy one, and
the wind sprang up, sending the dry snow in stinging particles into
their faces.

"My feet haven't any more feeling in them," said Fred at length, "and my
hands are like wooden ones."

"Is that so?" asked Mr. Baxter quickly. "Then you must get off and run a
bit. Your circulation is going back on you, and you'll be frost-bitten
if you don't look out. We'll all get off and run beside the sleds. That
will warm us up. In about an hour we will stop and have tea."

"I should think coffee would be better," suggested Fred.

"Tea is the best drink in all cold countries," replied the old gold
hunter. "Coffee is too stimulating, but tea warms you up without doing
any harm. In Russia, when a man gets chilled through, he will often
drink seventeen or eighteen glasses of hot tea, one right after the
other. They use glasses instead of cups there."

"I guess one or two will be all I can stand," replied Jerry. "I'm no
great hand for tea."

"You'll like it up here," said his father, and he was right.

Mr. Baxter called to Holfax to stop the dog teams, and the four
travelers got off. They were all so cold and stiff they could hardly
stand, but a little motion soon started the blood to circulating, and
they felt better. The dogs were driven at a slower pace, and the gold
hunters ran alongside of the sleds.

When thoroughly warmed through Mr. Baxter called a halt and got out the
alcohol stove to make tea. For water they used melted snow, and then Mr.
Baxter cautioned the boys and Johnson against ever eating snow or ice
when thirsty. It would cause sore mouths, he said, and they would suffer
great pain.

It seemed rather strange to sit down out of doors in that icy region and
drink hot tea, but every one admitted that it was an excellent drink.
Then the journey was resumed until a sudden increase in the gloom warned
the travelers that night was coming on.

"We'll make camp now," said Mr. Baxter, and he gave the orders to
Holfax.

The Indians drew the sleds up in the form of a square, and when robes
were spread over them, this would form their shelter. As for the
others, the tent was erected, snow being piled around the bottom to
keep out the wind. Then, when the alcohol stove was set up inside and a
simple meal started, the place was more warm and cozy than one would at
first suppose was possible.

"Why, I believe it's warm enough to take off our fur coats," said Fred.

"Yes, you can do that," spoke the old miner. "We'll get into our
sleeping bags soon."

The Indians were expert in making camp, and soon the dogs were tethered
off to one side, and were snarling and snapping over their supper of
frozen seal blubber. After that they burrowed down under the snow to
keep warm.

"I guess we're in for a cold spell," remarked Mr. Baxter as he looked at
the thermometer he had hung outside the tent. "It's forty-one below now,
but the wind doesn't blow, and that makes it better. With a stiff gale
now we'd be in a bad way."

"Is it liable to get any colder?" asked Fred.

"It's liable to, but I hope it doesn't. This is all I want."

There was nothing to do but to go to bed, which they were glad enough to
do, as they would be warm in the sleeping bags. Seeing that the tent was
securely fastened, and that their rifles were ready at hand, Mr. Baxter
turned in. The boys were already asleep, for cold has the effect of
making one drowsy.

It was long after midnight when Fred was awakened by a series of loud
howls outside the tent. At the same time Mr. Baxter and Jerry sat up.

"What's that?" asked Fred.

"The dogs must have gotten loose and want something to eat," said Jerry.

"Those are not dogs," replied Mr. Baxter. "I know those howls only too
well."

"What are they?" asked Fred.

"A pack of wolves. Boys, get your rifles ready. Unless I'm mistaken
we're going to have trouble. The animals are probably wild with hunger,
and have gotten scent of our camp."




CHAPTER XI

SHOOTING A MOOSE


It was the work of but an instant for the travelers to slip on their big
fur coats, and they were ready to go outside, for going to bed in the
arctic regions is more a process of dressing than undressing, and they
had lain down with even more clothes on than they wore during the day.

Mr. Baxter, kicking his sleeping bag to one side, loosed the fastenings
of the tent and stepped out. He was followed by Fred and Jerry, Johnson
coming last.

Fred was not prepared for the wonderful sight that met his gaze. At
first he thought he had been transported back to his own home, and that
a Fourth of July celebration was in progress. The sky was streaked with
long streamers of colored fire that waved and undulated to and fro,
beginning at the horizon and extending to the zenith.

"The Northern Lights!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter.

Then Fred understood that he had looked for the first time on the
wondrous and beautiful Aurora Borealis.

Suddenly the peacefulness of the night was once more broken by the
fierce howls, and this time they were answered by the sled dogs, who,
raising their sharp muzzles in the air, sent their answering challenge
to the wolves.

"There they are!" cried Fred, pointing to a dark mass on the white,
snowy expanse. "They're headed this way."

"Are your rifles ready?" asked Mr. Baxter. "We'll probably have to fight
them off."

"Will they attack us?" asked Jerry.

"Wolves have to be in large numbers or desperate with hunger before they
will tackle a man," said his father. "Especially where there is such a
large number as there are of us. But they may fight with our dogs and
injure them, and that would be the worst thing that could happen to us,
as we have to depend entirely on the dogs for traveling here."

"They are coming closer," remarked Fred.

"Yes. It's curious the Indians don't awaken. I think I'll call them."

Mr. Baxter stepped toward the enclosure of sleds, tipped on their sides,
which formed the Indians' camp. There was a small fire burning in the
center, and grouped around it, with their feet toward the embers, were
the dog-drivers. They were huddled up in their fur blankets, sound
asleep. Holfax said afterward that it takes more than the howling of
wolves to awaken an Alaskan Indian tired out with a day's work.

But at a call from Mr. Baxter the four guides sat up suddenly. They did
not need to be told what the matter was, for the wolves were now quite
close, and were howling fiercely, while the dogs were trying to break
the thongs that held them, so that they might seek a place of safety.

For, though an Alaskan or Eskimo dog is really a species of wolf, it is
no match in a fight for the wilder creature.

In a few minutes the Indians had the dogs safely inside the square of
sleds, and not a moment too soon, for the foremost of the pack of wolves
snapped at the heels of Holfax as he led the last dog in.

"Now, boys, let them have it!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter as he fired his
repeating rifle several times into the midst of the ravenous pack. There
were howls of pain, and several forms stretched out on the snow told how
effective had been his aim.

Jerry and Fred fired together, and Johnson coming to their help, they
had four rifles to turn against the savage creatures.

It was a wild scene, encamped there as they were on that dreary expanse
of snow, with the mysterious Northern Lights flashing overhead, giving a
weird illumination, the snarling wolves fairly surrounding the tent,
and the frightened Indians guarding the whimpering dogs.

It did not need an expert marksman to find a target in that pack. There
must have been at least fifty wolves in it, and their hunger had made
them exceedingly daring. They leaped against the sleds, and tried with
their keen teeth to bite through the lashings to get at the frozen fish
and seal blubber which formed the rations for the dogs.

"Give 'em some more!" cried Mr. Baxter. "They are coming closer!"

Indeed some of the wolves had actually invaded the tent, hoping to find
something to eat there. The rifles cracked, the wolves howled and the
dogs yelped, while the Indians called to one another in their harsh
tongue, asking if their white masters would be able to drive off the
foe.

Fred and Jerry were firing as fast as they could work the ejection
levers and triggers of their guns. At first they did not notice the
cold, but after a few shots the piercing frost began to numb their
fingers, for they had taken off their big, heavy mittens, which made it
impossible to work their guns, and had on only light gloves.

"My fingers are too stiff to pull the trigger!" exclaimed Fred as he
vainly tried to fire another shot. "They feel like pieces of ice."

"So do mine," added Jerry.

"Give 'em one more volley and I think we'll scatter 'em," called Mr.
Baxter as he and Johnson fired again.

The boys managed to do it, though the cold, which was intense, was
making itself felt more and more. But the tide had turned. More than
half the wolves had been killed and a number wounded, for it was
impossible to miss, firing into the midst of the pack as they did. With
snarls of baffled rage the remainder of the fierce creatures withdrew to
some distance, and, sitting down on their haunches, howled dismally,
with their muzzles lifted in the air toward the flickering Aurora
Borealis. The dogs howled back in answer, and then, after a few shots at
long distance, the battle was ended. The wolves turned tail and trotted
off across the snow-covered waste.

"It's lucky we heard them in time," commented Mr. Baxter, "or they might
have been the means of depriving us of all our dogs. Then we would have
had to give up the expedition for the time being."

As it lacked several hours to morning, and as every one was cold, Mr.
Baxter had Johnson make a big pot of tea, some of which was served to
the Indians. The beverage warmed every one up, and then the treasure
hunters once more crawled into the sleeping bags, where they remained
until the sun, coming just a little way up, told them another day had
begun. The sun did not rise very high, and the day was of short
duration, but the Aurora Borealis at night partly made up for the short
visits of Old Sol.

Breakfast was a short meal, as indeed were all the ones that they had in
that cold clime, for it is not pleasant to linger sitting down with the
thermometer hovering around thirty below zero. The dogs, who always
seemed ravenous, were tossed some frozen whitefish, which they bolted
almost whole. Then the harness was adjusted, the sleds looked to and the
start made.

Though the dogs were capable of great speed and endurance, even while
pulling the heavy sleds, which each contained a load of over four
hundred pounds, Mr. Baxter had given orders that the animals were not to
be driven to their utmost. He wanted to be sure of reaching his
destination and getting back.

It was about noon when, having passed through a gloomy stretch of
woodland, they came out on a vast, level snow-plain which seemed to
stretch away for many miles. At the farther end was a low range of
mountains.

"Those are the mountains we are headed for," said Mr. Baxter in a low
voice to the two boys. "There is where we will begin to search."

They knew by that he meant that was where the treasure might be hidden.

Suddenly Fred, whose sled was in advance, uttered a cry, and pointed to
what seemed like a black rock on the snow.

"What is it?" called Mr. Baxter.

"A moose! A big moose! I'm going to have a shot at it!"

As he spoke Holfax gave a cry, and the dogs of all the sleds stopped.
Fred was busy loosening the fur robe that covered him in order to get
up.

"Take the snowshoes!" advised Mr. Baxter.

The driver of Fred's sled must have understood, for he handed the boy a
pair of the contrivances which enable one to walk on top of soft snow.
Fred, with the Indian's aid, quickly adjusted them. By this time the
moose, which had been nosing under the snow to get the mosses which grow
there, and on which it feeds, lifted its immense head with the sweeping
horns.

"Oh! He's a beauty!" cried Fred. "I wonder if I can get him?"

"I'll help!" cried Jerry.

"No, let Fred see if he can't get it alone," advised Mr. Baxter.

With a snort the big animal was off, but the snow was deep, and it sank
down at every step. Holding his rifle in readiness, Fred glided forward
on the snowshoes. They gave him a great advantage over the beast, for
otherwise he would not have been able to get anywhere near it.

As it was, even with sinking to its shoulders at every plunge, the big
brute was slowly distancing the boy. Fred determined on a long shot, for
he was a fair marksman. Taking as good aim as he could in the excitement
of the moment, he fired.

The moose plunged on.

"You've missed!" cried Jerry.

Fred fired once more. But there was no need. By great good luck his one
bullet had reached a vital spot, and a moment later the big moose sank
down in the snow.




CHAPTER XII

LOST IN THE SNOW


With shouts of joy at the prospect of plenty of fresh meat, the Indians
leaped from the sleds, donned showshoes, and were soon at the side of
the dead moose. Mr. Baxter, Jerry and the colored man followed.

"Yo' suah am a good shot, Massa Fred," complimented Johnson. "I once
shot a wild turkey, an' goodness, I was so puffed up I hardly knowed
mahself."

"I guess it was more due to good luck than anything else that I hit
him," said Fred modestly.

"Well, it's just in time for dinner," remarked Mr. Baxter. "It will be a
welcome relief from the canned stuff."

"I'se gwine t' look out fo' suthin' t' shoot after dis," announced
Johnson. Absent-mindedly he had taken off his heavy mittens to feel of
the antlers of the moose, and without thinking what he was doing, he
took hold of his rifle barrel in his bare hand. The next instant he
uttered a howl of anguish.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Baxter quickly.

"Mah hand! It's froze fast t' mah gun! Ah cain't git it off!"

This was true. So intense was the cold that the moment the colored man
placed his warm and somewhat moist hand on the steel the flesh had
frozen fast. This is a common occurrence in the far north, and
travelers, knowing it, are careful never to grasp anything of metal in
their bare hands. But the colored man, though he had been warned against
this, had forgotten it.

"Quick! Put some snow on and then wrap his hand up in a blanket!" called
Mr. Baxter. "He'll lose a finger or two if we don't."

It was the work of but an instant for Fred to scoop up some snow in his
big mitten, place it over the negro's hand and part of the rifle barrel
and then throw a fur robe over his whole arm, thus shutting out the
terrible cold for a moment. The treatment was effective, the snow melted
the ice between Johnson's hand and the metal, and in a few seconds the
hand had thawed loose.

"It done feel jest laik a burn," remarked Johnson as he drew on his
mitten again.

"Yes, intense cold such as we are now in does feel for a moment almost
like heat to the naked flesh," said Mr. Baxter. "Let this be a lesson to
all of us. We must exercise the greatest care, or some of us will have
frost-bitten hands or feet, to say nothing of our noses."

By this time the Indians were skinning and cutting up the moose. It
would have been hard work in a region where everything froze solid
almost the minute life left it, but Holfax and his men built a big fire,
and in the warmth of that they worked. Every one had a good dinner, even
the dogs, who feasted to their hearts' content on moose meat. Some was
left to freeze, to be packed on the sleds for future use.

Once more they started the dogs northward, the day soon coming to a
close, as the short-lived sun went down, and the Northern Lights began
to play.

Their camp that night was not disturbed by any wolves, and they made an
early start the next day, coming a few miles nearer to the mountains
which they hoped held the store of buried gold.

As they approached a region where the going would be hard, for it was
mostly up hill, Mr. Baxter decided to make a camp where they could
remain a day or so to give the dogs a chance to rest. Some of the
animals had sore feet, where they had been cut by the sharp ice, and, as
the dogs were their only means of transportation, it was necessary to
take good care of them.

Accordingly they stopped that afternoon on the edge of a big wood which,
Holfax said, would take them two days to get through. It was a gloomy
forest, stretching for miles and miles throughout the heart of Alaska,
and beyond it lay the mountain range where Stults, the German hunter,
had been pursued by the fierce Indians, to escape from whom he had
hidden his gold.

The tent was put up for the adventurers, and the Indians made themselves
a shelter of the sleds, heaping snow up around them and spreading
blankets across the top. Then, with a good fire, there was more comfort
than at first would seem possible to get in a country where, at that
season, it was seldom warmer than ten or fifteen degrees below zero.

They slept better that night than they had any previous one since
starting on their land journey, for the terrible cold had somewhat
abated. The next day the sun shone brightly, and the two boys decided to
take a little trip for exercise, since sitting on a sled, weighted down
by fur robes, had made their muscles stiff.

They put on their snowshoes, and with their rifles started off. They
hoped they might see another moose, or a musk ox, or, at least, an
Arctic fox, at which to take a shot.

"Don't go too far," cautioned Mr. Baxter. "There's no telling when a
snowstorm may come up, and you can lose your way very easily up here."

They started off, and, as Holfax had said it was rather dangerous to go
into the forest because of the numbers of fierce wolves that might be
there, they moved southward across the plain over which they had just
come.

The sun shone brightly on the snow, which was unrelieved by a single
dark object. It was one vast extent of dazzling white.

At first it was beautiful, so still and quiet, and with the sun up there
was some relief from the piercing cold, that even seemed to strike
through their thick garments. But there was a danger they did not know
about.

"See tracks of anything?" asked Fred when they had gone some distance
and were out of sight of the camp, which was down in a sort of hollow.

"No. Do you?"

"Not a thing. Let's keep on a little farther."

They walked on for perhaps another mile, their snowshoes making travel
easy. But there was no sight of game. Not even a wolf showed itself.

"Guess we'd better go back," remarked Fred at length. "There doesn't
seem to be anything here. Say, my eyes smart something fierce. How about
yours?"

"Mine do, too. I wonder what it is?"

"I don't know. Say, the sun must be going down. It's getting dark. We
must have been out longer than we thought."

"That's so. Come on back. My, but it's getting dark suddenly."

"It certainly is. Why, Jerry, I can't seem to see anything! Where are
you?"

"Right here, but I can't see you. I wonder what the trouble is? Do you
think there's going to be a blizzard?"

Fred was waving his hand in front of his face. To his horror he could
not see it. Before his eyes was nothing but blackness. Then he uttered a
cry of fear.

"What is it?" asked Jerry. "What's the matter? I can't see you, Fred."

"Jerry!" cried the young treasure hunter. "We're blind!"

"Blind?"

"Yes, snow-blind. The sun shining on the snow has dazzled and blinded
us, and we're lost, a long way from the camp!"




CHAPTER XIII

IN THE WILDERNESS


Blindly groping about, the two boys located each other by the sounds of
their voices.

"We mustn't get separated," said Fred. "That would be terrible. Oh, how
my eyes hurt!"

"So do mine. It's just like once when some pepper blew in them. What
shall we do?"

"I don't know. We must think. Wait a minute. I'll take my belt and
fasten it to yours. Then we can't lose each other, and we'll have our
hands free," for in their despair the two lads were holding each other's
hands.

Fred held his gun between his knees that it might not sink down in the
snow. Then he fastened his belt to Jerry's. Neither of the boys could
see a foot in advance. It was just as if there was a black veil in front
of their faces, and, though the sun shone brilliantly on the white snow,
they could not distinguish it.

"Now what shall we do?" asked Jerry. "Have you any idea which way the
camp is?"

"I remember that as we came away from it the wind was at our backs."

"Then if we walk with the wind in our faces we ought to get somewhere
near it."

"That's so. Let's try it."

Stepping out cautiously, for they could not see where they set their
feet, the boys advanced. It was like walking in the darkest night.

"Do you think they'll come to look for us?" asked Jerry.

"Perhaps; but they won't think we're in this plight until quite late, if
it ever does occur to them. Then it will be dark, and they can't see our
tracks in the dark."

"Maybe the Indians can."

"Perhaps; but I doubt it."

"Then what shall we do? If we have to stay out in the open all night
we'll freeze to death. It's getting colder. I guess the sun must be
going down."

"I'm afraid so," replied Fred. He felt that, in a measure, he was
responsible for Jerry's plight, as he had been instrumental in
organizing the expedition. It was getting much colder, and the wind was
almost as cutting as a knife blade. It whipped stinging particles of
snow into their faces, but they dared not turn their heads aside, as, if
they did, they feared they would never get anywhere near camp.

"I have it!" cried Fred suddenly when they had proceeded cautiously some
distance. "Why didn't we think of it before?"

"What?"

"Firing our guns! They may hear them in camp and come after us."

"That's so. Here goes!"

Jerry pointed his rifle in the air and pulled the trigger. The report,
coming in that great stillness, sounded like a clap of thunder.

"We'll take turns at it, firing every five minutes, as near as we can
judge," said Fred. "That ought to tell them something is wrong with us."

They put this plan into operation, walking slowly on in the intervals of
firing as nearly in the direction of the camp as they could judge. They
could see absolutely nothing save a sort of haze in front of their eyes,
and, as the cold continued to increase, they knew the sun must have gone
down.

"Can you see the Northern Lights?" asked Jerry.

"No. Can you?"

"Not a thing. Go on, it's your turn to shoot."

Following the report of Fred's gun they listened intently for an
answering shot. None came. For an hour longer they walked on, firing by
turns.

"I have only three more cartridges left," announced Jerry at length.

"And I have only two. This is getting serious. Maybe we're wandering
away from the camp instead of toward it."

"If we are, and have to stay out in the open all night, we'll have to
burrow down under the snow, the way the dogs do. I guess----"

"Hark! What's that?" asked Fred quickly.

"It's a shot!"

Fred quickly fired his rifle in answer.

"There it goes again!"

It was unmistakably a shot. Then Jerry fired, and again there came a
response.

"Let's yell," suggested Fred, and they united their voices in a shout.

To their great relief they heard persons calling. The voices came
nearer, and then they could distinguish Mr. Baxter's cry.

"Boys! Boys! Are you all right?" he asked anxiously.

"All right except that we're snow-blind!" replied Jerry.

"Oh, I feared you had been attacked by a pack of wolves, Jerry," said
his father. "And, Fred, are you all right?"

"We're both blind!"

"Well, that will pass away. I should have warned you to wear snow
goggles. I did not think you were going so far from camp, and I did not
realize that the sun was so strong on the snow. We began to get worried
about you a while ago, so Holfax and I started out after you. We heard
your shots, and traced you by them. It's a good thing you had your guns.
But come on, I'll lead you back to camp."

It did not take long to reach it, for the boys had been advancing in the
right direction. They were warmed with many cups of hot tea, and after
bathing their eyes in warm water their sight gradually came back, but
they could not see well until the next morning.

"After this you must wear goggles; we all will," said Mr. Baxter.
"Holfax has some, made from wood."

The goggles were queer affairs. They were merely pieces of wood, long
enough to extend across the eyes, and wide enough to completely cover
the optics. There was a narrow slit through which to look, an opening so
narrow that only a little light penetrated through it. The goggles were
fastened on with a piece of deer thong. Regular glasses, with metal
rims, could not have been worn, as the great cold would have frozen them
fast to the nose and face.

"We start through the great wilderness to-morrow," said Mr. Baxter to
the boys in the tent that night. "I have been studying the map," he
added, after listening to see that none of the Indians were walking too
close outside the shelter. "I think we are on the right trail, though,
of course, we are too far off to tell exactly. I have a plan, of which
I have not told you yet."

"What is it?" asked Fred.

"I am going to get rid of all the Indian guides, save one, and he is
Holfax. I know I can trust him. The others, especially Zank, I believe
are thieves, and very dishonest."

"But can we get along with one?" asked Fred.

"Yes. Holfax says he can take the leading dog team, and, attaching the
other dogs to the head sled, he can pilot them all. In this way, when we
reach the treasure, only one Indian, and, I believe, an honest one, will
know about it. Thus we will not run such a chance of being robbed."

"But what will you do with the three Indians you are going to
discharge?" asked Jerry.

"They will go off to join a branch of their tribe, that is encamped not
far from here. I have spoken to Holfax about it, and he says they will
only be too glad to go, as the remainder of the journey is very
difficult. I am going to pay them off when we camp to-morrow night, and
then we will shift for ourselves."

"I hope we don't get lost again," remarked Fred.

"No; after this no one must leave camp," said Mr. Baxter. "We will make
that a rule."

They started through the big wilderness the next day. The dogs, well
rested, pulled the sleds at a good speed, though it was, most of the
way, up a hard slope.

It was still very cold, and the travelers burrowed down in the piles of
robes on the rear parts of the sleds. The Indians did not seem to mind
it, though they did not have on as many garments as did the adventurers.
Johnson suffered more than did any of the gold-seekers, for he was of a
race that loves warmth. But he did not complain, and, when he felt too
cold he got off, put on his snowshoes, and ran alongside. At times he
would help pull the sleds up some steep hill.

When they made camp that night Mr. Baxter, through Holfax, as an
interpreter, told the other three Indians he would no longer need their
services. They seemed to take it as a matter of course, and their eyes
shone greedily as they saw the bag of gold coins, from which Mr. Baxter
took their pay. Only gold was used as money for the Indians.

"I hope they will have no trouble finding their tribe," said the leader
of the expedition to Holfax.

"They know way," was the response. "They be in dis country many year."

"Well, give them plenty to eat, some tea, meat, and some matches to
build a fire," added Mr. Baxter, for each Indian carried with him a
simple camping outfit, consisting, for the most part, of a pot in which
to make tea, and a frying pan to warm meat in over an open fire.

"Well, good-by," said Mr. Baxter, to the three who were leaving, though
they did not understand very much English.

"Goo'-by," responded Zank, with a leer that struck Fred as being rather
ugly. "Me see you 'gin, maybe."

"I don't believe so," said Mr. Baxter with a smile, but Fred thought of
the whispered words between the man with the glass eye and the Indian. A
vague feeling of uneasiness possessed the boy.




CHAPTER XIV

THE LOST MAP


Slinging over their backs the packages of food which had been given
them, the three Indians started away along the ridge of the first low
range of mountains, to join their tribe. The gold-seekers thought they
had seen the last of them, but they did not know what the future had in
store for them, nor under what circumstances they were again to see the
treacherous Alaskans.

"Now we've got to rely a good bit on ourselves," said Mr. Baxter, when
Zank and his two companions were out of sight. "Each one of us will have
to do more work, but I think we will be better off. We are getting near
to where Stults is supposed to have hidden the gold, and the fewer
natives who know about it the better it will be."

He had spoken before Holfax, and Fred's face must have shown the wonder
he felt, for Jerry's father remarked:

"Oh, Holfax knows what we are after. In fact we shall have to depend on
him, in a measure, for he knows this country and the locality where we
are going better than I do. I have told him about the map and about the
treasure."

"Me help to find it," replied the Indian with a grin. "But not good too
many know. Some Indians bad. Me try be good."

"Yes, you do try, and I think we can trust you," added Mr. Baxter. "Now
then, we must make camp. I think we had all better sleep in the tent,"
for it was not uncommon for white men and their negro, or Indian,
helpers to occupy the same shelter in that cold country. The more
persons in a tent the warmer it would be.

But the Indian had his own ideas about this. He did not like to change
his way of life, and he had been so long used to burrowing under the
snow, in a warm fur robe, that he preferred that method still. So he
declined the shelter of the tent.

It was not as easy work as Mr. Baxter had thought it would be, to resume
the journey the next day. The three dog teams, that were without
drivers, seemed to know it, and got all tangled up in the harness,
fighting among themselves, so it was some time before they could be
separated, and fastened by long thongs to the sled in charge of Holfax.
On this Mr. Baxter rode, in order to converse with the guide as to the
best road to take.

The two boys, and Johnson, were entrusted with the long whips the
Indians had formerly used. They tried to handle them as had the natives,
in guiding the teams, but they did not have much success.

However, Holfax kept a watchful eye over the wolfish canines, and
whenever one of the brutes was inclined to turn tail, and attempted to
haul the sled backwards, the angry voice of the Alaskan would, with a
sharp reminder from the whip, send the rebel back in line with its
fellows.

On and on they went, making slow progress because the trail was very
poor. The second day after dismissing the three Indians they were
enveloped in a blinding snowstorm, and they had to halt and make camp.
It was terribly cold, so cold that a hot cup of tea would have a skim of
ice over it in a minute after it was poured out. It seemed as if their
very bones were frozen.

But the next day the storm ceased, and they toiled on and on, the hope
of the hidden gold luring them. Once a sled overturned, and the load was
spilled off, necessitating an hour's halt.

Again, one of the sled runners broke, going around a dangerous curve,
and only the quickness of Fred, who leaped off and held on to the load
by the thongs binding it, prevented it from toppling over into a deep
ravine.

It took some time to mend the sled runner, but Holfax was equal to the
emergency, and, after a day's halt, they were able to proceed. But
their troubles were not at an end. The dogs grew worse and worse, and
were continually fighting among themselves. They did it so often that
the party could only go a mile or two, before Holfax would have to stop,
and run back to separate some of the savage animals, that seemed to
become more and more like wolves the farther north they went.

At last the Indian solved the problem by changing all the dogs about.
With new team-mates, the animals seemed to get along better.

One afternoon, just as they were about to go into camp, Johnson, who was
riding on the sled containing most of the provisions, got off, intending
to unharness his dogs, and tie them. No sooner was he off the sled than
the beasts ran away with it.

"Stop them! Catch them!" cried Mr. Baxter. "If they run away with that
load we'll starve."

Johnson needed no urging, but, as he had not put on his snowshoes, which
were on the back of the sled, he plunged up to his thighs into a deep
drift, and could make only slow progress, while the broad-runner sled
skimmed over the frozen snow at top speed, pulled by the wild dogs.

It looked serious for a few moments, but Holfax leaped on his sled, and
with a word to his trained beasts, sent them after the runaways,
rounding them up before they had gone more than a mile.

"We're getting to the end of this wilderness," remarked Mr. Baxter,
when the dogs had been driven back, and camp was in process of making.
"By to-morrow night we ought to be through it."

"Then where will we be?" asked Fred.

"At the edge of a big plateau, according to Holfax. That plain leads to
the second range of mountains, in which is located the waterfall, near
the cave of which the gold is supposed to be buried."

"I hope we find it," remarked Fred.

"So do I," added Mr. Baxter. "If we don't we'll have had a lot of
trouble and expense for nothing."

Fred felt the responsibility that rested on him, but he knew he was
taking the same chances as the others, though he was not risking as much
as was Mr. Baxter.

It was bitter cold that night. By the spirit thermometer it was nearly
fifty degrees below zero, and, wrapped up as they were, in thick furs,
with a great fire going outside the tent, and the alcohol stove lighted
inside, the adventurers were nearly frozen. They had to get up every now
and then, and stamp their feet and throw their arms about, in order to
keep the blood in circulation.

"Look at that," said Fred, as, in the glow from the alcohol stove, he
pointed to a mercury thermometer they had with them. The little silver
column had vanished from the tube, and the quicksilver was in a little
globule at the bottom.

"Yes, it's frozen solid," remarked Mr. Baxter. "You could use it for a
bullet if you wanted to. Mercury freezes at forty degrees below zero."

"Does alcohol ever freeze?" asked Jerry.

"It has been frozen, with artificial cold, at two hundred and three
degrees below zero, but we are not likely to reach that here. If it got
much colder than this I'd want to turn back. But I guess we're about at
the frostiest part of our trip."

Hot tea served to make the travelers more comfortable, but even the
effects of that wore off after a while.

"I can understand now, how those Russians can drink seventeen or
eighteen cups in succession," remarked Fred. "They have to do it almost
constantly to keep from getting frozen stiff."

"That's about it," admitted Mr. Baxter.

They were all glad when morning came, and they had a glimpse of the sun,
even if the golden ball was not so very heating. At any rate it was more
cheerful than the long night, with the mysterious Aurora Borealis
flashing in the sky.

To make sure of the route for that day's travel Mr. Baxter got out the
map, and he and Holfax examined it, before the dogs were hitched to the
sleds.

"I think we are really in the treasure district," said the old gold
hunter, as he looked at the copy of the tracing made by the German.
"Here is shown the end of the forest, and the great plain over which we
have to go to get to the waterfall. Well, boys, we will be there in a
day or two, now."

"That's good," remarked Fred. "I'll be glad to get back to warm, sunny
California again, where I can wear ordinary clothes."

Mr. Baxter was returning the map to the fur case in which he carried it.
On account of the heavy mittens he and all the adventurers had to wear,
his hands were not very certain in their movements. When he had replaced
the map in the case, he endeavored to slip the latter inside his fur
coat, where he had a pocket in which it was kept.

But his hand slipped, and the fur case, map and all fell to the
snow-covered ground. An instant later, one of the big hungry dogs,
doubtless thinking it was something to eat, rushed up and made a grab
for it, carrying it away in its strong jaws, and snapping and snarling
at its fellow brutes that tried to take away what they supposed was a
choice morsel of seal blubber.

"Catch him!" cried Mr. Baxter. "If he tears that case, and spoils the
map, we'll never find the treasure!"

"I'll git him!" cried Johnson, gliding on his snowshoes after the dog.
But the brute saw him coming, and ran farther off.

"Hold on, or I'll shoot you!" called the negro.

"No, don't shoot!" cried Mr. Baxter. "If we lose even one dog it will go
hard with us."

"He's tearing the case!" yelled Fred.

"The map is lost!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter.

"Me get him!" spoke Holfax, running up. "Me show how make dog drop map."

It was a critical moment. In another instant the strong teeth of the dog
would make the map undecipherable, and the trip would end disastrously.




CHAPTER XV

IN THE CAVE


With a swift motion the Indian ran to the sled containing, among other
things, the food for the dogs. He burrowed beneath the fur coverings,
that were firmly lashed down, to prevent the animals eating all their
supplies at one meal, and brought out several frozen fish. Now the
Alaskan dog loves fish above everything else, and when Holfax had tossed
several on the snow, there was a mad rush of the shaggy, wolf-like
creatures to secure some.

Even those dogs crowded around the one that had the map-case, ceased
worrying him, and bolted to get a share of the good things so
unexpectedly cast before them. The rush, and the sight of the fish, was
too much for the canine thief. He dropped the map, and made a bolt for
the fish.

"Now git um," said Holfax, and Johnson, who was nearest, rushed forward
and secured the precious document.

"Is it injured?" asked Fred, as Mr. Baxter began to examine it.

"No, I think not. I'll have to be more careful in the future. That dog
nearly ate a fortune."

Stowing the map securely away, Mr. Baxter helped the boys and Johnson
strike the tent, and load the sleds for that day's trip. It was not as
cold as it had been during the night, but there was a feeling of snow in
the air.

"Git plenty bad storm quick soon," remarked Holfax, as he again fastened
the coverings on the provision sled.

"Do you think we had better start then?" asked Mr. Baxter.

"Bad here--bad there," replied the Indian, with a sweep of his arm
toward the distant mountain range. "Bad all over--plenty bad--bad
go--bad stay."

"Then as long as we're going to be in for it one way or the other, we
might as well start. Come, boys, are you ready?"

"All ready, dad," mumbled Jerry from the depths of his fur collar.

"How about you, Fred?"

"My sled is all ready."

"Then we'll start."

The long whips cracked, Holfax gave his Indian yell to the dogs, they
settled into their harness, and once more the sleds were being pulled
northward. The dogs seemed to be in better humor after their unexpected
meal of frozen fish, and they hauled well together.

It was a bleak and cheerless landscape that lay before the travelers.
The vast snow-covered plain stretched out before them, and, at their
backs, was the desolate, black wilderness. Only the hope of gold kept
their hearts stout.

Over the hard crust scurried the dogs, their toe-nails scratching the
hard ice. Occasionally they yelped or barked, probably in protest at
being made to haul such heavy loads. But Holfax kept them at their
tasks.

As they advanced the day became dreary in the extreme. The sun was
hidden by misty clouds, and the wind was cold and cutting. Then a few
fine flakes of snow sifted down.

"Storm come," remarked Holfax, tightening the robes about him.

"Guess you're right," admitted Mr. Baxter. The moisture in the air,
which preceded the storm, had, with his breath, condensed on his beard,
and about his mouth was a ball of snow, as large as his two fists. He
actually had to crush it off his beard before he could speak.

Then with a sudden fury the snow came down in a blinding cloud. Only the
fact that the four dog teams were fastened together by a long piece of
deer hide prevented them from becoming separated in the fog of frozen
crystals.

"Can Holfax see to guide us?" shouted Fred, above the howl of the wind.

"I guess so," answered Mr. Baxter. "We'll have to trust to him, anyhow."

It was the worst weather they had yet met with, and it was all the
Indian could do to induce the dogs to continue. It needed the spur of
his long whip, and his angry voice, calling to them in strange words, to
keep them on the trot.

At last even the hardened Indian had to give it up. It was almost
certain death to face that blast from the north any longer.

"Got to camp!" shouted Holfax, above the roar of the gale, and he began
to unharness the dogs.

It was desperate work to get the tent up, but they managed to do it, and
also to build a roaring fire of logs which the Indian dug out from under
the snow with one of the shovels that had been brought along. Then, in
the combined shelter of the tent and the upturned sleds, with a big pot
of hot tea and some sizzling bacon, the gold hunters tried to forget
their hardships.

But it was not easy to do, and there were grave apprehensions that night
whether they would not be frost-bitten before morning. The storm
continued all the next day, and it was impossible to proceed. The dogs
were buried from sight in big snowdrifts, and Holfax had one hand
slightly frozen in digging them out to give them a feed of fish.

But troubles cannot last so very long at a time, and on the morning of
the third day the sun came out once more.

"Forward!" cried Mr. Baxter. "We are nearing the place, Fred. In a
couple of days we ought to be able to tell whether we are on a
wild-goose chase or not."

They crossed the big plain by the next night, and camped at the foot of
the mountain range where the gold was supposed to be buried. Mr. Baxter
consulted the map, and thought they had come very close to the trail
down which Stults had made his way to the settlement, where he had
related his strange story.

By daylight Mr. Baxter's views were confirmed by Holfax, who closely
examined the map. There was to be seen a tracing of a vast ravine, near
which the party had made camp, and this ravine was one of the landmarks
by which the place was known. Several expeditions, seeking the gold, had
gotten thus far, but when they penetrated the mountains they lost all
traces. Either the map was wrong, or they did not properly follow the
directions. Would these fortune hunters have any better luck?

Breakfast was hurriedly eaten, the dogs harnessed, and a start made.
Travel had to be very slow now, and it was necessary for the adventurers
to walk beside the sleds, as the dogs could not pull the passengers and
the heavy loads up the steep, snow-covered mountain.

They reached a shoulder of the incline, and stopped to rest. Here Mr.
Baxter consulted the map again.

"I think we had better bear off more to the left," he said. "It looks as
if there was a stream there, but it's frozen over."

Holfax agreed with him. It was now quite certain they were at least on
part of the very ground mapped out by Stults. But whether they were near
the hidden treasure was another question.

They followed the course of the stream as nearly as they could with the
sleds, and, after a toilsome climb found themselves on a sort of level
place.

"Doesn't look as though we were going to find a waterfall around here,"
remarked Mr. Baxter.

"It certainly does not," added Jerry.

Fred felt his heart sinking. They had come far enough, according to the
map, to be at the fall, but there was no sign of It. Was the story all a
myth? Was there no waterfall, no cave, no gold?

Fred went a little way ahead. As he turned a place where a big ledge of
rock jutted out, hiding what was behind from view, he uttered a cry.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Baxter, hurrying up, thinking the lad had
been hurt.

"The waterfall!" cried Fred. "There it is, frozen solid! See!"

And so it was. The great cold had solidified, into fantastic shapes, the
falling water, until it looked like nothing but a vast ledge of ice,
with great columns, like spears, hanging down here and there.

"Now for the cave!" cried Fred, hurrying forward. "It must be at one
side of the fall."

Mr. Baxter, Fred, and Jerry hastened forward, while Holfax and Johnson
remained behind to look after the dogs, that seemed to develop a sudden
wild desire to run away.

It was hard climbing, over the piled-up masses of frozen water, and
great icicles, but the gold-seekers managed it. Mr. Baxter was in the
lead. He passed across a frozen pool, into which, during what summer
there was in that cold region, the waters of the cataract fell, and
then, with a loud shout, he pressed forward.

The boys, close at his heels, saw him headed toward a dark opening. They
hurried to join him.

"The cave!" cried Fred. "It's the cave where Stults hid his treasure!"

Mr. Baxter was just at the entrance. As he was about to pass under the
icy ledge, there was an ominous crackling overhead. Fred looked up. To
his horror he saw a great icicle, that had become detached from the mass
at the frozen waterfall, come toppling straight down toward where Mr.
Baxter was standing, he having hesitated a moment to look into the black
interior of the cavern.

"Look out!" cried Fred. "Go into the cave!" Mr. Baxter comprehended his
danger. He took a step forward, but, just then, his foot slipped, and he
fell.

The great mass of ice, sharp as a spear, and weighing a ton or more, was
falling straight down on the prostrate man, as if to transfix him.




CHAPTER XVI

DIGGING FOR TREASURE


Fred never could distinctly recall, afterward, how he accomplished it,
but he did. As he saw the mass of ice descending toward Mr. Baxter, the
boy, with a swift, comprehensive look, took in the situation. A daring
scheme came into his head.

From where he and Jerry stood, on a sort of little hill, the ice
descended, in a slope, to the mouth of the cave. The frozen surface was
almost as smooth as glass.

"My father will be killed!" cried Jerry.

Falling downward the great icicle struck with a tinkling sound against
the masses of ice on either side. Down, down it came.

With a sudden motion Fred threw himself face forward on the icy slope,
like a boy coasting down hill on a sled. Only Fred had no sled. But his
thick fur garments protected him as much as a contrivance of wood and
steel could have done.

Right down the steep, icy slope he slid, straight at the prostrate
figure of Mr. Baxter. The man, hampered as he was in his heavy suit
of furs, was struggling in vain to rise and get out of the way of the
falling mass of ice.

[Illustration: "The force of the blow shoved the man ahead"

_Page 117_]

But there was no need. Coasting down the declivity, Fred struck Mr.
Baxter on the shoulder with his outstretched hands, and the force of the
blow shoved the man ahead. Straight ahead it forced him, the weight of
Fred's body, with the speed it had attained, being sufficient to send
Mr. Baxter within the cave. Fred followed also, being unable to stop.

An instant later, with a terrific crash, the great icicle came down
where, but a moment before, Mr. Baxter had been prostrate on the ice.
His life had been saved by Fred's brave and quick act.

Mr. Baxter slowly struggled to his feet, within the cave. Fred also got
up. The youth was trembling from the excitement and exertion.

"Fred," spoke up Mr. Baxter, "you saved my life!"

"I am glad I thought of sliding down to you," replied the boy modestly.
"It came to me in a flash that it was the only way."

"Yes, and you came against me like a flash, only a little more solidly,
or it wouldn't have done any good," went on the man.

Jerry, who had watched the rescue with awe-struck eyes, hastened into
the cavern, climbing over the broken masses of the great icicle. His
emotion was such that, for a moment, he could not speak. He had thought
to see his father crushed to death. Then he clasped the hand of his
parent in one of his, and extended the other to Fred.

"I shall never forget what you did," he said to Fred.

"Nor I," added Mr. Baxter. "If we don't get any of the hidden gold I
shall feel that I owe Fred a debt I can never pay."

"Hello dar!" exclaimed a voice at this juncture. "Whar am everybody? Did
anyt'ing happen?"

"It's Johnson," said Mr. Baxter. "Yes, something did happen."

"Whar am yo'?" asked the colored man. "I can hear yo', but I cain't see
yo'."

The entrance to the cave, in which were the three, was partly hidden
from view by the broken ice.

"We're in the cavern," replied Fred, stepping to the opening, where
Johnson could see him.

"Do you think this is the place, father?" asked Jerry, gazing around
curiously.

"I think so. It seems to correspond with the map. But we shall soon find
out. Probably the gold is not buried very deep, as Stults did not have
much time. The cave is small, and it ought not to take long to explore
it thoroughly. George, tell Holfax where we are, have him make a sort of
temporary camp just outside here, and bring up the tools. We'll stay in
the cave, I think. It's warmer than outside."

The colored man went back to join the Indian, while Mr. Baxter and the
boys looked about the cave, as well as they were able to in the
darkness. The cavern was about twenty feet square, and the roof seemed
to be quite high up. It was formed of rock, and here and there water had
leaked through and frozen, long, sharp icicles hanging from the sloping
sides and roof.

"When we get a lantern lighted we can begin to dig for the treasure,"
said Mr. Baxter. "I'm afraid it will be difficult work, though, for the
ground is frozen as hard as a stone."

The thought of being so near the store of precious metal took their
minds off of the narrow escape from death that Mr. Baxter had just had.
Fred recovered his nerve, and waited with impatience the return of
Johnson and Holfax with the lanterns and tools.

The latter were soon at the cave, having brought the dogs and sleds as
close as possible to the entrance. After bringing in the tools, and
several lanterns, fitted to burn alcohol, and arranged to give a more
brilliant light than the usual little blue flame from that fluid, the
colored man and the Indian, in obedience to orders from Mr. Baxter, went
outside.

"I don't want them to see us when we come upon the gold," said Mr.
Baxter. "There is no telling how much there is, and it would not be
right to put temptation in their way. Besides, they must get the camp in
shape before night."

The lanterns were lighted, and then the work of digging for the treasure
was begun. It was warm enough in the cave to allow the three to lay
aside their heavy outer coats, as the exercise of digging would keep
their blood in circulation.

"Now we'll divide the cave floor into three parts," said Mr. Baxter,
"and each one of us will take one. In this way we will be able to make
sure that we have covered every foot. There is no need to go down very
deep."

The work was soon under way. It certainly was difficult, for the frozen
earth was like stone in hardness. But the picks were sharp, and they
were wielded by sturdy arms, the owners of which were urged on by the
desire to get at the buried wealth.

It was slower work than Mr. Baxter had calculated on, and when it came
time to eat dinner, they had, altogether, turned up only a small part of
the cave floor to a depth of about two feet.

"No sign of treasure yet," said Fred, about the middle of the afternoon.
"I think I'll go outside far a breath of fresh air, and to rest myself."

"I'll go along," declared Jerry.

When the two boys reached the mouth of the cavern, they were surprised
to find that it was quite dark outside. The short day was ended, and the
sun, which never got far above the horizon, had set some time before.
The Northern Lights were beginning to shoot across the sky.

Close to the cave, Holfax and Johnson had arranged the sleds with their
loads, and had tethered the dogs, that were now howling for their supper
of frozen fish.

"That reminds me I'm hungry too," said Jerry; "aren't you, Fred?"

"Not so very. I'm too anxious to find the gold. I'm going back and dig."

They used their picks on the flinty soil for an hour more, and then Mr.
Baxter, with something like a sigh of disappointment, announced that
they would have the night meal.

"I don't suppose any of you came across any stray gold nuggets, did
you?" he asked the boys.

"No," replied Fred soberly. "Do you think the treasure is here, Mr.
Baxter?"

"Well, I hope so. If it isn't we can at least prove that there is no
Stults treasure, and that the story is all a myth, Fred."

"Oh, I hope such a thing as that doesn't happen."

"I hope so myself."

It got much colder after they had had their hot tea and meat, so, as
they were very tired, Mr. Baxter decided they would do no more digging
until the next morning.

"We ought to finish up the cave to-morrow," he said.

"Suppose we don't find the gold, dad?"

Mr. Baxter said nothing. It was a thing he did not like to contemplate.
They had dug over more than half the floor of the cavern, and had seen
no signs of where Stults, years before, had made an excavation to hide
his gold. The cave looked as if it had not been disturbed for centuries.

"This is the right place, according to the map," said Fred, as though to
assure himself and the others that they must be on the track of the
hidden wealth.

"It is," admitted Mr. Baxter, "but there are so many chances for error,
that we can never be sure. There are probably more caves and waterfalls
than this in Alaska, and Stults was not an expert map-maker. He may have
thought he was setting down very explicit directions, when, as a matter
of fact, he may be miles and miles off. But we can tell better in the
morning."

None of the gold-seekers rested well. Though they were more sheltered
than at any time since beginning their journey,--for the cave made a
fine place to camp in,--their sleep was disturbed by a haunting vision
of disappointment. Suppose there should be no gold after all?

They resumed the digging soon after breakfast. By noon they had covered
nearly the entire floor of the cavern. Fred was using his pick in one
corner of the cave. Of the third assigned to him, not more than a square
yard remained. The others had about the same still to explore, and, up
to now, there had not been the slightest indication of the buried
wealth. Fred's heart began to fail him.

He raised his pick high over his head, and brought it down with great
force in the frozen dirt. Somehow it seemed to penetrate easier than it
had before. It stuck in nearly up to the handle. The sharp point had
entered something soft.

The boy's heart gave a convulsive throb. He pried up on the pick handle.
Something was giving way. Had he discovered the hole in which the gold
was hidden?

An instant later, as the light from one of the lanterns gleamed on the
spot where he was digging, Fred uttered a joyful cry.

"What is it?" shouted Mr. Baxter, as he and Jerry threw down their picks
and hastened to the lad's side.

The boy was down on his knees, scooping at something with his hands. The
others looked.

Then they saw what they had come so far to seek. Fred's pick had pierced
through a canvas bag, buried a short distance below the frozen surface.
It was a bag of gold nuggets, and they lay scattered about in the dirt.

"The treasure!" cried Fred. "Here it is! I have found it!"

And so he had. Almost on the verge of failure he had unearthed the gold
buried so long before by the old German, Max Stults!




CHAPTER XVII

THE SPYING INDIAN


The adventurers could hardly believe their good luck. Fred, still on his
knees, scooped out handful after handful of the dull yellow nuggets,
which meant so much to him and to them all. His thoughts went back to
the humble home he had left, to his crippled father, and his toiling
mother. Now they could have peace, comfort and happiness. But, better
than all, his father could now be assured of a cure. No wonder it seemed
too good to be true.

But it was no dream. The gold was actually there. There were two score
sacks of it, as they soon discovered, for it did not take the three of
them long to get it from the hiding place. Only one had been broken by
Fred's pick, and the nuggets were carefully gathered up.

"Good for you, Fred!" exclaimed Jerry, as he and his father helped pile
the gold carefully to one side. "You won out, but I had begun to think
we were going to fail."

"So did I," added Mr. Baxter.

"I was beginning to get discouraged myself," admitted Fred. "How much do
you suppose is there, Mr. Baxter?"

"There must be half a million," said Jerry.

"Nonsense," answered his father. "No such good luck as that. Still, it
is a tidy little fortune. Let me see if I can calculate it."

He weighed in his hands the different bags, counted them and began to
figure in his head.

"There are forty bags," he said, "and I calculate that each one weighs
about eight pounds. That would give us about three hundred pounds of
gold."

"Three hundred pounds of gold!" repeated Fred, in an awe-struck voice.
"How much is that worth?"

"Well, if it's pure gold, such as these nuggets are, it is worth in the
neighborhood of twenty dollars an ounce."

"How many ounces have we?" asked Jerry.

"Well, of course gold is weighed by Troy measure, which goes twelve
ounces to the pound, but I have calculated this gold by the standard of
sixteen ounces to the pound, and, in three hundred pounds there are
forty-eight hundred ounces."

"And if the gold is worth twenty dollars an ounce that would be--why it
would be ninety-six thousand dollars!" exclaimed Fred, who was good at
arithmetic.

"Ninety-six thousand dollars!" repeated Jerry, staggered by the amount
of so much wealth.

"Of course that is only a rough estimate," Mr. Baxter hastened to add.

"Well, now we've got it, how are we going to get it home?" asked Fred,
when they had stood about a while, contemplating the wealth.

"That's so," agreed Jerry. "Three hundred pounds of gold is no light
weight to transport over three hundred miles on dog sleds."

"I think we will distribute it on the four sleds," said Mr. Baxter. "It
will be safer that way, and not such a load for the dogs. We have used
up considerable of our supplies, and we have that much less in weight.
But the gold will more than make up for it."

They were so excited over their good fortune that they scarcely thought
of eating, and they were startled when Johnson put his head in the
opening of the cave, and announced that dinner was ready.

"All right," answered Mr. Baxter. "We've found the gold, George."

"Has yo' really, Massa Baxter? Am it a million dollars?"

"Far from it, George."

The colored man seemed disappointed. Mr. Baxter did not think it wise to
tell him just how much it was, nor did he want him or the Indian to
catch sight of the yellow nuggets. They might not be able to stand the
sight of so much wealth. So the sacks were covered with some fur robes,
and, while Mr. Baxter remained on guard, Fred and Jerry went to eat.
Then they relieved Mr. Baxter, and, with ready rifles, waited until he
had finished his meal.

The short day was soon at an end, and Mr. Baxter, having sent the Indian
away from camp, to bring in a supply of firewood, began, with the aid of
the boys and Johnson, to pile the gold securely on the sleds.

"We'll start for the south in the morning," announced Mr. Baxter, "and
glad I am to be able to do it, too. This cold seems to get through to my
very bones."

As the last of the gold was being put on the sleds, Fred saw, peering
over the edge of an ice-covered rock, the face of an Alaskan Indian.

"Hello, Holfax!" he cried. "What are you coming that way for?"

But, to his surprise, the figure vanished, and, a moment later, Holfax
appeared, coming from a different direction.

"Why--why--that's funny," remarked Fred.

"What is?" asked Mr. Baxter.

"I thought I saw Holfax looking at me from up there, and here he comes
down there."

No sooner had he spoken than there was a cry from the guide. The eyes of
the four adventurers were drawn toward him, and, as they watched, they
saw another Indian rush at Holfax, take quick aim with a rifle, and
fire.

Holfax dropped the bundle of wood he was carrying, seized a long stick,
and ran at the other. The latter turned and fled, easily distancing
Holfax, who had no snowshoes, while his assailant had on a pair.

"Are you hurt?" asked Mr. Baxter anxiously, hurrying toward the guide,
who turned back as the other passed out of sight in a hollow.

"No hurt. Him bad shot. Him miss."

"Who was it? Why did he fire at you? What did he want?"

"Him bad Indian. Him come spy on camp. Him Toldez, friend of Zank--no
good. Me catch," and Holfax, who had donned his snowshoes, prepared to
race after his assailant.

"No!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter quickly. "Don't go, Holfax. There is
something queer about this," he added. "That Indian tried to kill you,
Holfax. Why did he do it?"

"Me no know. Him bad, guess. Maybe want gold."

"That's it!" cried Mr. Baxter. "He's a spy, sent on by some others. You
say he is a friend of Zank? Zank knows that one-eyed man. Do you
suppose there are more Indians around here, Holfax?"

"Mebby so. Plenty Indians live over there," and the guide pointed to the
west. "Toldez live there. Him come spy on camp. Me like shoot Toldez,
but him no shoot me. Too much bad aim," and he chuckled over his narrow
escape, as though it was a thing of no consequence.

"Boys," said Mr. Baxter solemnly, "I'm afraid we're in for trouble. The
thieving Alaskans know about our finding the gold. That one may have
been hiding around here for some time, and probably watched us put the
sacks on the sleds."

"What can we do?" asked Fred.

"We must be on our guard. Get your rifles, and keep them loaded. We must
hasten to some settlement. Here we are at the mercy of these savage and
thieving Indians. Our gold is not safe yet, even though we have found
it."




CHAPTER XVIII

FOLLOWED BY THE ENEMY


An uneasy feeling filled the hearts of the treasure finders. If what Mr.
Baxter surmised proved true, they might have to face more perils than
any they had yet encountered.

"Do you think that man with the glass eye--Callack his name is--will try
to get the gold?" asked Fred.

"It looks as if he had arranged some plot," replied Mr. Baxter. "You
recall how he whispered something to Zank as we started off on this
expedition. I did not like that at the time, for I feared he was up to
some trick. Now, it appears, this other Indian, who is acquainted with
Zank, has been spying on us. Probably Zank, and the other three Indians
who we dismissed, made their way to where their tribe was encamped, and
Callack was there. He may have paid Zank to give information about us."

"But how did he know where we were going?"

"He may have gotten it out of Holfax in some way," said Jerry's father
in a low voice. "I don't believe Holfax would betray us knowingly, but
he is simple-minded, and a scoundrel like Zank may have wormed it out of
him."

"Then what shall we do?"

"We can only be on the lookout. We must stand guard to-night, and
to-morrow we will proceed as fast as we can to the south. Come, we will
eat now. Holfax has the fire ready."

The Indian had built a roaring blaze, and was preparing a meal, while
the hungry dogs, smelling it, tried in vain to break loose and reach the
food.

The travelers passed an uneasy night. They took turns standing guard, at
the mouth of the cave, and, though they saw no signs of any hostile
Indians, there was a nervous fear in every heart. Soon after breakfast
the next morning, having seen that the sleds were well loaded, with the
gold and the remainder of their supplies, they started for the south.

All that day they traveled, making fairly good time, as the slopes of
the hills were downward. The terrible cold did not let up, however, and
Johnson's hands were slightly frost-bitten when they camped that night.

Once more they stood guard, but this time it was under trying
circumstances. For they were now in the open, protected only by the
tent, and the time they had spent in the cave, where it was
comparatively warm, made them wish again for its shelter.

Shortly after midnight, when Fred, in accordance with the arrangements,
roused Mr. Baxter to take his turn at guard duty, there sounded, off to
the rear, long-drawn-out howls. At the sound the sled-dogs raised their
muzzles in the air, until they were pointing at the flickering and
shifting Northern Lights, and sent back an answer.

"Wolves!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter. "I hope we're not going to be surrounded
by a hungry pack of the brutes. We may need all our ammunition to fight
off human enemies."

"Do you think the Indians will attack us?"

"I hope not, but it is hard to say what the rascals will do, especially
if they have an unscrupulous white man to urge them on."

"That sounds as if there were a large number of wolves on our trail."

"It certainly does, Fred. I think I'll rouse Johnson and Holfax."

But there was no need to awaken the Indian. The disturbance among the
dogs, of which he had charge, had roused him from his slumber on the
snow under a pile of fur blankets. He called some commands to the
animals, and they slunk down.

"Wolves coming, Holfax?" asked Mr. Baxter. "Shall we get our guns
ready?"

"No wolves," replied the Indian.

"No wolves? Why I can hear them howl."

"No wolves," repeated the Indian. "Them dogs what howl. Listen. Can tell
different noise. Wolf howl long--shrill--dog he howl short an' quick."

Mr. Baxter and Fred listened intently. Now that their guide had called
their attention to it, they could distinguish a difference in the howls,
which did not sound at all like those of the brutes that had once
attacked them.

"Then if those are dogs, there must be Indians close to us," went on Mr.
Baxter.

Holfax nodded.

"What are they doing near here? Is that the camp where Zank and the
others went?"

"No," replied Holfax. "Them Indians follow us."

"They are following us?"

"'Bout three miles back," added Holfax. "Can hear plain on cold night."

"Do you mean they are coming after us to get the gold?" inquired Mr.
Baxter.

Once more Holfax nodded.

"Them camp now," he said. "Follow us in mornin'."

Mr. Baxter, as Fred could see in the glare of the Aurora Borealis,
looked grave. Their worst fears were realized. It would have been better
to have a pack of wolves after them, than to have this band of savage
Alaskan Indians, led on probably by a daring and unscrupulous white man.

"Shall I stay up and keep watch with you?" asked Fred.

"No. I think, as Holfax says, that they will not attempt to creep up on
us during the night. They will do nothing until morning. Then we must be
on the lookout."

Holfax proved that he had guessed correctly. There was no disturbance
that night, but, in the morning, after they had started, the Indian
mounted a hill, near which they had encamped.

"There Zank and his men," he announced, pointing to the rear. "Can see
smoke of fire."

Mr. Baxter looked. A thin thread of smoke could be observed ascending in
the frigid morning air, but no camp was in sight.

They started off soon after they had made a hasty breakfast. It seemed
colder than at any time yet, but a glance at the thermometer showed that
it was only thirty degrees below zero. Still that was cold enough,
though what made it seem more piercing was a stiff wind that sprang up.

"Hark!" exclaimed Holfax, when they had gone several miles.

He halted the dogs and listened. The others could hear nothing.

"What is it, Holfax?" asked Mr. Baxter.

"Them come," replied the Indian. "Can hear dogs howl, an' sound of sleds
on ice."

This may have been so, but the hearing of the Indian was more acute than
that of the travelers.

"So the enemy is after our gold?" remarked Mr. Baxter. "Well, they'll
have to fight to get it."

"Suppose they outnumber us?" asked Fred.

"They probably do. Otherwise I do not believe they would dare think of
attacking us. There is probably a large band of them."

"Then we can not fight them alone."

"I suppose not," admitted Mr. Baxter. "But I have a plan that may help
us. Holfax, come here, I want to talk to you."




CHAPTER XIX

THE ATTACK


The Indian obeyed, having first fastened his leading team of dogs to a
large ice boulder by means of a long thong, so they would not run off.
As the other animals were attached to the team Holfax drove, they too,
halted.

"Goin' make fight?" asked the Indian.

"That is what I want to talk to you about. Do you think we can fight
them?" and he motioned back toward their pursuers.

"They plenty many," replied the Indian.

"I suppose so. What sort of weapons have they?"

"They got guns."

"What! Indians in this wild country having guns? Where did they get
them?"

"White mans give, for to be showed gold," replied Holfax, "Indian not
care much for gold--only for guns an' t'ings. If can find gold tell
white mans an' git guns. Guns better than gold--guns shoot wolves,
musk-ox, moose."

"That's so. Guns are worth more to the Indians than gold."

"Shoot mans too," added the Indian. "Zank an' his men got plenty much
guns--also plenty much men. Make big fight."

"That is what I supposed," said Mr. Baxter. "Our only hope is to run
away from them, and get help. We'll put the first into operation at
once. Do you think our dogs are faster than theirs are, Holfax?"

"Our dogs much fastest. I pick out good dogs. No dogs so fast like dogs
Holfax pick out."

"I believe you. These dogs are certainly excellent animals, and they are
as strong and healthy as the day we started."

"Other dogs--no much good," went on Holfax, speaking slowly to make his
imperfect English understood.

"Then we have a chance to escape them. But I am also going to try to get
help. Holfax, do you think you could get some friendly natives to aid
us? Can't you call on some friends of yours who will come and help us
fight these scoundrels, who want to steal the gold?"

"Holfax's friends much ways off."

"I suppose so, but you can travel fast on snowshoes, and tell them to
come back with you. We will pay them well."

"Pay gold?" asked the Indian.

"Some gold, yes. I'll give you and your friends a thousand dollars in
gold if they succeed in protecting us."

"Gold buy plenty guns," observed the Alaskan, seeming to consider the
matter.

"Will you go?"

"Me go," said the guide quickly. "Good far ways, but Holfax go quick.
Tell friends come help white man, two boy-white mans an' black man like
smoke," the last description referring to Johnson, whose ebony skin was
a source of considerable wonder to the Indian.

"That's right," said Mr. Baxter. "Now you had better hurry, Holfax.
There's no telling when those thieving Alaskans will be close after us."

"But what are we going to do?" asked Fred. "Will we stay here and defend
ourselves?"

"No, my plan is to push on south as fast as possible. Every mile we get
nearer our destination the better off we are, for the miners will rally
to our aid when they see our plight."

"But how can we go on without Holfax to guide the dogs?"

"I have thought of that. I know something of dog teams, though I am not
an expert driver. I have often handled the animals, and I think, with
the aid of you boys and Johnson, and if I leave the four teams hitched
together, I can get along all right. Holfax and his friends can take a
short cut and catch up with us perhaps. How long before you can get
help, Holfax?"

"Two sleeps," replied the Indian, meaning two nights.

"Well, we'll try to stand the enemy off until then. Now hurry, and don't
waste any time."

Holfax was an experienced traveler. He fastened on his snowshoes, made
himself up a package of food, tea and a pot, put some matches in a safe
place, and was ready to start on his long trip to find his friends.

"Keep watch," was his parting injunction to the four treasure finders.
"No let Indians come too close. Me come back soon as can."

With that he was off, setting himself a rapid pace, half walk, half
trot, that enabled him to cover considerable ground in a day.

"Now to see what sort of progress we can make," remarked Mr. Baxter when
Holfax was out of sight down a hollow between two ice hummocks. "Boys,
help me with the dogs. Johnson, you sort of keep your eyes on the sleds
so that none of them upset. We'll see if we can outdistance our
pursuers."

The dogs made much trouble, leaping about here and there, and almost
refusing to get properly in line with the traces so they could pull.
Probably they knew that Holfax was not there to punish them. But by
dint of hard work Mr. Baxter succeeded in getting them started.

He rode in the foremost sled, with Fred next, then came Jerry, while
Johnson brought up the rear. The colored man had strict instructions to
give the alarm the instant he saw the enemy in pursuit.

Once the dogs found out they had to do their usual work, they seemed to
give up their playful spirit, and settled into the collars for a long,
steady pull. They were traversing the same track they had used in going
to the cave, but of course all traces of it had been blotted out by
storms. Still the dogs seemed able to find their way with very little
guidance.

Though anxious watch was kept, there was no sign of the enemy seen that
day, and night settled down, finding the travelers in a more hopeful
mood.

"Perhaps they have given up," suggested Fred.

"I'm afraid not," returned Mr. Baxter. "More likely they are up to some
trick. We must be careful about standing guard to-night. Fire at the
least suspicious sight or sound, boys. I'm afraid it's going to be more
trouble to keep this gold than it was to find it."

They were traveling over the plain now, having emerged from the forest
some time previously, and, when Mr. Baxter gave the word to halt for
the night, the boys looked about for a good place to pitch the tent.

"That looks like a sheltered place over there," remarked Fred, pointing
to where a big hummock of ice offered some protection from the north
wind that was now sweeping over the plain with great force.

"We'll try it there," decided Mr. Baxter. "Fasten the dogs well, and
give them plenty of fish. We must keep up their strength, and see that
they are in good health, or we will fail, after all."

The animals were tethered, the tent put up, and supper was gotten ready.
Then a big fire was built, as some protection against the bitter cold.
In spite of the fact that they were getting closer to the Yukon River,
where it is always warmer than inland, they felt the frost cruelly.

Jerry had the last watch that night, his hour extending to nearly
sunrise, which, as winter was more and more advancing, was not of much
account in the arctic regions. As the boy noted with satisfaction a
reddening in the east, indicating that it would soon be time for
breakfast, when he would not be so cold, he heard a noise off to his
left. It was different from the crackle of the ice, and the dull boom
that told of falling masses of frozen crystal, and Jerry turned quickly
around.

As he did so he saw a sight that startled him. From behind great masses
of ice there suddenly sprang into view the ugly faces of a score or
more of Alaskans. They peered at the little camp of adventurers, and
some of them uttered a cry of satisfaction.

"The Indians! The Indians! They're all around us!" cried Jerry.

Mr. Baxter, Johnson and Fred hurriedly awoke, and it was instinct with
them to grab the guns lying at their sides.

"What's the matter?" cried Jerry's father, running to the flap of the
tent, near which his son stood.

"The Indians! They're here!"

There was no doubt of it. Seeing that there was no need of concealment,
the Alaskans boldly advanced. It was seen that nearly every one had a
gun.

But stranger than all was the figure that walked at the head of the
hostile Indian procession. It was the figure of a white man. A man with
a glass eye--the same man who had accosted Fred on the ship.

"Well, what do you want?" asked Mr. Baxter as he saw Callack advancing.
"What right have you to follow us?"

"There's no 'right' up in this land," was the sneering answer. "There's
no law, neither. We do as we please here."

"What are you going to do now?"

"We're going to take that gold you unlawfully removed from the cave. Ah,
you needn't deny you have it. I have proof of it. One of my men saw it."

"I suppose you mean that spy," replied Mr. Baxter. "We are not going to
deny it. But let me tell you we'll never give up anything we have
without a fight."

"A fight? Why, we outnumber you five to one!"

"I'm not afraid of that. We shall defend our property to the last."

"Bold words!" spoke Callack with a sneer, "but I'm going to have that
gold," and he advanced toward Mr. Baxter.

The Indians, watching their white leader, began to close in on the
treasure finders.

"Fred!" cried Mr. Baxter, "you look after the left side, Jerry, you the
right, and I'll take the center. Stand with your backs to the tent.
Johnson, get up on the ice hummock and fire at the first man who comes
within a hundred feet, be he a white or an Indian."

In less time than it takes to tell it the little force had assumed a
position of defense. From his elevated place the negro could command a
wide range.

"Are you going to fight us?" demanded Callack.

"Certainly," replied Mr. Baxter.

"It will be useless. I have traveled too far after that gold to give it
up now. You had better surrender. I'll guarantee to get you safe to the
river."

"Never! We are going to keep the gold."

At that moment, whether by accident or design, one of the Indians
discharged his gun at Johnson, who had not done as Mr. Baxter had
thought he would, and concealed himself behind some blocks of ice.
Instead he stood bolt upright.

There was a cry of pain from the colored man. An instant later he raised
his rifle quickly and fired into the midst of the advancing Alaskans.
One Indian fell.




CHAPTER XX

BURYING THE TREASURE


"Are you hurt?" cried Mr. Baxter anxiously.

"Jest a scratch on mah cheek," replied Johnson. "But it was so close,
sah, dat it done made me mad. I hit one o' dem rascals."

"That's what you did. I hope you didn't kill him, for I don't want any
bloodshed if we can avoid it. Still, they fired first."

The moment the Indian fell his companions were thrown into confusion.
They had not expected such vigorous resistance. Several of them threw
down their guns and rushed to their fallen comrade. A well-directed fire
at that moment would probably have scattered the enemy, but Mr. Baxter
did not want to shoot into the midst of the Indians, unarmed as most of
them now were.

Callack was in a rage. He stormed at his allies, and made them take up
their guns again. The Indian Johnson had hit was only wounded, and he
was carried to the rear. But the quick response of the colored man to
the attack of the Indians had a good effect. It frightened the
Alaskans, and, notwithstanding the demands of the rascally white man,
they would not again advance. They wanted to consider matters first, and
Callack was too big a coward to proceed alone.

Sullenly he retreated with his band of Indians to a small hollow about
half a mile from the Baxter camp.

"Don't think we're going to let you go," he called out angrily as he
went away. "We're going to have that gold."

Mr. Baxter did not reply. He watched the withdrawal of the Indians.

"Keep a close watch," he cautioned Johnson. "Tell us as soon as you see
any suspicious movement."

"Dat's what I will, an' I'll shoot, too."

"No, don't do that unless they attack us again. They may leave us alone
after this."

The position of the treasure finders was perilous enough. They were in a
desolate country, and, though they had plenty of provisions for the time
they had calculated on, they would not have enough if they were detained
by the enemy. Their only hope was that Callack's men would retreat.

"Well, they've given us a chance to get breakfast, at any rate,"
remarked Mr. Baxter. "Now you boys hustle around, make some tea, cook
some meat, and get things ready, while I bring the dogs closer in and
feed them. Then I'll lay out some more ammunition. If it comes to a
fight we'll have our hands full."

"Do you think they'll go away?" asked Fred.

"No; to be frank, I don't think they will. Callack is too greedy after
the gold. He knows we have it."

"Then what are we going to do? We can't fight such a big crowd."

"I don't know. Perhaps I can think up some plan. But now get busy with
the breakfast."

The meal was soon ready and eaten, Fred taking the place of the colored
man on the ice hill while Johnson ate. Mr. Baxter had brought the sleds
closer to the big hummock, had fastened the dogs more securely, and had
opened several packages of cartridges.

"Why can't we build some sort of a fort?" suggested Fred.

"A fort?" inquired Mr. Baxter.

"Yes; to protect ourselves."

"What could we make it of?"

"Blocks of ice."

"So we could. I wonder I didn't think of that. It's a good idea, Fred.
We'll do it. Get the picks and shovels. We can soon throw up a
breastwork that will be proof against their bullets, and, as we occupy
the highest ground, they can't fire down on us."

There was plenty of material for the fort, and before night there was a
good rampart of ice, built in a semicircle out from the big rock, and
taking in the tent and sleds, to which the dogs were kept fastened. They
were quiet now, Mr. Baxter having given them a good feeding of seal
blubber.

"What are your plans?" asked Fred after an early supper. "Do you think
they will attack us to-night?"

"I hope not, for I want to put into execution a scheme I have thought
of."

"What is it, dad?" asked Jerry.

"I think we will bury the treasure and make a dash to escape."

"Bury the treasure? Where?"

"Right here. We can cut a deep hole down under the ice and snow, put the
bags of gold in, cover them up, and then be in readiness to make a dash
through their lines."

"Suppose they pursue us?"

"That is probably what they will do. But I think we can escape, as our
dogs are much swifter than are theirs. Then we will proceed toward the
river, get help, and return for the gold. Or, better than that, Holfax
and his friends may come to our relief. They ought to be here soon."

"If he doesn't fail us," suggested Fred.

"I do not believe he will. Holfax is faithful."

Mr. Baxter's plan was soon put into operation. A great hole was dug in
the ice, the enemy being unable to observe the operation because of the
rampart. Then the gold, in bags, was put in, and the blocks of frozen
crystal placed back again. To better cover up the place, Mr. Baxter
melted some snow into water in a kettle over a fire and poured the water
over the filled-up hole. It froze almost instantly, and no one would
ever have suspected that beneath that ice there was a fortune in gold.

"When are you going to try to escape?" asked Fred.

"To-night, about midnight. I think they will be sleeping soundly then,
and if the dogs keep quiet we can slip through their lines."

"Can't we muzzle the dogs?"

"I'm afraid not. They would probably be so frightened that they would
make more fuss than ever. We can only trust to luck."

Meanwhile Johnson or one of the adventurers kept a close watch from the
hummock. Though only occasional glimpses of the Indians could be seen,
the number of fires that were built showed that the enemy was in a
circle about the place.

"They have us fairly hemmed in," said Fred. "They evidently mean to get
that gold."

"I should think you'd be afraid to leave it buried here, dad, and go
off," said Jerry. "Won't they dig and find it?"

"I depend on our chance of fooling them," replied his father. "I don't
believe they will suspect we would go off and leave the treasure. They
will think we have it with us and will give chase."

"Then our only chance depends on keeping out of their clutches?"

"That's it."

Preparations for the escape were quietly made, so that if by chance any
spying Indian looked into the little camp he would not understand what
was going on. The sleds were securely loaded, rifles and ammunition
placed where they could be quickly reached, and the tent struck shortly
before midnight. The Northern Lights were not as brilliant as usual, for
which they were thankful, as it favored their chances of not being
discovered.

At last all was in readiness. For a wonder the dogs were quiet, and
allowed themselves to be harnessed with little or no fuss. With a final
look around the fort, which held the treasure they had braved so much
for, the small party set out, each one taking his place on a sled.

Mr. Baxter called softly to the leading dogs, and swung the long whip
over their furry backs. The animals straightened out, and set off at a
rapid run. Mr. Baxter guided them toward the left, which seemed the more
open place in the circle the enemy had drawn around the camp.

They had made a good start, but could they get far enough through the
line of the Indians to make good their escape? That was the question in
the hearts of the four.




CHAPTER XXI

CAPTURED


As the dogs drew the sleds down the little elevation on which the gold
was buried, and where the fort was built, the treasure finders caught a
glimpse of their enemies.

The Indians had established four camps, about equal distances apart,
depending on members from each one to guard the spaces between. Four
fires glowed on the snow, and little dark heaps here and there showed
where either dogs or the Indians were huddled up in slumber.

Mr. Baxter directed the leading dog team as nearly as possible between
two fires. He hoped none of the natives would awake, and certainly there
seemed to be no danger of disturbing any guards, for there were none to
be seen, at least none patroling the open spaces.

But his hopes were doomed to disappointment. One of the Indian dogs set
up a sudden howl. Perhaps it was a challenge in the Alaskan dog
language. At any rate, it was answered from several throats of the
beasts pulling the sleds of our friends.

"That will bring them out!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter in dismay. "No need for
silence now!"

He shouted to the dogs, calling loudly, and cracked the long whip.
Barking and snarling, bidding defiance to their fellows in the camp of
the enemy, the animals rushed on.

But the barking had roused the Indians and likewise their white leader.
Callack's voice could be heard urging on his men. One or two rifles were
fired, probably at random.

"Whip your dogs, boys," called Mr. Baxter, and Fred and Jerry let the
long lashes fly.

The Indians were leaping to their feet and shouting. Several hurried to
their sleds and began harnessing the animals.

Even then the fugitives might have escaped had it not been for their own
dogs. A series of loud howls came from the beasts of the Indians. This
was too much for the others. With wild yelps, utterly disregarding the
voices and whips of Mr. Baxter, the boys and Johnson, who tried to urge
them on, the brutes turned and made straight back for the camp of the
Alaskans, probably intent on fighting with those who had challenged
them.

"They're taking us right into the midst of the enemy!" cried Fred.
"Let's jump off and run!"

He tried to do so, but he was so encumbered with robes and fur coats
that he could not.

Mr. Baxter was trying his best to guide the leading team to one side,
but it was useless. Lash them as he did the dogs kept on, straight for
the Indian camp, beyond which they had almost passed.

"We've got 'em!" yelled Callack. Then he cried some commands in the
Alaskan tongue.

"Shall we fire?" cried Fred.

"No, don't!" replied Mr. Baxter. "You can't tell where you are aiming.
You might kill one of us. I guess it's all up. But I'm glad I buried the
gold," he added to himself.

A moment later the adventurers were fairly in the hostile camp, and
Jacob Callack and his men had surrounded them.

"Surrender! We've got you!" yelled the rascally white man.

"Yes, you've got us," admitted Mr. Baxter coolly, "but you wouldn't have
if our dogs hadn't turned back."

"They're fine dogs," answered Callack with a sneer. "I think I'll take
'em for myself. Now then, get off your sleds and we'll talk business.
After I have the gold I may consent to let you have your dogs back,
though you don't deserve it, for you've made me a lot of trouble."

He spoke as though he had a right to steal the treasure from those who
had found it, and as if they had no right to resist. Callack called
something to his men, and a moment later they were pulling the treasure
finders from the sleds and binding them with thongs of deer skin, having
first taken their guns away.

Mr. Baxter and the two boys submitted with what grace they could to
these indignities. But Johnson, the big colored man, fought with all his
strength against the Indians. And, as he was very strong, and they were
not very muscular, he tumbled several of them in a heap.

"There ain't no ugly ole Indian gwine t' tie up George Johnson without a
fight, that's what they ain't!" he exclaimed.

"Rush at him all together!" called Callack to his men in the Alaskan
tongue. Four or five of them did rush, but even they were no match for
Johnson, who caught them in his long, powerful arms and tossed them over
his shoulder, one by one, into a deep snow bank.

"I'll fix you!" yelled Callack, springing toward the fighting colored
man, whose gun had been taken away.

The leader of the ugly Indians raised his rifle by the barrel and
brought the stock down with terrific force on the head of Johnson.

Even protected as his skull was by a thick fur cap, the blow felled the
negro like an ox. With a groan he sank down on the snow.

"There," said Callack, addressing Mr. Baxter. "That's the way I serve
them as don't do what I say."

"You're a coward, to strike a defenseless man," said Mr. Baxter
contemptuously.

"What's that! You dare call me a coward!" and the infuriated man strode
over to Jerry's father with upraised rifle. But Mr. Baxter did not
flinch. Looking Callack straight in the face, he never moved away from
under the poised weapon. The man's bravery was too much for the coward.
Muttering something below his breath Callack moved away, calling to the
Indians to bring along the captives and the sleds.

"Are you going to let Johnson lie there and freeze to death?" asked Mr.
Baxter.

"Let him freeze! What do I care?" was the cruel answer.

"If you do I shall charge you with deliberate murder when I reach a
settlement," threatened Mr. Baxter.

"Maybe you'll never reach one."

But the threat evidently had some effect, for, at a muttered word from
Callack, some of the Indians carried the unconscious colored man to one
of the tents of the enemy's camp.

It was quite light, for the Aurora Borealis was streaming across the
sky, giving a radiance like that of a full moon, only more beautiful.
The captives could see that they were in the hands of quite a large band
of Indians. More of the Alaskans had evidently arrived since the first
skirmish. Among them was Zank, on whose evil face was an ugly grin at
his success in betraying those who had trusted him.

"It would have been better if you'd given up the gold at first," said
Callack with a sneer. "Then I'd have let you go down to the river with
your sleds and dogs. Now I don't know what I'll do with you. But first
I'll get the gold."

"Will you?" thought Fred, as he recalled the cunning way in which they
had buried it.

Callack gave some more orders, and the Indians began taking the things
off the sleds of the captives. The dogs were removed and tied at a
distance from the other animals, so the different teams would not fight.

So eager was the rascally white man to get possession of the treasure
that he began to aid his allies in searching for the precious metal. The
robes, tools, provisions and supplies of Mr. Baxter and the boys were
rudely cast to one side in the hunt for the bags of yellow nuggets.

But the search was without avail. When at last the sleds had been
stripped bare and no gold was found, Callack started up in a rage.

"Where's that gold?" he cried. "You had it, I know you did!"

"Yes, we had it," admitted Mr. Baxter calmly. "One of your spies saw
it."

"Then where is it now? You've got to give it up! I see! You have it
concealed about you."

He strode over to Mr. Baxter and began to feel about his clothing. The
impossibility of any one hiding a lot of bulky sacks about him without
having them show did not occur to Callack until he had convinced himself
that Mr. Baxter had no gold under his fur suit. Neither had the boys nor
Johnson.

Callack was plainly puzzled. He had confidently expected to get the gold
when he captured the fugitives. Now that it was neither among their
baggage nor on their persons, he did not know what to do. But he was
determined to have the bags of nuggets.

Approaching close to Mr. Baxter, and shaking his fist in the face of the
bound man, he asked:

"Are you going to tell me where that treasure is?"

"No, I am not," was the bold reply.

"Then you'll suffer for it!"

He turned aside, called to some of the Indians, and the three captives
were led into one of the tents, while a guard of several of the Alaskans
was stationed outside.

"Well, they've got us," said Fred softly when they were left alone.

"Yes," admitted Mr. Baxter, "but they haven't got the gold."




CHAPTER XXII

ANXIOUS HOURS


The situation of the captives was desperate. They were in the power of a
white man as savage, or more so, as any of the Indians. To add to this,
he was enraged at his failure to discover the gold, to obtain which he
had risked so much. What he might do to compel them to reveal the hiding
place they could only guess.

For a while after being thrust into the tent there was silence among the
three. They had been roughly handled, the exertion to escape had been
hard, and they were utterly discouraged. It looked as though they had
failed almost in the moment of success.

"Do you think Holfax will bring any aid?" asked Fred after a long pause.

"I think he will try," replied Mr. Baxter. "Whether he can bring enough
of his friends to drive away this band of rascals is another matter. He
ought to come along pretty soon, if he had good luck in reaching a camp
and can persuade enough to come back with him."

"I wish I could loosen some of these knots," remarked Jerry. "I'm tied
so tightly that I can't move, and I'm getting cold."

It was very cold, even in the shelter of the tent, and wrapped as they
were in thick fur garments, for they were tied so tightly that their
blood could not circulate freely.

"Let's see if we can't loosen some of our bonds," suggested Fred. "The
exertion will make us warmer even if we can't. And if we get loose we
may be able to escape."

"No, don't try that part of it," advised Mr. Baxter.

"Why not?"

"Because, angry as he now is over not finding the gold, Callack would
probably order us shot at once. If we wish to save our lives we will
have to go slow. Try to loosen the thongs, by all means. That, as Fred
says, will warm us up. But even if we get loose it will be advisable to
stay in the tent. For, if we should manage to get out, we could not go
far without dogs and sleds, and it would be impossible to harness the
animals unobserved. No, boys, we'll have to stay here awhile and take
our chances."

The Indians had been in such a hurry to tie their captives so that a
search might be made for the gold that the knots were not very secure.
It did not take a great deal of exertion to undo them, and the three
were able to stand up and stamp about, thereby warming themselves.

"I feel better," announced Fred. "Now if they'd bring us in something to
eat we wouldn't be so badly off."

"I wonder how it goes with poor Johnson," said Mr. Baxter. "That was a
cruel blow he received. Callack shall pay for that some day."

"He's a brute!" exclaimed Fred. "I wish I was big enough to fight him."

"I fancy if Johnson ever got at him in a fair fight Callack would wish
he had never tried any of his tricks," observed Jerry.

Anxious hours passed. The captives, looking from the tent, saw Callack
and several Indians grouped about the supplies they had taken from the
sleds of the prisoners. They were appropriating to their own use such of
the articles as they fancied, while Callack, unwilling to believe the
gold was not there, was minutely examining every robe and garment,
hoping to find part of the treasure concealed in the folds, or sewed up
in them.

It was getting lighter with the approach of morning, though the days
were successively getting shorter and shorter as the winter season
advanced.

At last Callack became convinced that there was no trace of the gold to
be found in the baggage of his prisoners. He gave up the search, and,
calling to some of the Indians, ordered them to replenish the campfires,
which had died down in the excitement over the attempted escape.

"I hope he thinks to send us some breakfast," remarked Fred, as from the
tent the captives saw the Indians preparing a repast.

"He's not very likely to, unless he thinks that by getting us in good
humor we will tell him where the gold is," said Mr. Baxter.

"Will you tell him?"

"Never! And I hope you boys will remain firm, no matter what he does."

"I'll not," declared Fred. The search for the gold had been too hard,
and the possession of it meant too much to him to make him willing, even
under stress of dire threats, to tell where it was hidden.

"He'll have to threaten me good and hard before I'll tell him where it
is," said Jerry.

"Perhaps he may find it himself," suggested Fred.

"I don't think so," observed Mr. Baxter. "We hid it very carefully, and
it will take some digging, even if he thinks to try that method, before
he'll come upon it. By that time Holfax and his men may arrive."

That it was not Callack's plan to starve his captives was shown a little
later, when a couple of Indians came in with some hot tea and some
meat. There was also some cold tallow, an article of diet much esteemed
by the Alaskans in the winter, and the treasure finders had learned to
eat it. For fats are very heating, and some such food as that is much
needed in the Arctic region.

"He's up to some move," said Fred, as, looking from the tent-flap, he
saw a lot of the Indians beginning to break camp.

"Maybe they're going to leave us here and go back to the cave where we
found the gold, thinking that we left it hidden there," suggested Jerry.

"No, they know we brought the gold away," said his father. "Their spy
was there for that purpose."

"They certainly are moving the camp," went on Fred.

Moving it they were, but for no great distance. The tents and supplies,
including those of the prisoners, their sleds and dogs, were taken
toward the place where the ice fort had been built around the base of
the great hummock.

"He's going back to our old camp!" exclaimed Fred.

"I thought he would," added Mr. Baxter. "He's going to have a try for
the gold there. Well, I hope he doesn't find it."

A little later Callack approached the tent where the three captives
were.

"We're going to shift a bit," he said gruffly. "Going to where you had
your camp. I'll dig up the gold there, and then I'll see what I'll do
with you."

If he hoped to provoke a response by this he was disappointed, for
neither Mr. Baxter nor the boys answered. Callack did not appear
surprised to see that his prisoners were no longer bound. Perhaps he
thought the Indians who had brought them the breakfast had loosed the
thongs.

Closely guarded on all sides by the dusky Alaskans, Mr. Baxter and the
two boys were made to march back to where the ice fort was. The tent was
struck, and the old camp abandoned. Johnson, who had somewhat recovered
from the cruel blow, staggered along, with an Indian on either side of
him.

Callack lost no time in seeking the gold once he had reached the place
where the first skirmish had taken place. He ordered his men to erect
the tents, and then, taking several of the Indians, including Zank, with
him, each one with a pick and shovel, he began to dig around the big
hummock of ice.

"He'll hunt a good while before he finds anything there," remarked Fred.

As soon as the tents were up more Indians were set at digging. They
demolished the fort, but this hindered rather than helped them, for the
floor inside beneath which the treasure was buried was covered deeper
than ever with a layer of ice. Callack excavated a little there, but the
place seemed frozen so solidly because of the water Mr. Baxter had
poured over it that it did not look as if it had been disturbed in a
hundred years. So he did not go deep enough.

All day long the Indians, urged on by the white man, dug and searched
for the treasure, but without success. As night came on Callack seemed
to give it up.

Throwing down his pick, he walked over to where Mr. Baxter and the boys
were kept under guard in a tent.

"Come on out here!" he called to them. "I've got something to say to
you."

He gave an order to the guards, and they stood aside. Wondering what the
new move of the scoundrel might be, Mr. Baxter, followed by his son and
Fred, went out. A bitter cold wind was blowing, and it looked as if
there was going to be a big snowstorm.




CHAPTER XXIII

CALLACK'S CRUEL THREAT


"Well," remarked Callack as he eyed his captives, "you hid the gold
pretty far down, I guess. I haven't been able to find it."

He waited, seemingly for an answer, but Mr. Baxter did not reply, nor
did the boys say anything.

"Now," went on the rascally white man, "I'm going to make you tell me
where you've buried it, for I know you did bury it."

"Then why don't you find it?" asked Mr. Baxter.

"You were too sharp for me. I don't mind admitting that. You are ahead
of me--so far--but I've got several tricks to play yet. But first I want
to give you a fair chance."

"Then if you want to do that the best thing you can do is to give us
back our sleds, dogs and other possessions and let us go on our way."

"Hu! I'd be very foolish to do that, wouldn't I? As soon as you got
there you'd have mounted police after me, or you'd organize a vigilance
committee."

"That's what we would," admitted Mr. Baxter. "I'll pay you back for what
you have done, if it takes the last dollar I have in the world."

"Well, you'll not use any of the gold," replied Callack with a sneer,
"for I'm going to have that myself."

"You'll have to get it first."

"I intend to. That's why I called you out here. I have a proposition to
make to you."

"You can save your breath," said Mr. Baxter quickly. "I'll never consent
to compromise with you and give you part of the gold."

"And I'm not asking for a compromise. I want it all," cried Callack
quickly. "What I mean is this: You can tell me where the gold is buried
and help me find it, in which case I'll provide you with safe
transportation to the river."

"And if I refuse?"

"Then you will be starved to death!"

At this cruel threat even Mr. Baxter, hardened as he was by privation in
his early mining days, could not repress a start. For of all the deaths
that could be devised, that of starving in the Arctic region is probably
the worst. In that terribly cold climate much food is necessary to keep
up bodily warmth, and once the temperature of the blood gets too low,
the end comes by freezing. So, in reality, Callack was threatening to
freeze and starve his captives to death unless they revealed the hiding
place of the gold.

But after his first exhibition of emotion Mr. Baxter recovered his
composure. He did not believe Callack would dare do as he said he would.

"I thought I'd make you think twice," said the scoundrel, as he noted
the slight change that came over Mr. Baxter's face. "Now will you tell
me?"

"No!"

The word came as an exclamation.

"Then you'll starve."

"Will we?" asked Mr. Baxter. "You can't scare me, Callack. A man who is
cowardly enough to strike an unarmed person isn't brave enough to do as
you say you'll do. You'll be afraid to do it, for, though we're a good
way from civilization, the law will get you some day. I'm not afraid.
These boys are not afraid. You'll never get the gold if we have to tell
you where it is, and you can make the most of that. Now don't ask me
again, for if you do I'll not answer you. I don't like to talk to such a
scoundrel as you are."

These words of defiance stung Jacob Callack to fury. He raged up and
down in front of the captives, and at times it seemed as if he would
attack them. But the fearless attitude of Mr. Baxter, and the calm
bearing of the boys, who took a lesson from their older companion, was
too much for the coward.

"All right!" he exclaimed. "We'll see how you'll talk after you've been
twenty-four hours without anything to eat. We'll see how you'll like it
to feel the cold making you stiff. You need not think I'll ask you again
where the gold is. I'll find it myself, and punish you at the same time.
You might better have thought twice, Simon Baxter, before you defied me.
You don't know me!"

"Yes, I do. I know you for a coward, and a man who would not stop at the
worst of crimes to accomplish his ends. But I'm not afraid of you. Help
is on the way to us, and before twenty-four hours have passed you may be
begging me for mercy."

Callack laughed. Evidently he placed no faith in what his prisoner said.

"Very well," he sneered. "From now on, unless you change your mind and
decide to tell me where the gold is, you shall have not a morsel to
eat."

He turned and walked away, while the captives went back into the tent.

"Do you think he'll really do as he threatened?" inquired Fred.

"I have no doubt but that he'll try it," replied Mr. Baxter.

"But can we stand it?" asked Jerry. "Wouldn't it be better to give him
part of the gold and have him let us go?"

"He'd never be content with part of the treasure," was his father's
answer. "He wants it all. But what do you say, Fred? You are an equal
partner in this enterprise. Do you want to give Callack all the gold?"

Fred thought matters over for a moment. He had endured much to get his
share of the treasure, and he was likely to endure more. To return
without the gold meant that conditions would be the same at home as they
had been. There would be pinching poverty, with his mother toiling over
her sewing, and his father trying to get such light tasks as suited his
strength. It meant that Mr. Stanley would get well very slowly, if at
all.

On the other hand, if he stood out boldly with Mr. Baxter, there was a
chance that Holfax and his men might come in time to save them. If he
could stand the terrible pangs of hunger and cold for a time, all might
yet be well. He made up his mind.

"We'll starve before we give up the secret of the gold," he said boldly.

"That's what I thought you'd say!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter. "I didn't think
you'd give in, Fred. Now let them do their worst! We'll show them how
brave boys and a strong man can go without eating. I don't believe
he'll dare let us die. And Holfax may come at any time now. Yes, boys,
we'll defy that scoundrel!"

At that moment several Indians appeared at the flap of the tent.

"Come," said one who spoke a little English. "You go."

"I wonder what's up now?" said Fred. "Has he found the gold?"

There was no choice but to obey, and the captives went outside. It was
snowing furiously.




CHAPTER XXIV

DOUBLE HARDSHIP


Callack stood in front of the tent from which the captives were led by
the Indians. He was so bundled up in furs that he was scarcely
recognizable, and, as Mr. Baxter walked toward him, the man said:

"I'm going to give you one more chance to tell where the gold is. Will
you?"

"I will not."

"Be careful! You don't know what you are going to suffer!"

"You have my answer. I'll not tell you where the gold is, and you had
better be careful what you do. Friends are on the way to rescue us."

"They will arrive too late."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that unless you reveal the secret you will be left out in the
open all night, with only such clothing as you now have on, and not a
morsel of food, nor a drop of warm drink shall you have. Now do you
still refuse to tell me?"

Mr. Baxter hesitated. The double hardship might be more than the boys
could stand. As for himself, he believed he could hold out until help
came. But it was terribly cold, and the storm that was now howling about
the camp gave promise of being a fierce one. Should he give in?

A moment's reflection decided him. He thought Holfax must be near at
hand. Perhaps he would come by morning, and they could stand the cold
and exposure until then.

"Well?" asked Callack impatiently.

"You can go ahead with your cruelty," replied Mr. Baxter. "I'll never
tell you where the gold is."

With a muttered exclamation Callack turned aside. At an order from him a
moment later the Indians led the captives to the top of the ice hummock.
A more exposed place in a storm could not well be found. The wind swept
over it with great velocity, making it colder than down in the more
sheltered places. To be left there without food was almost certain
death.

Yet there Callack was going to leave his prisoners. Johnson, who still
suffered from the blow on the head so that he was dazed, was led out
from a tent, and the four treasure finders were tied with strong thongs,
part of the dog harness being used.

Under the direction of Callack three of the Indians were making the
final fastenings of the bonds, when there suddenly arose a disturbance
among the others, who were grouped about the sleds of the treasure
seekers. There were loud voices, and then angry cries.

"Those imps are fighting!" muttered Callack. "I'll soon put a stop to
that!"

He caught up a heavy dog whip, and started down the side of the frozen
mound. The disturbance among the Indians became more fierce. Blows were
struck right and left, and several of the natives grappled with each
other, rolling over and over on the frozen snow.

"They're fighting over the possession of our things," said Fred.

"Yes, there won't be much left for us," observed Jerry. "But I don't
know as that makes much difference. We'll never get away from here to
use our things."

"Oh, maybe we will," remarked Fred, hopefully.

Callack sprang into the midst of the fighting Indians. He raised his
heavy whip, and the cruel lash fell left and right, but owing to the
heavy clothing of the natives, it produced little effect. The cries of
rage grew louder. The Indians were fairly tearing from each other's
hands the choice articles of food, and the other supplies belonging to
the captives.

The sight of their fellows in possession of what was to them unlimited
wealth was too much for the three savages who were binding the captives.
With one accord they dropped the thongs and leaped down the side of the
ice hummock.

For a moment, left thus comparatively alone and unguarded, the captives
did not know what to do. They watched the three Indians leap into the
midst of the fighting, yelling throng of their fellows, amid which
Callack stood, vainly plying his whip, as he would among a pack of dogs,
to restore order.

"Boys!" cried Mr. Baxter suddenly. "Here's our chance. Can you loosen
the thongs?"

As he spoke he exerted all his strength, and the partly-tied leather
strips about his hands came loose. A moment later Fred's arms were also
free. Jerry was more securely tied, but it did not take long for Fred
and Mr. Baxter to release him.

"Now help Johnson," said the old miner, turning to where the colored man
sat in the snow, just as he had been dropped when brought from the tent.

The thongs were quickly stripped from the negro.

"Stand up," cried Mr. Baxter, shaking the man, who seemed to be in a
daze. "Stand up! We're going to escape! It's our only chance, when
they're fighting among themselves!"

The Indians were paying no attention to their captives. They were in
the thick of the fight now, the sound of blows echoing loudly in the
still air. Clubs, dog whips, chunks of ice, shovels and picks, the
implements being taken from the sleds, were used as weapons. Callack was
unable to control his men. In fact he was in considerable danger.

But the colored man never stirred. He looked up at Mr. Baxter, smiled
stupidly and mumbled:

"It suah am a warm day. Landy, but dis coon has got t' take off some ob
his clothes!"

"His mind is wandering," spoke Mr. Baxter sadly. "Come, Johnson," he
said. "We will help you to escape. Get up and walk. You must, or we'll
have to leave you. We haven't a minute to spare."

But the unfortunate negro could not understand.

"It's no use," murmured Mr. Baxter. "We'll have to leave him to save
ourselves. We can't carry him, he's too heavy."

"But what will Callack do to him, when he finds us gone?" asked Fred,
for it seemed that they could easily escape during the excitement, which
had not ceased.

"I don't believe Callack will harm him," replied Jerry's father. "He
knows Johnson can't tell where the treasure is in his present state, and
he'll look after him carefully, in the hope that his mind will come
back, so he can point out the hiding place of the gold. So he'll not
harm him, and if we make good our escape, we can come back with a strong
party, and free him. But we must hurry. Callack seems to be getting his
men under some kind of submission."

This was so. Though the Indians were still fighting, Callack's use of
the heavy whip and his vigorous commands appeared to be having some
effect. The captives waited no longer. Bidding Johnson farewell, though
the negro probably did not understand what they said, Mr. Baxter and the
boys fled down the side of the hummock, away from the camp.

Over the ice and snow they ran as fast as they could, but they welcomed
the exertion, since, as they were not as warmly dressed as usual, the
terrible cold was numbing them. The fierce fall of snow, which increased
rather than diminished, served in a measure to conceal their movements.

"Come on, boys!" called Mr. Baxter cautiously, as he led the way. "We
may escape that villain and his savages! Are you all right?"

"All right, but it's terrible cold," answered Jerry.

"Indeed it is, though it's not so bad as it was up on that hummock.
Let's stop a minute, and see if they are after us."

They paused to listen. The only sound was the mournful howling of the
wind, and the occasional boom, like that of a cannon, as some immense
crack opened up in the ice about them.

"They haven't discovered that we are gone, or else they don't know which
way we took," said Mr. Baxter. "Come on, we must get farther away than
this."

"Where are we going?" inquired Fred. "We can't stand much exposure, in
this weather, and without food."

"I know it," replied Mr. Baxter. "I have hopes that we may chance upon
some settlement of friendly Indians, where we can not only get food and
shelter, but enlist their aid in capturing Callack."

"That sounds too good to be likely to happen," observed Jerry.
"Burr-r-r-r but it's cold."

"Don't think of it," advised his father. "Move a little faster, and get
your blood in good circulation. Then you'll feel warmer."

"I don't believe I've got any blood left in me," replied his son. "It
seems just like ice water."

They trudged on, not knowing and scarcely caring where they were going,
as long as it was away from Callack's camp. In fact they could see but a
short distance before them, and had to go it almost blind, for the
snowflakes were like a pall of frozen fog.

"Hark!" suddenly exclaimed Mr. Baxter, when they had been tramping
along about half an hour. "Isn't that shouting behind us?"

The boys listened. Faintly there sounded voices in pursuit.

"They're after us!" exclaimed Fred. "What shall we do? Shall we run, or
give fight?"

"We haven't any weapons, or we might stand them off," remarked Jerry.
"I'm almost willing to give up. We can't go on this way very far."

"I'd rather freeze to death out here than back in Callack's camp,"
observed Mr. Baxter grimly. "Let's go on, but we'll turn off to the
left."

He swung around and began to run, the boys following. The three
fugitives had not taken a dozen steps when suddenly Mr. Baxter, who was
in the lead, disappeared.

"Why--why----" began Fred, when he found himself slipping down, and an
instant later, Jerry also toppled into a big hole, that opened through
the snow right at their feet. The two boys brought up with a jolt, and
found themselves sprawled out beside Mr. Baxter. They had fallen down an
opening toward a sort of cave, the black mouth of which was directly in
front of them.

"Well, we came right down the chimney," observed Mr. Baxter. "This is a
lucky fall. We'll have a place to stay, and we'll throw Callack and his
Indians off the track."

He rose to his feet, and started into the cave, which seemed a large
one. They had toppled down a shaft or hole in the roof. The boys
followed him, and as they entered the cavern they saw a faint light at
the farther end.

"This cave has a back and a front door," observed Mr. Baxter. "Come on,
boys, we'll conceal ourselves in here until they have given up the
search."

As he spoke there sounded above their heads, and off to one side, the
shouts and yells of Callack and his men, who were running at top speed
after their captives. For the fight had been quelled, and the escape
discovered.

The cave was found to be one hollowed out under the earth and rocks, and
there was no ice or snow in it.

"Say, this is as warm as toast!" exclaimed Jerry.

"Toast! Don't mention such things," begged Fred. "I'm half starved. I
wonder why who ever made this cave didn't leave something on the
sideboard for visitors to eat?"

"I guess this is a natural cave," replied Mr. Baxter. "There doesn't
appear to be any signs that any one was ever in it before. It will serve
us well, though, as Fred says, it's hard to be without food."

There was nothing to do but wait until it was safe to emerge. The
fugitives went close to the other opening of the cavern. In front of it
stretched a big level field of ice and snow, as far as the treasure
seekers could observe, which was not far, for the snow still came down
in big flakes.

The warmth, which was a welcome change from the terrible cold, made them
drowsy, and before they knew it the escaped captives were dozing off.
How long they slept they could not tell, as there was no way of
measuring time, and with no change from daylight to darkness.

With their awakening came a renewal of the pangs of hunger. In that cold
climate men need to eat often and heartily to combat the frost king, and
the captives, weakened by the exposure, their exertions and lack of
food, suffered very much.

But they grimly bore it all, and, though the boys felt it more than did
Mr. Baxter, who was seasoned to hardships, they never complained.

"Maybe if one of us went out, we could find some edible mosses beneath
the snow," suggested Fred. "That would be good for us, wouldn't it, Mr.
Baxter?"

"Yes, if we can find the moss. There are some kinds that will keep a man
from starving. I'll go out of the cave. I think it will be safe now. It
must be several hours since Callack and his crowd passed."

Mr. Baxter went to the mouth of the cave and looked out. It had stopped
snowing, and the northern lights were flickering in the sky.

"I'll chance it," he said.

As he was about to step forth he heard a noise to one side. It was the
movement of something over the frozen surface of the snow. He started,
and was about to dart back into the cavern, thinking it was some of the
Indians, when Fred, who had come to the entrance with Mr. Baxter, cried
out:

"It's one of our sleds, with two dogs fast to it. Hurrah! It's a sled
with food on it!"

"Well, if this isn't a marvel!" exclaimed Jerry. "How did that get here?
Did Callack send it?"

"The dogs probably wandered away during the fight," said Mr. Baxter.
"See, they are not properly harnessed; they are only tangled up in the
thongs. I wonder if we can catch them?"

Hurrying out, the old miner called sharply to the animals in the Indian
tongue, of which he had learned a few words. The beasts halted. They
were almost exhausted from pulling the heavy load from which, doubtless,
they had probably tried to break loose.

"Food! food!" cried Fred, rushing from the cave, and beginning to tear
away the robes over the load on the sled. "Now we're all right!"

With eager hands Mr. Baxter and Jerry aided Fred. The dogs lay down in
the snow, panting and weary.

"We'll feed them well, to pay them for having brought us this sled,"
said Mr. Baxter. "It has saved our lives. Fate sent the beasts this way.
Now boys----"

But he did not finish the sentence, for, at that instant with wild
shouts, there came rushing over a little hill of ice several fur-clad
figures. And the foremost of them was Callack, while behind him came
several Indians.

"Here they are! We've got them!" cried the ugly white man. "I'm glad I
decided to trace those straying dogs. Don't run or I'll shoot!" he
added, and the captives saw that he had a gun. They could not have run
if they wanted to, they were so exhausted. Fate had apparently aided
them only to cast them once more into the hands of their enemies.

"Ah! You thought you'd get away from me, did you?" asked Callack
exultantly, as he and his men rushed upon the treasure seekers. "Well,
you nearly got away, and if it hadn't been that I started off after the
dogs that strayed away with the sled, you might have fooled me. But now
I've got you, and I'll wager you won't get away again."

The captives said nothing. They were too miserable. They were roughly
bound, though their legs were left free, and then they were led away.
Callack sat in comfort on the dog sled, the animals managing to pull him
and the load of food, as the trail back to camp led down hill.

It was not far to the place where they had escaped from, for as the
captives learned later, they had wandered about considerably in their
flight. They were soon back at the camp, and this time Callack looked
carefully to the tying of the thongs.

When the captives had been securely fastened, holes were made in the
ice, and in them stakes were thrust. Then loose ice was tamped in around
to make the stakes hold. To these stakes, which soon froze in, almost
like part of the ice itself, the prisoners were fastened.

"Now," said Callack when the barbarous work was finished, "let's see how
you like that. I think you'll soon wish you'd told me the secret."

No one made him an answer. All were too intent on trying to move about
as much as the close bonds would permit to get positions where the cruel
wind and the stinging particles of snow would not be in their faces.
Poor Johnson, scarcely able to move, groaned in pain.

"Boys, can you stand it?" asked Mr. Baxter in a low voice, "or shall I
give in to him?"

"I'll stand it," answered Fred decidedly.

"So will I," added Jerry.

They were left alone. The Indians and Callack retired to the tents
where, sheltered from the fierce blasts, they ate of the food which
they had taken from the sleds of their captives, for Callack's band was
not well supplied with rations.

[Illustration: "The terrible cold was making them stupid"

_Page 187_]

Thicker and thicker came down the snow. It began to form in little
mounds over the extended feet of the staked-out prisoners. Soon it would
cover them completely. But that might be an advantage rather than
otherwise, as it would produce a warmth which might save their lives.
But would it happen in time? And would they not die in the meanwhile of
faintness, because they were very hungry?

The terrible cold was making them stupid. With a refinement of cruelty
Callack had hung a big thermometer on a stake in front of Mr. Baxter
that he might look at the little column of colored spirits and see to
what low point they fell. The glow of the Northern Lights made an
illumination sufficient to see the figures.

The night advanced. More and more intense grew the cold. The snow froze
as it fell, until the captives were fairly encased under a covering of
ice. Higher and higher it grew, until it was up to their chests. They
could not move.

"Fifty degrees below zero," murmured Mr. Baxter as he looked at the
thermometer. "And it will get lower. I am afraid I must give in--for the
sake of the boys."

He looked over at his son and Fred. They had not spoken nor moved in
some time. The cold was making them numb. Even Mr. Baxter, hardened as
he was, felt a deadly calm stealing over him.

An hour passed. The thermometer had gone down five degrees more. But the
cold was now so intense that a few degrees more or less made no seeming
difference. Burrowing their heads down as far as they could in their fur
hoods, the captives tried not to think about it. This was easy for poor
Johnson, as he was out of his mind from the cruel blow Callack had dealt
him.

The snow came down thicker and faster. It was now almost over the heads
of the captives. The thermometer could no longer be seen. It was getting
darker as the Northern Lights died away.

More keen grew the pangs of hunger, made acute by the great cold. Fred
thought he would have to give up, and ask Mr. Baxter to reveal the
secret of the gold that they might escape their terrible fate.

But it was doubtful now if even a shout would have attracted Callack's
attention. He was in his tent with some of the Indians. The others were
also under shelter.

But now the snow, which had seemed to add to their discomforts, proved
beneficial to them. As it drifted over their heads while they sat on the
ground, bound to the stakes, it shut out some of the terrible cold.
Soon there stole over the captives a feeling of delicious warmth. It was
not the dangerous sensation that precedes death by freezing, but real
warmth; the warmth from their bodies, retained beneath the covering of
closely-packed snow.

Though they were completely covered, it was porous enough for them to
breathe through, or they might have been suffocated to death.

They could only hear each other now with difficulty, as the snow muffled
their voices. Mr. Baxter called to the boys occasionally to learn if
they were still alive.

"I'm feeling all right," answered Fred once. "Only I wish Holfax would
hurry."

"Wait until morning," advised Mr. Baxter hopefully. "I think he will
come then."

Somehow the long night passed. They could tell when the sun arose
slightly above the horizon by the increased light that shone through the
snow blanket that covered them. They could hear faintly movements in the
camp about them--Indians calling to one another.

The captives knew that their enemies were preparing breakfast, and, oh,
how they wished for some hot tea, and some warm meat, or even some cold
tallow! A candle would have been welcome, provided it was made from
suet.

Soon could be heard the blows of picks being driven into the ice. Then
shovels tinkled on the frozen crystals. The Indians had resumed their
hunt for the buried treasure.

It had stopped snowing, and because of the warm breath of the prisoners
little holes had been melted in the white mounds which covered them so
that they could see out a bit. They observed a score of Indians digging
all around the foot of the hummock, while Callack directed them,
occasionally helping himself.

"How are you, boys?" asked Mr. Baxter.

"Still alive," replied Fred.

"Terribly cold and hungry," answered Jerry.

"Shall I give up?"

"No!" exclaimed both boys. They were not going to surrender yet.

The hours passed. Foot after foot the Indians searched. The captives,
tortured by being obliged to sit in one position, suffering from cold
and hunger, watched them. Callack seemed to become more and more enraged
as the time went on and he did not find the gold. Yet he did not again
appeal to Mr. Baxter.

The sun began to decline. Night was once more settling down. For over
twenty-four hours they had had nothing to eat. They were faint and
almost frozen, but they would not give in. As for Johnson, he realized
little of what was going on around him.

It began to get dark. Once more the Northern Lights appeared in the sky,
wavering and shooting from the horizon to the zenith. The Indians had
ceased their digging and returned to their tents.

"How are you, Fred?" asked Mr. Baxter.

"I'm--I'm pretty well--I--I guess I can stand it a little longer."

"Why doesn't Holfax come?" thought Mr. Baxter. "Jerry, do you want to
give up?" he asked.

"I'll--I'll stick it out a little longer, dad."

"All right. But I'm almost determined to give in. I did not think
Callack would dare carry out his threat. We must save our lives, even if
we have to give up the gold. I will wait an hour longer----"

At that moment Mr. Baxter felt something working at the bonds in back of
him which bound him to the stake. He could not turn his head to see who
it was because of the pile of snow that covered him.

"Who is there?" he asked.

There was no answer.

"Holfax; is that you?" he asked, a great hope coming into his heart.

Still there was no answer.

"Dad!" cried Jerry. "Some one is undoing the thongs about my arms."

"And mine also!" added Fred.

A moment later Mr. Baxter felt himself free from the stake at his back.
He struggled to his knees, thrust out his arms to make a space in the
snow about him, and tried to see who it was who had released him. There
was no one in sight.




CHAPTER XXV

THE RESCUE--CONCLUSION


For a moment Mr. Baxter did not know what to think. That he had been
released was certain; but how? That the same agency was also at work for
the boys was evident, for a moment later they, too, were able to get up
on their knees. Their hands were free, but their feet were still tied.
However, it was an easy matter to slash with knives which they all
carried the thongs that were wound around their ankles.

"Who did it? Who aided us?" asked Fred.

"I don't know," replied Jerry.

"Quiet!" cautioned his father. "We have a chance to escape."

At that moment there was a movement in the snow at his feet, and a
black, pointed muzzle was thrust up.

"The dogs!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter. "It was the dogs that gnawed through
the bonds and released us. I see how it happened. The thongs were
freshly cut from some hide, and the half-starved dogs smelled them.
They burrowed under the snow until they could gnaw them, and thus they
released us. I thought at first it was Holfax and his men."

"So did I," spoke Fred. "But what had we better do now?"

"We must first get something to eat," said Mr. Baxter. "Wait until our
blood is in a little better circulation, and we will steal down to the
camp and see if we can't get something without attracting attention."

By stamping around on the hummock and whipping their arms about them the
prisoners succeeded in getting some warmth into their benumbed bodies.
To their surprise the noise they made did not attract any notice from
the Indians or Callack. As it happened, the Alaskans were all so wearied
with their day's labor that they slept sounder than usual.

Cautiously the captives stole down from the hummock toward one of the
tents near which their own sleds had been placed. They hoped to find
some food, for they were nearly famished.

As they advanced they detected a movement among the dogs, only a few of
which had burrowed under the snow to get at the fresh thongs, for an
Alaskan dog will, in stress of hunger, devour its own harness.

Suddenly there was an uproar among the animals, they probably thinking
the approach of the captives meant that food was going to be
distributed. There were barks, snarls and yelps. Some of the half-savage
beasts jumped up on Fred and Jerry, and the boys had to beat them off.

"They're as bad as wolves!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter.

Then from one of the tents appeared Callack. He had been aroused by the
noise, and saw the prisoners free, rushing down on his camp.

"Here!" he cried. "What's up?"

With a bound Mr. Baxter sprang for the man. He had determined to
overpower him if he could and get food. But in his weakened condition he
was no match for his enemy. Callack dealt Mr. Baxter a blow that felled
him. Then the leader of the Indians called for help to recapture the
prisoners.

It looked as if they would again be taken back to the stakes and kept
there until they died. A hopeless fear was in the hearts of the three.
Johnson was still back on the hummock.

"Hold 'em!" cried Callack. "Shoot 'em if they resist!"

But none of the three was in a position to resist. Mr. Baxter was
grasped by half a dozen hands, and several of the Indians surrounded
Fred and Jerry. Mr. Baxter was willing to give up now. Fate was against
them. He was about to call to Callack that he would tell where the gold
was when a shot was heard at the edge of the camp.

It came so suddenly, and was so evidently fired by some one not
connected with the thieving band, that it produced an instant cessation
of activities.

Then a voice was heard calling.

"Where be Mr. Baxter? Where be? Where boys? Got plenty help now! Plenty
much fight!"

Another shot was heard. Callack looked around wonderingly. Some of his
Indians released their hold of the captives.

Just then there rushed into the center of the camp the figure of a man
completely enveloped in furs. In his hand he held a rifle, and he rushed
up to Callack and pointed the weapon in his face.

"Let Mr. Baxter go!" he shouted. "Me know you. You Callack. Zank tell
me. I tie Zank up. He tell all. But he get away. Me see him here."

"Holfax! It's Holfax!" cried Fred in delight.

"Thank God for that!" murmured Mr. Baxter. "He came just in time!"

Following their brave leader came two score of friendly Indians,
uttering shouts of defiance at the enemies of Holfax's friends.

Several shots were fired. The thieves, taken by surprise, were unable to
make any defense. Several of them were hit by bullets and slightly
injured.

With a cry of defeat they began to run away. Those having hold of the
boys had left them, and Fred and Jerry were free. Callack suddenly drew
a revolver from his pocket and aimed it at Mr. Baxter. But before he
could pull the trigger Holfax, swinging his rifle as a club, knocked the
rascal down.

"Don't kill him!" begged Mr. Baxter, merciful even to his enemy.

But Holfax had no chance. Callack scrambled to his feet and ran away. He
must have been bewildered by the sudden rescue, for he ran straight
toward a deep ravine near the camp, and before any one could call out to
warn him he had fallen over the steep cliff. The bad man was seen no
more.

By this time the friendly Indians were in possession of the camp. The
wounded ones, including Zank, limped off, leaving all their possessions
with the rescuers.

"How be?" asked Holfax of his friends, grinning in a friendly fashion.

"Almost starved," replied Mr. Baxter. "Boys, we must get some food at
once and see to poor Johnson."

"Me do it," spoke Holfax, and he was as good as his word. Soon pots of
hot tea were ready, and, with their own supplies to draw on, the
half-starved and nearly frozen captives feasted to their hearts'
content.

Then Holfax told his story. He had been longer in getting to the camp of
the friendly Indians than he had thought he would be, and on the journey
of rescue the storm had delayed him and his friends. They came on dog
sleds, which had been left just outside of the camp. He had met Zank,
who had tried to persuade some friendly Indians to attack the white
adventurers, and had forced from the Alaskan scoundrel part of Callack's
plan. Then Zank escaped and joined his evil master.

"Now we must dig up the gold, and hurry to the south. Callack may get
together a larger band, and follow us," said Mr. Baxter, when
explanations had been made.

But they need have had no further fear of Callack, for he was beyond the
power of harming anyone. The gold was dug up, the dog teams were
harnessed, and when the supplies had been packed on the sleds, all was
in readiness for the start.

Mr. Baxter paid well the Indians whom Holfax had brought to the rescue,
and, as a further reward, they were given the dog teams, tents and other
things belonging to the thieving tribe. Thus they were abundantly
satisfied.

Holfax and a few of the Indians agreed to accompany Mr. Baxter, the boys
and Johnson to the nearest settlement. The colored man improved very
much after a good breakfast, and, though he was not completely himself
for a long time after the blow, he eventually got well.

"Homeward bound!" exclaimed Mr. Baxter, as, with Holfax and some of his
acquaintances to drive the dog teams, they were carried on the
well-filled sleds over the frozen snow.

"And with all the gold safe!" added Fred. "Now I can help my father and
mother."

They made good time to the settlement on the Yukon River, whence they
had made the start for the interior.

The adventurers were lucky in finding a ship about to sail for Seattle,
whence they could take a train for San Francisco. Holfax was well
rewarded for his part in the treasure search, and three months after he
had left his home Fred Stanley, richer by fifteen thousand dollars (for
that was his share after Mrs. Stults's half and the expenses had been
taken out), started from the Piddock railroad station toward the little
cottage which, at one time, he feared he would never see again.

But something about it seemed strange. The shutters were closed, and
there did not appear to be any one in it. For a moment the boy felt a
deadly fear clutching at his heart. Suppose his father and mother had
died while he was away? He had heard nothing from them, and had merely
sent them a telegram from Seattle, telling them of his safe arrival,
but saying nothing of his success, for he wanted to surprise them.

As he started up the front walk he heard a noise. Around the corner of
the house came his father, limping along with a crutch, while his mother
was walking at his side. She was weeping.

"Mother! Father!" cried Fred. "What is it? What has happened?"

"I'll tell you what's happened!" exclaimed a gruff voice, and a
roughly-dressed man appeared. "They ain't paid their rent for two
months, and they're being dispossessed--put out--that's what it is."

"Mother, is this so?" asked Fred.

"Yes, dear. Your father lost his place as watchman, and our money gave
out. But never mind. Now you are safe back I shan't worry. We can easily
find another place. I can go back to sewing, and you will help us.
Perhaps some of the neighbors will care for us until you can get work."

"You don't need work, mother!" cried Fred, throwing his arms about her
neck. "We've got lots of money. The treasure hunt was a success! I've
got fifteen thousand dollars in gold as my share!"

"Fifteen thousand dollars in gold!" repeated Mr. Stanley as if in a
dream. "Then we needn't be dispossessed, mother."

"Oh, Fred! Fred!" cried Mrs. Stanley. "Can it be true? How did it come
about? Did you really find the treasure? You're not sick, are you?"

"Sick? Why no, mother. What made you think that?"

"Because I can hardly believe what you say. I thought perhaps you might
have been frozen, and been very ill and--and that it had turned your
mind. I have read of persons in the far north going insane because of
the dreadful whiteness and the cold."

"No, mother; I'm all right. It was terrible cold, and we had a hard
time, with plenty of danger thrown in, but I'm all right, and I'm not
out of my head. In fact my health is better than ever."

"And you really have all that gold?" repeated Fred's father again.

"Sure. Here are some samples," and Fred pulled out a few gold nuggets
that he had taken from his share of the treasure, which had been left in
a safe place while he came on ahead.

At the sight of the gold the eyes of the mean landlord sparkled. He
looked greedily at the yellow particles.

"Yes, that's the genuine stuff," remarked Mr. Stanley. "Oh, Fred, my
son, how glad I am that you succeeded, for I feared you would not!"

"Ahem! I--er--I guess you'd better go back into the house, Mr. Stanley,"
said the landlord, a sudden change coming into his manner. "I'll have
your goods brought right back. I'll send in something for you to eat,
too. You need nourishing food, that's what you need. I'll attend to it
for you. And if your son wants to invest some of his money I will be
glad to offer my advice. Come back into the house and we'll talk it
over."

"Talk what over?" asked Fred sharply.

"Why--er--about investing your money. Of course you'll want to invest
it."

"Probably," replied the young treasure hunter coolly, "but I think I
know where to go for advice, too. I don't believe I'd trust any one who
would act as you have done to my relatives when they were in temporary
distress."

"Oh--er--I--I didn't mean anything by that," said the man, somewhat
confused. "You see I have so much property, and my agents attend to it
for me. One of them must have ordered Mr. Stanley dispossessed on his
own responsibility. I did not understand the case. I am always disposed
to be lenient to my tenants, especially----"

"Yes, especially when you discover they have money," finished Fred.

"You, personally, began this dispossess action," said Mr. Stanley. "It
was not the work of one of your agents."

"Oh--er--well, perhaps I made a mistake," went on the man. "You may stay
in this house as long as you like."

"No, but we'll not stay in this house," said Fred. "We will have a
better one. Come, mother, we'll go to a hotel until we can find a place
that suits us. And then father can go to a good hospital until he gets
cured."

"I--er--I hope you won't take offense--I--er--I had to have my rent
money--if you'd like it, I'll let you have this place a little cheaper,"
said the mean landlord.

"No, thank you," answered Fred decidedly. "We want a better place than
this."

And some days later he bought a fine house for his parents with part of
the proceeds of the buried gold. Mr. Stanley was sent to a hospital,
where, with good care and nourishing food, he soon recovered the use of
his leg, and was able to resume his work. As for Fred, he went back to
school to complete his education, since the family was now beyond the
fear of want. Part of the money his father insisted on investing for his
son, and later some shares in a good mine were bought with it. If you
were to visit Piddock to-day, you would find it a much larger city than
when Fred left it to hunt for gold in far off Alaska, and if you were to
ask who was the best known citizen there, you would be told he was Fred
Stanley.

For Fred prospered very much after he started in the mining business for
himself, and he showed the same determined characteristics that he
exhibited when on that perilous trip.

Among his best friends he numbers Mr. Baxter and his son Jerry. As for
Mrs. Stults, she never can say enough in praise of what Fred did for
her, as her share of her husband's fortune was large enough to make her
independent for life.

"Dot Stanley boy, he is der greatest boy vot effer vos," she used to
say. "Dere vos a man Stanley vot discovered t'ings in der hot Africa,
but Fred Stanley, he discovered gold in der cold country, und dot's
better as neffer vos, eh?"

So now we will bid farewell to Fred, though, if you should ever meet him
and ask him about his trip to Alaska, I have no doubt that he would be
glad to tell you many details I have not had space to set down here.


THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 35, "would" changed twice to "vould" to match rest of usage. (vould
be lost. Maybe it vould)

Page 89, "throught" changed to "throughout" (throughout the Alaska)

Page 127, "massa" changed to "Massa" to conform to rest of text.
(really, Massa Baxter)

Page 200, "sha'n't" changed to "shan't" (I shan't worry)





End of Project Gutenberg's The Young Treasure Hunter, by Frank V. Webster

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNG TREASURE HUNTER ***

***** This file should be named 20922.txt or 20922.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/9/2/20922/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
