The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Jolly Jingle-Book, by Various, Edited by
Laura Chandler


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Jolly Jingle-Book


Author: Various

Editor: Laura Chandler

Release Date: March 31, 2007  [eBook #20952]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A JOLLY JINGLE-BOOK***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 20952-h.htm or 20952-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/9/5/20952/20952-h/20952-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/9/5/20952/20952-h.zip)





Juvenile Library Young Folks Series

A JOLLY JINGLE-BOOK

Compiled by

LAURA CHANDLER

Illustrated with Black and White Drawings







The World Syndicate Publishing Co.
Cleveland ---------- New York
Copyright, 1913
by
Luther H. Cary




CONTENTS


   A JOLLY BOOK
   MR. TONGUE
   KISSES
   TRIALS OF TRAVEL
   THE QUARREL
   MY PLAYMATES
   A PUZZLING THING
   HER NAME
   GAME OF GOING-TO-BED
   THE BALL
   A VOYAGE
   APPLE-TREE-INN
   AN OUTDOOR GIRL
   THE BEDTIME STORY BOOK
   THE BROWNIES
   HER ANSWER
   A TROUBLESOME DAUGHTER
   THE RACE
   A BIG PLAYFELLOW
   HAYING TIME
   NOBODY
   MY GARDEN
   MAMMA'S LITTLE HOUSEMAID
   TOYS
   THE BATH
   NAP-TIME
   CHUMS
   A TOUCH OF NATURE
   A LESSON IN NATURAL HISTORY
   PICTURE BOOK TIME
   THE TOPSY-TURVY DOLL
   POOR OLD BOOKS
   SYMPATHY
   A SPRING SONG
   SECRETS
   SOMEBODY DID IT
   IN SUMMER
   OUR LITTLE BROOK
   THE PINEWOOD PEOPLE
   THE STUDENTS
   THE LADY MOON
   THE JOURNEY
   PRETENDING
   A LITTLE APRIL FOOL
   FROST FIRES
   WHISTLING IN THE RAIN
   THE WOODEN HORSE
   AFTER SCHOOL
   A SLEEPY-HEAD TOP
   A CHRISTMAS TELEPHONE
   A LOST BABY
   VELOCIPEDE
   A RAINY DAY PLAN
   THE BIRTHDAY ONES
   A DUTCH WISH
   A SIGN OF SPRING
   MY DOLLY
   ONE MILE TO TOYLAND
   A BATH TUB JOKE
   HER OWN WAY
   THE MONTH OF MAY
   THE BIRTHDAY
   BABY'S PLAYTHINGS
   WHEN IT RAINS
   THE SLEEPING TREES
   A SUMMER HOLIDAY
   TWO POCKETS
   MY HORSE
   MAY TIME
   BOOKS
   THE LITTLE BOOK PEOPLE
   CHARLOTTE THE CONQUEROR
   THE SCARECROW




ILLUSTRATIONS


   The Game of Going-to-Bed

   The Ball

   An Outdoor Girl

   The Bedtime Story-Book

   Bad Luck and Good Luck Brownies

   A Big Playfellow

   Nobody

   Sympathy

   Secrets

   A Little April Fool

   Whistling in the Rain

   The Dutch Wish

   When It Rains




  A JOLLY BOOK

  How can they put in black and white
  What little children think at night,
  When lights are out and prayers are said,
  And you are all tucked up in bed?

  Such funny dreams go dancing through
  Your head, of things nobody knew,
  Or saw, or ever half believes!--
  They're all inside these singing leaves.

  And little children laugh and go
  A-ring-a-round-a-rosy-O;
  And birds sing gay--you'd almost think
  You listened to a bobolink.

  Look at the pictures, one by one!
  The rhymes are only half the fun.
  It laughs and bubbles like a brook--
  My pretty, jolly jingle-book!




  MR. TONGUE

  A little red man in a little red house
    With gates of ivory!
  He _might_ stay there, as still as a mouse,
    And nobody could see;
  But talk he will, and laugh he will,
    At everything you do;
  And come to the door and peep, until
    I know his name--don't you?




  KISSES

  "Here's a kiss for every year,
    And here is one to grow on!"
  Father says and mother says
    And auntie says, and so on.

  "Here's a pat and there's a pat!"
    If growing comes of kisses,
  I know how one girl found a way
    To grow as big as this is!




  THE TRIALS OF TRAVEL

  Boohoo, boohoo, boohoo, boohoo!
  My mother says I can't take Sue
  And Grace and Maud and Clarabel
  And Ruth and Beth and sweet Estelle,
  Unless I pack them with our things.
  Oh dear! oh dear! my heart it wrings
  To put them in that hot, dark place,
  With paper wrapped around each face.
  I'm sure they all would suffocate
  Or meet some other dreadful fate.
  I'd gladly take them on my arm
  And keep them safe from every harm,
  But mother says that that won't do;
  She draws the line at more than two.
  I'd like to know what she would say
  To sending me packed in a tray.

  REBECCA DEMING MOORE.




  THE QUARREL

  The Wooden Dog and the China Cat
  Face to face in the doll-house sat,
  And they picked a quarrel that grew and grew,
  Because they had nothing else to do.
  Said the dog, "I really would like to hear
  Why you never stir nor frisk nor purr,
  But sit like a mummy there."

  Up spoke in a temper the china puss,
  Glad of an opening for a fuss:
  "Dear Mr. Puppy, I can't recall
  That I ever heard you bark at all.
  Your bark is a wooden bark, 'tis true,
  But as to that," said the China Cat,
  "My mew is a china mew."

  So they bristled and quarreled, more and more,
  Till the baby came creeping across the floor.
  He took the cat by his whiskers frail,
  He grasped the dog by his wooden tail,
  And banged them together--and after that
  Left them, a wiser Wooden Dog
  And a sadder China Cat.

  Now, children, just between you and me,
  Don't you think in the future they will agree?

  NANCY BYRD TURNER.




  MY PLAYMATES

  When Willie comes to visit me
    We play menagerie.
  He says, "Pretend that you're a lamb,
    And I'll a lion be."
  Then he begins to growl and roar
    And make a dreadful noise.
  I don't mind much when he goes home;
    It's hard to play with boys.

  When Julia comes to visit me
    I am her waiting maid,
  While she's a lady, grand and stern.
    Of her I'm 'most afraid.
  She sends me for my mother's hat,
    Then takes her nicest skirt,
  And trails it all around the house
    Until it's full of dirt.

  When Alice comes to play with me
    She asks, "What shall we play?"
  I answer, "Anything you like."
    She coaxes, "Do _please_ say."
  Sometimes it's dolls, sometimes it's games,
    No matter what it be,
  I have the very nicest time
    When Alice plays with me.

  REBECCA DEMING MOORE.




  A PUZZLING THING

  Eight of us went to a party--
  The nicest ever given.
  There was apple fluff, and frosted stuff,
  And cake and candy and fruit enough,
  But seats for only seven!

  Eight of us hurried homeward
  After the happy treat,
  With run and bound; yet there were found
  Only the tracks on the dusty ground
  Of seven pairs of feet!

  Eight of us got back safely,
  And seven told with glee
  Of all we'd done, and the feast and the fun--
  But one of us was a silent one.
  Now, which can that one be?

  NANCY BYRD TURNER.




  HER NAME

  "I'm losted!  Could you find me, please?"
    Poor little frightened baby!
  The wind had tossed her golden fleece;
  The stones had scratched her dimpled knees;
  I stooped and lifted her with ease,
    And softly whispered, "Maybe;

  Tell me your name, my little maid--
    I can't find you without it."
  "My name is Shiny-eyes," she said.
  "Yes, but your last?"  She shook her head.
  "Up to my house they never said
    A single 'fing about it!"

  "But, Dear," I said, "what _is_ your name?"
    "Why, di'n't you hear me told you?
  Dust Shiny-eyes!"  A bright thought came.
  "Yes, when you're good; but when they blame
  You, little one--it's not the same
    When mother has to scold you?"

  "My mother never scolds!" she moans,
    A little blush ensuing;
  "'Cept when I've been a-frowing stones,
  And then she says (the culprit owns),
  'Mehitabel Sapphira Jones,
    What _has_ you been a-doing!'"




  THE GAME OF GOING-TO-BED

  Says father, when the lamps are lit,
  "Now just five minutes you may sit
  Down-stairs, and then away you go
  To play a little game I know!"

  He gives a kiss and pulls a curl:
  "Let's play you were my little girl,
  And play you jump up on my back,
  And play we run!"  And clackity-clack,

  We both go laughing up the stair!
  (If I should fuss he'd say "No fair!")
  And then he says, "Night, Sleepyhead."
  It's fun, the game of Going-to-Bed.


[Illustration: The Game of Going-to-Bed]




  THE BALL

  Close cuddled in my own two hands,
  My big round ball with yellow bands!
  They've filled my playroom up with toys--
  Dolls, horses, things to make a noise,
  Engines that clatter on a track,
  And tip-carts that let down the back;
  Arks, just like Noah's, with two and two
  Of every animal he knew;
  Whole rows of houses built of blocks,
  A mouse that squeaks, a doll that talks,
  But when the Sleepy Man comes by
  And I'm too tired to want to try
  To think of anything at all,
  Here's my old, dear old, rubber ball.

  Close cuddled in my own two hands,
  My big round ball with yellow bands.


[Illustration: The Ball]




  A VOYAGE

  She rowed 'way out on the Daisy Sea,
      with a really-truly oar,
  Out of a really-truly boat, and what
      could you ask for more?
  Her sea and her boat were make-believe,
      but the daisy waves dashed high,
  And 'twas pleasant to know if the boat
      went down that her frock would still be dry.

  She rowed 'way out on the Daisy Sea, with
      a really-truly oar,
  Past the perilous garden gate where the
      fierce white breakers roar,
  Past the rocks where the mermaids sing as
      they comb their golden hair,
  Past an iceberg grim and tall, and a great,
      white polar bear.

  She rowed 'way out on the Daisy Sea, with
      a really-truly oar,
  Till she came to an island castle, where she
      brought her boat ashore.
  She entered the castle boldly, and--wonderful
      sight to see!--
  She had rowed straight home to the dining-room
      and the table spread for tea.

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  APPLE-TREE INN

  It stands by the roadside, cool-shuttered and high,
  With cordial welcome for all who pass by;
  And here's how you enter--you make a quick dash
  And scale the steep stair with a bound, in a flash.
  You cross the clean threshold and find you a chair.
  There's room for all comers and plenty to spare.
  You can rock, you can rest, happy lodging you win
  Who stop for an hour at Apple-tree Inn.

  The walls and the roof and the ceiling are green,
  With rifts of light blue that are painted between.
  The seats are upholstered in brown and dark gray,
  And yet, for it all, not a penny to pay.
  Then, when you are hungry, the table is spread
  With fare that is dainty, delicious, and red.
  Oh, hurry and come if you never have been
  A guest in your travels at Apple-tree Inn!

  NANCY BYRD TURNER.




  AN OUTDOOR GIRL

  The wind and the water and a merry little girl--
  Her yellow hair a-blowing and her curls all out of curl,
  Her lips as red as cherries and her cheeks like any rose,
  And she laughs to see the little waves come curling round her toes.

  The breezes a-blowing and the blue sky overhead,
  A laughing little maiden,--and this is what she said:
  "Oh, what's the use of houses?  I think it is a sin
  To take a lot of boards and bricks and shut the outdoors in!"


[Illustration: An Outdoor Girl]




  THE BEDTIME STORY-BOOK

  There's something very, very queer
  About a story-book,
  No matter what's the time of year,
  Nor where you chance to look;

  No matter when it is begun,
  How many pages read,
  The very best of all the fun
  Comes just the time for bed,

  When mother whispers in your ear:
  "'Tis almost eight--just look!
  Now finish up your chapter, dear,
  And put away your book."

  The minutes almost seem to race
  When it is growing late;
  The very most exciting place
  Is just half after eight.


[Illustration: The Bedtime Story-Book]




  THE BROWNIES

  The little Bad Luck Brownies,
    They cry and pout and frown;
  They pucker up a crying-mouth,
    And pull the corners down;
  They blot the smile from every face
    And hush the happy song--
  The little Bad Luck Brownies
    That make the world go wrong!

  The little Good Luck Brownies,
    They sing and laugh and shout;
  If any cloud of trouble comes,
    They turn it inside out
  To show the silver lining
    That's always, always there,--
  The little Good Luck Brownies
    That make the world so fair!


[Illustration: Bad Luck and Good Luck Brownies]




  HER ANSWER

  It was an easy question and Margie thought it so,
  An easy one to answer, as any one would know.
  She smiled and smiled again as it hung upon the wall:
  "In going to school what do you like the very best of all?"
  Then grew a little sober as she began to write,
  With wrinkles on her forehead and lips a little tight.
  She wrote her answer carefully, with look so grave and wise,
  She minded all her capitals and dotted all her I's,
  She crossed her T's precisely, she smiled a little more
  At all the pleasant images the pleasant question bore
  Of all the merry, laughing hours, and all the joyous play--
  "The thing I like the best of all in school--a holiday."

  SIDNEY DAYRE.




  A TROUBLESOME DAUGHTER

  Angelica Sue is the carelessest child!
    The trouble she makes me is perfectly fearful.
  I told her this morning, but she only smiled,
    And swung in her hammock, and looked just as cheerful.
  I'm sure I should feel I had nothing to do,
  If some one adopted Angelica Sue.

  It's always Angelica falls in the dust,
    Angelica's frock that gets torn on the fences,
  The other dolls sit as I tell them they must,
    But when she comes out, then the trouble commences.
  Wherever I go, or whatever I do,
  She's sure to be with me--Angelica Sue.

  Oh, nobody knows how I work for that child!
    But once, when I spoke of her ways to my brother,
  He said, and he looked at us both, and he smiled,
    "Angelica Susan takes after her mother!"
  I've wondered since then if it really can be
  Angelica Sue is a little like me.

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  THE RACE

  Across the field and down the hill
  I ran a race with Cousin Will,
  And lost my shoe, I ran so fast,
  And that is why I came in last.

  But Cousin Will would try once more
  Across the field down to the shore.
  This time all would have ended well,
  Only I stubbed my toe and fell.

  And then we raced across the yard,
  And though I ran as swift and hard
  As Cousin Will, yet some way he
  Got to the place ahead of me.

  Will says to lose is no disgrace,
  That trying really makes a race.
  Twas trying, he says, made the fun,
  That all we wanted was the run.

  ALICE TURNER CURTIS.




  A BIG PLAYFELLOW

  It's lots of fun down in the grass,
  A-watching all the things that pass!
  You won't come too?  I wonder why
  It's fun a-playing with the sky!

  I guess you are too tall to see;
  If you would come down here with me,
  And just _ungrow_ a little, you
  Could see just what you wanted to.

  Such big cloud-ships with sails spread out
  To catch the breeze that's all about!
  And big gray birds with soft cloud-wings,
  And wolves and bears and tiger things!

  Just lying down here in the grass,
  I've seen about a million pass;
  They creep and run and sail and fly--
  It's fun a-playing with the sky!


[Illustration: A Big Playfellow]




  HAYING TIME

  In haying-time my grandpa says
    I'm lots of use to him;
  I take my nice new wheelbarrow
    and fill it to the brim;
  The big team comes out, too, and
    takes the hay-cocks one by one,
  And that and my new wheelbarrow
    soon get the haying done.

  F. LILEY-YOUNG.




  NOBODY

  "Nobody b'oke it!  It cracked itself;
  It was clear 'way up on the toppest shelf.
  I--p'rhaps the kitty-cat knows!"
    Says poor little Ned,
    With his ears as red
  As the heart of a damask rose.

  _Nobody_ lost it.  I carefully
  Put my cap just where it ought to be
  (No, 'tisn't ahind the door),
    And it went and hid,
    Why, of course it did,
  For I've hunted an hour or more.

  "_Nobody tore it_!  You know things will
  Tear if you're sitting just stock stone still!
  I was just jumping over the fence--
    There's some spikes on top,
    And you have to drop
  Before you can half commence."

  Nobody!  Wicked Sir Nobody!
  Playing such tricks on my children three!
  If I but set eyes on you,
    You should find what you've lost!--
    But that, to my cost,
  I never am like to do!


[Illustration: Nobody]




  MY GARDEN

  I have a little garden
    All edged with four-o'clocks;
  And some of it is sunflowers,
    And some is hollyhocks.

  And all around the border
    I've planted little stones--
  A lot of round beach pebbles--
    To keep out Rover's bones.

  And then, as plain as daylight,
    A sign, "Keep off the grass,"
  Warns hens and everybody
    That here they shouldn't pass.

  But Rover makes his pantry
    Right in that garden patch;
  And all the hens and chickens
    Think that's the place to scratch.

  ANNA BURNHAM BRYANT.




  MAMMA'S LITTLE HOUSEMAID

  I am mamma's little housemaid, don't you see?
  They couldn't get along so well if it were not for me;
  For every Friday morning I take my little broom,
  And sweep and sweep the pretty rugs that lie in mamma's room.
  And then I sweep the door-steps off, and do not leave a crumb,
  And wipe the dishes, too, and oh, it is the bestest fun!
  And then, when mamma starts to bake, she says that maybe I
  Can make all by my very self a cunning little pie.
  When I am big enough for school I think I'll like to go,
  But truly I would rather stay at home, you know,
  And help my mamma do the work, and bake a little pie,
  For mamma says all little girls, if they would only try,
  Can help their mammas very much with willing hands and feet,
  By sweeping rugs and door-steps and keeping porches neat.
  So I am mamma's housemaid, and she pays me with a kiss,
  And papa, when he comes at night, says, "Bless me, what is this!
  How bright and clean the rugs do look!"  And then I laugh and say
  That my little broom and I work for mamma every day.

  HARRIET CROCKER LEROY.




  TOYS

  Toys have a bedtime, too.
  Oh, but it's really true!
  This is what you should do,--

  Just as the sun sinks low,
  Off to bed make them go,
  Laid in a tidy row.

  There let them rest all night,
  Sleep until morning light,
  Then wake when day shines bright.

  ALICE VAN LEER CARRICK.




  THE BATH

  It always has seemed queer to me,
    When I give Bess a bath
  In our big, shiny, new, white tub,
    She shorter grows by half.

  But when I take her out again
    She hasn't changed at all.
  If you have doubts of what I say,
    Just try it with your doll!

  REBECCA DEMING MOORE.




  NAP-TIME

  Rock-a-bye me!  Rock-a-bye me!
  I'm just as tired as I can be.
  We've swung and swung as high as the sky,
  Then slower, to let the "old cat die;"
  We played we were grasshoppers--hippity-hop
  The grasshoppers go, and they never stop;
  And then we played kangaroo--just look,
  The way they do in the picture-book!
  And then--I want to get on your knee!
  Rock-a-bye me!  Rock-a-bye me!

  F. LILEY-YOUNG.




  CHUMS

  We're chums, and we love it---dear father and I!
  He's tall and grown-up, of course--ever so high!
  But _you_ don't mind that, though you're little as me;
  He always stoops down, or you sit on his knee
  When you're chums.

  We go for long walks--he says, "Now for a hike!"--
  With beautiful talks about things that I like;
  Some folks do not care about beetles and toads
  And little green snakes that you find in the roads,
  But we're chums.

  Sometimes mother gets into trouble with me;
  She tells him about it, and he says, "I see!"
  His arm gets around me, and pretty soon, then,
  I'm telling him I'll never do it again,
  'Cause we're chums.

  We tell all our secrets, and when things go bad
  And worry-lines come in his face, I look glad
  And get him a-laughing, and smooth them away.
  He says, "Little Partner, it's your turn today!"
  So we're chums.




  A TOUCH OF NATURE

  A little maid upon my knee
  Sighs wearily, sighs wearily;
    "I'm tired out of dressin' dolls,
  And havin' stories read," says she.

  "There _is_ a book, if I could see,
  I should be happy, _puffickly_!
    My mamma keeps it on a shelf--
  'But _that_ you cannot have,' says she!"

  "But here's your Old Man of the Sea,
  And Jack the Giant!"  (Lovingly
    I tried the little maid to soothe.)
  "The _interestin'_ one," says she,

  "Is that high-up one!--seems to me
  The fings you want just has to be
    Somethin' you hasn't got; and _that's_
  The interestin' one!" says she.




  A LESSON IN NATURAL HISTORY

  "Now who can tell," the teacher said,
    "Who the five members be
  (The one who knows may go to the head)
    Of the cat family?"

  "I guess I know as much as that,"
    Cried the youngest child in glee;
  "The father cat and the mother cat,
    And the baby kittens three!"




  PICTURE-BOOK TIME

  Whenever the rain-drops come pattering down,
    And the garden's too dripping for play,
  Whenever poor nursie's determined to frown,
    Or mother dear's just gone away,
  Then up to the nursery book-shelves we climb,
  For trouble time's always a picture-book time!

  When some one's been naughty, and some one is sad,
    When the new walking bear will not go,
  When the kitten is lost or the puppy is bad,
    When Mary hates learning to sew,
  Then up to the nursery book-shelves we climb,
  For trouble time's always a picture-book time!

  And there in the pictures the world seems so gay,
    And everything always goes right.
  The gardens are sunny, the children at play,
    There's seldom a picture-book night.
  No wonder we love to sit cosily curled,
  Forgetting our woes in the picture-book world.

  The dear, merry pages! we know them so well,
    And when they are folded away,
  Our troubles have vanished as if by a spell,
    And nothing is wrong with the day.
  The nursery book-shelves are easy to climb,
  And no time is better than picture-book time!

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  THE TOPSY-TURVY DOLL

  Topsy-Turvy came to me
  On our last year's Christmas tree.
  She is just the queerest doll,
  Much the strangest of them all.
  Now you see her, cheeks of red,
  Muslin cap upon her head,
  Bright blue eyes and golden hair,
  Never face more sweet and fair.
  Presto! change!  She's black as night,
  Woolly hair all curling tight,
  Coal-black eyes, thick lips of red,
  Bright bandanna on her head.
  She's not two, as you'd suppose,
  When Topsy comes, Miss Turvy goes.
  Perhaps it's as it is with me.
  Sometimes another child there'll be,
  And mother says, "Where is my Flo?
  I wish that naughty girl would go."

  REBECCA DEMING MOORE.




  POOR OLD BOOKS

  The poor old books that nobody reads,
    How lonely their days must be!
  They stand up high on the dusty shelves,
  Waiting and wishing, beside themselves,--
    And nobody cares but me.
  They have no pictures, they are no good,
  But I'd read them through, if I only could.

  The poor old books!  They are fat and dull,
    Their covers are dark and queer;
  But every time I push the door,
  And patter across the library floor,
    They seem to cry, "Here, oh here!"
  And I feel so sad for their lonely looks
  That I hate to take down my picture-books.

  The nice new books on the lower shelves
    Are giddy in gold and red;
  And they are happy and proud and gay,
  For somebody reads in them every day,
    And carries them up to bed.
  But when I am big I'm going to read
  The books that nobody else will heed.

  ABBIE FARWELL BROWN.




  SYMPATHY

  Sometimes the world's asleep so soon
    When all the winds are still,
  That I can see the little moon
    Come peeping o'er the hill.

  It looks so small and scared and white,
    The way I feel in bed
  When I have just put out the light
    And covered up my head.

  It half seems wishing it had stayed,
    And half creeps softly out.
  "Dear moon," I say, "don't be afraid!
    No bogies are about."


[Illustration: Sympathy]




  A SPRING SONG

  Out in the woods,
    Where the wild birds sing,
  It is all alive
    With the happy spring.

  It gets in my feet,
    And the first I know
  They are dancing-glad,
    And away they go.

  I race with the brook
    Till my breath is gone,
  And it laughs at me
    As it races on.

  I rock with the trees,
    And I sway and swing,
  And make believe
    I am part of the spring.




  SECRETS

  I know a man that's big and tall,
    With glasses on his nose,
  And canes and shiny hats and all
    Such grown-up things as those;
  But we have secrets I won't tell!
    Here in the nursery,
  Before they ring the dinner-bells
    He's just a boy like me.

  He comes home from the office, where
    They think he's just a man
  The same as they are, with his hair
    All slick and spick and span.
  Oh, don't I make it in a mess!
    It makes us scream for joy.
  "Sh--sh!" he says, "they mustn't guess
    I'm nothing but a boy!"

  And sometimes when the doorbell rings,
    The girl knocks at the door.
  "An' is the doctor in?" she sings,
    A dozen times or more.
  "Good-by, old man!" he says.  "That bell
    Means business.  Here's your toy!"
  And off he goes.  I'll never tell
    He's nothing but a boy.


[Illustration: Secrets]




  SOMEBODY DID IT

  Hunting, hunting, high and low,
  Where do the caps and "tammies" go?
  Ned's--he hung it, he knows he did,
  Right on a nail, and it went and hid!
  Rob's--"Well, mother, I'm almost sure
  I hung it"--"Right on the parlor floor?"
  "_Where_ is my 'Tam'?" cried Margery;
  And the household echoes, "Where _can_ it be?"

  "Somebody does it!"  Yes, they do!
  And not a person to "lay things to!"
  Ned will sputter and Rob complain,
  And Margery weeps till it looks like rain;
  And the family puts its glasses on
  And hunts and hunts till the day is gone;
  Somebody! wicked old Somebody!
  No end of trouble you make for me.

  Hunting, hunting, here and there!
  Rob's was under the Morris-chair;
  Ned's, by a strange coincidence,
  _Was_ on a nail--of the garden fence;
  And Margery's little pink Tam-o'-shanter
  I chanced to spy in a morning saunter
  Out through the barn, where 'tis wont to hide
  When they've been having a "hay-mow slide."




  IN SUMMER

  When all the roads are white with dust,
    And thirsty flowers complain,
  Our little lassie cries, "I must
    Go carry round the rain."

  As up and down the garden plots
    With busy feet she treads,
  The pansies and forget-me-nots
    Lift up their drooping heads.

  She waters all the lilies tall,
    The fragrant mignonette,
  And hollyhocks beside the wall--
    Not one does she forget.

  What wonder that her garden grows
    And blooms, and blooms again,
  When every grateful blossom knows
    Who "carries round the rain!"

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  OUR LITTLE BROOK

  Our little brook just sings and sings
    In such a happy way,
  I'd love to sit beside it,
    And listen all the day.

  In spring it has a merry sound,
    I know the reason why--
  Because the ice has gone and now
    The brook can see the sky.

  It loves to glisten in the sun
    And sparkle in its light.
  I'm sure it loves the silvery moon
    And sings to it at night.

  The summer song is not so gay,
    The brook is now quite still,
  With here and there a darling song
    Sung by a tiny rill.

  I love to watch the bubbles float,
    I wonder where they go,
  I see the little "skaters"
    All darting to and fro.

  When leaves are falling from the trees
    As fast as they can fall,
  I love to sail them in the brook--
    Though there's not room for all.

  They sail like little fairy boats
    And start out merrily,
  But sometimes find a stopping place
    Before they reach the sea.

  The winter brook is soon with ice
    All covered up with care,
  But I can hear a tiny voice,
    I know the brook is there!

  EDITH DUNHAM.




  THE PINEWOOD PEOPLE

  When winds are noisy-winged and high,
    And crystal-clear the day,
  Down where the forest meets the sky
    The Pinewood People play.

  Far off I see them bow, advance,
    Swing partners and retreat,
  As though some slow, old-fashioned dance
    Had claimed their tripping feet.

  Or hand to hand they wave, and so,
    With dip and bend and swing,
  Through "tag" and "hide" and "touch and go"
    They flutter, frolicking.

  But when I run to join the play,
    I find my search is vain.
  Always they see me on the way,
    And change to pines again.

  ELIZABETH THORNTON TURNER.




  THE STUDENTS

  I say to Tommy every day,
  "Now let us read awhile,"
  But Tommy doesn't like to read,
  He'd rather be a prancing steed,
  And have me drive him many a mile,
    And often run away.

  I like to do as grown folks do.
  Our house is full of books.
  My sisters gather every night
  About the cheery study light.
  I often think how wise it looks,
    And wish I could stay, too.

  So I coax Tommy every day
  To read a little while.
  I know my M's and N's and P's
  And everything, 'way down to Z's.
  When Tommy reads I have to smile,
    For Tommy just knows A!

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  THE LADY MOON

  There's a lady in the moon,
    With a floating gown of white;
  You can see her very soon,
    When mamma turns out the light.

  Tis a lady and she smiles
    Through my narrow window way,
  As she sails on miles and miles,
    Making night as fair as day.

  ALICE TURNER CURTIS.




  THE JOURNEY

  Whither away shall the baby ride?
    How many miles shall he fare?
  Under the trees whose arms spread wide,
    Out to the meadow there.

  Down by the brook that flows rippling by,
    Bordered by moss and fern.
  From flower and bird and tree and sky
    How many things shall he learn?

  Baby'll journey all safe and sound
    Out in the world of green,
  Traveling over the grassy ground,
    Where wild flowers are seen.

  Leaves will whisper and birds will trill,
    And all things display their charms,
  And, when he's journeyed as far as he will,
    He'll ride back to mother's arms.

  Then, though he thought the green world good,
    He'll gladly come back to rest,
  And will drowsily feel, as a baby should,
    That mother's arms are the best.

  ANNIE WILLIS MCCULLOUGH.




  PRETENDING

  We played we were lost in the wood,
    But home was just over the hill.
  With only one cooky for food,
  We played we were lost in the wood.
  We talked just as loud as we could,
    The world seemed so big and so still.
  We wished we had always been good,
    And we said in our hearts, "Now we will."

  We gathered fresh grass for our bed,
    And then there was nothing to do.
  A robin flew over my head
  As we gathered fresh grass for our bed.
  "He'll cover us up," brother said,
    And then he began to boo-hoo,
  And home to our mother we fled,
    Or, really, I might have cried too.

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  A LITTLE APRIL FOOL

  One day in the midst
    Of an April shower.
  This dear little girl
    Was missed for an hour.

  And under the trees
    And over the grass,
  We all went hunting
    The little lost lass.

  We found her at last
    Where two walls met,
  A-looking naughty
    And a-dripping wet.

  "I was April-fooling,"
    She softly said;
  And down she dropped
    A shamed little head.


[Illustration: A Little April Fool]




  FROST FIRES

  Look! look! look!
    The woods are all afire!
  See! see! see!
    Aflame are bush and brier!
  The trees are all unhurt, I know--
    Oak, maple, elm and all--
  But, oh, they all seem burning up
    In red fires of the fall!




  WHISTLING IN THE RAIN

  Whistle, whistle, up the road,
    And whistle, whistle down the lane!
  That's the laddie takes my heart,
    A-whistling in the rain.
        Winter wind may whistle too--
          That's a comrade gay!
        Naught that any wind can do
          Drives his cheer away.

  Whistle, whistle, sun or storm;
    And whistle, whistle, warm or cold!
  Underneath his ragged coat
    There beats a heart of gold.
          He will keep a courage high,
            Bear the battle's brunt;
          Let the coward whine and cry!--
            His the soldier's front.

  Shoes, I know, are out at toe,
    And rags and patches at the knee;
  He whistles still his merry tune,
    For not a fig cares he.
        Whistle, whistle, up the road,
          Whistle, whistle, down the lane!
        That's the laddie for my love,
          Whistling in the rain.


[Illustration: Whistling in the rain]




  THE WOODEN HORSE

  I'm just a wooden horsy, and I work hard all the day
  At hauling blocks and dollies in my little painted dray.

  Sometimes they feed me make-believe, sometimes nothing at all,
  And sometimes I'm left standing on my head out in the hall.

  I try to be most patient, but 'twas just the other day
  I got provoked with Teddy Bear and almost ran away.

  REBECCA DEMING MOORE.




  AFTER SCHOOL

  I've come to you again, my dear.  There's no more school today.
  Let's cuddle down a little while before we go to play,
  And you shall tell me what you've done, and whether you've felt sad.
  I always hurry home because I know you'll be so glad.

  I had a thought in school today--I quite forgot my book--
  I seemed to see you waiting, and how lonely you must look,
  And all the other children's dolls, ten thousand, I suppose,
  All sitting up so patiently, and turning out their toes.

  And then when I was called upon to answer "four times four,"
  I failed, and teacher told me that I ought to study more.
  She asked if I had done my best.  I had to answer, "No'm."
  I don't believe she leaves a little lonely doll at home!

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  A SLEEPY-HEAD TOP

  My top is just the very best,
  But, my! it is the laziest.
  It sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps all day,
  And doesn't want to come and play.
  Then, when it spins, it sleeps the more.
  It stands up straight, but it will snore,
  Until it is so sound asleep
  It tumbles over in a heap.

  SINCLAIR LEWIS.




  A CHRISTMAS "TELEPHONE"

  "Ullo, Mr. Santa!  Ullo!  Ullo!  Ullo!
  If must be 'most to Christmas, and I think you ought to know
  About the things we're needing most--of course I'd like a doll,
  And Jimmy wants a rocking-horse, and Charlie wants a ball.

  "And all of us would like a lot of striped candy sticks
  (There's just six boys and girls of us--be sure to make it six),
  And gum-drops; and oh, if you could, some red-and-white gibraltars!
  I had some once, and half was mine, and half of them was Walter's.

  "But, dear old Santa, don't forget, whatever you leave out,
  To put in some surprises that we never thought about;
  For in the whole long stocking, clear down into the toe,
  The presents that are nicest are the ones you didn't know."




  A LOST BABY

  Baby's hidden all away!
    Nobody can find her!
  Where's the baby, mamma?  Say,
    Let's go look behind her!

  Baby?  No, she isn't there--
    Have we lost our baby?
  Let's go hunting down the stair,
    There we'll find her, maybe.

  Papa's lost his little girl!
    What will he do for kisses?
  What is this? A yellow curl?
    And please to say what this is

  Inside my coat!  "_I 'ant some breff!_
    _It makes me almost 'oasted!_
  _Next time don't smovver me to deff--_
    _Let's play aden I'm losted!"_




  VELOCIPEDE

  I know of a staid and sober horse
    That goes by a great, long name.
  The little ones like this trusty steed
  That always goes at a proper speed.
  They call him the good Velocipede,
    And he's never tired or lame.

  Ah, he is the horse that gives you fun,
    And he is the horse you need!
  He's never balky, he eats no hay,
  He's ready to either go or stay,
  And never was known to run away--
    This good horse Velocipede.

  ANNIE WILLIS MCCULLOUGH.




  A RAINY DAY PLAN

  The world's wet and stormy,
    The wind's in a rage.
  We are shut in the house
    Like poor birds in a cage.
  There's a sigh in the chimney,
    A roar on the wall.
  Good-by to "I Spy"
    And to swinging and all!
  But the child that complains
    Cannot better the day,
  So the harder it rains,
    Why, the harder we'll play!

  There are tears on the window
    And sighs in the trees,
  But who's going to fret
    Over matters like these?
  If the sky's got to cry,
    Then it's better by half
  That the longer it weeps,
    Why, the louder we'll laugh!
  And look! I declare,
    There's the sun coming out
  To see what on earth
    All the fun is about!

  NANCY BYRD TURNER.




  THE BIRTHDAY ONES

  I am the birthday baby,
    And this is the birthday horse.
  They gave him to me because I was three
    And knew how to drive, of course.
  He's trotted and walked and galloped,
    And traveled the whole birthday;
  He's carried a load up the hilly road,
    And once he has run away.

  I've fed him high in the stable,
    I've watered him at the trough,
  I've curried him down to a glossy brown,
    And taken his harness off.
  Now we are resting a little,
    Because there has got to be
  A long, stiff run before we're done,
    For the birthday horse and me!

  NANCY BYRD TURNER.




  A DUTCH WISH

  The little Dutch children,
    With little Dutch shoes,
  Go clitter-clatter
    Wherever they choose.

  But we must move lightly,
    In slippers, at that,
  And walk on our tip-toes,
    And go like a cat.

  But, oh, noise is lovely!
    We wish very much
  That we were Dutch children
    With shoes that were Dutch.


[Illustration: The Dutch Wish]




  A SIGN OF SPRING

  The blue-bird is a-wing;
      he has heard the call of spring;
  And a dozen times this morning
      I have heard a robin sing;
  But I know a sign that's surer,
      and I see the twinkling feet
  Of a score of little children
      at the corner of the street.

  The crocus-bed's abloom;
      in the shadow of my room
  Glows a vase of golden jonquils
      like a star amid the gloom;
  But the sign that's sure and certain
      is the children's merry feet
  Dancing round the organ-grinder
      at the corner of the street.

  Song of bird or hum of bee,
      there's no sign of spring for me
  Like the jolly little dancers
      and the frolic melody;
  And my heart shall catch the rhythm
      of the happy little feet
  Dancing round the organ-grinder
      at the corner of the street.




  MY DOLLY

  There's nothing so nice as dolly!
    She comforts me when I'm sad,
  She keeps me from getting lonely,
    She smiles at me when I'm glad.
  She's such a delightful playmate,
    And causes me so much joy,
  I wouldn't exchange her for all the toys
    That people give to a boy.

  ANNIE WILLIS MCCULLOUGH.




  ONE MILE TO TOYLAND

  "One mile, one mile to Toyland!"
  Just s'pose, to your intense
  Astonishment, you found this sign
  Plain written on a fence.
  Just one short mile to Toyland,
  To happy girl and boy-land,
  Where one can play the livelong day!

  Now who will hurry hence?
  There dollies grow on bushes,
  And wooden soldiers stand
  With frisky rocking-horses near,
  A brave and dauntless band;
  And whips and tops and whistles
  They grow as thick as thistles,
  And every kind of toy you find--
  A strange and magic land!

  "Only a mile to Toyland!"
  How big your eyes would grow,
  And how you'd come and stand stock-still
  To read it, in a row;
  Then, brother, girls, and maybe
  The puppy and the baby,
  You'd make that mile in little while,
  And find that land, I know!

  NANCY BYRD TURNER.




  A BATH-TUB JOKE

  Clean and sweet from head to feet
    Is Jerry, but not his twin.
  "Now for the other!" says merry mother,
    And quickly dips him in.
  Jim and Jerry, with lips of cherry,
    And eyes of the selfsame blue;
  Twins to a speckle, yes, even a freckle--
    What can a mother do?
  They wink and wriggle and laugh and giggle--
    A joke on mother is nice!
  "We played a joke,"--'twas Jimmie who spoke,--
    "And you've washed the same boy twice!"




  HER OWN WAY

  When Polly goes into the parlor to play,
  She never minds what the little notes say,
    Nor peeps at a music-book;
  "I play by ear," says the little dear
  (When some of us think the music's queer),
    "So why should I need to look?"

  When Polly goes into the kitchen to cook,
  She never looks at a cookery-book,
    Nor a sign of a recipe;
  It's a dot of this and a dab of that,
  And a twirl of the wrist and a pinch and a pat--
    "I cook by hand," says she.




  THE MONTH OF MAY

  It comes just after April,
    And right before 'tis June;
  And every bird that's singing
    Has this same lovely tune:
  You needn't ask your mother
    To let you go and play;
  The very breezes whisper,
    "You may!  You may!  You may!"

  There are no frosts to freeze you,
    And no fierce winds to blow;
  But winds that seem like kisses,
    So soft and sweet and slow;
  The lovely sun is shining
    'Most every single day.
  Of course you may go out, dears--
    It is the _month_ of "May"!




  THE BIRTHDAY

  Bring the birthday-marker!
    That's the way to show
  How much I've been growing
    Since a year ago.

  All my last year's dresses
    Are too short for me;
  This one--with the tucks out--
    Only to my knee!

  Grandpa rubs his glasses;
    Whispers, "Yes, indeed!
  How that child is growing--
    Growing like a weed!"

  Mother's word is sweetest:
    "Yes, in sun and shower
  She's been growing, growing,
    Growing like a flower!"




  BABY'S PLAYTHINGS

  Ten cunning little playthings
    He never is without--
  His little wiggle-waggle toes
    That carry him about.

  They look so soft and pinky,
    And good enough to eat!
  How lucky that the little toes
    Are fastened to his feet!

  Ten little pinky playthings
    He cannot eat or lose;
  Except when Nursey hides them all
    In little socks and shoes.




  WHEN IT RAINS

  We don't mind rainy days a bit,
      my brother Ted and I;
  There's such a lot of games to play
      before it comes blue sky.
  Sometimes we play I'm Mrs. Noah,
      and Ted's Methusalem!
  I put him in his little box and
      hand his little drum
  (There has to be some way, you see,
      to let the Ark-folks know
  That Father Noah expects them all,
      and where they are to go)
  And then they come by twos and twos,
      and twos and twos and _twos_,
  Till trotting with them 'cross the floor
      'most wears out my new shoes.
  They all go in, and when it's time,
      we let the flood begin;
  The rainier it rains the more
      we like it staying in.


[Illustration: Staying In]




  THE SLEEPING TREES.

  I know how the apple-tree went to sleep!
    Its fluttering leaves were so tired of play!--
  Like frolicsome children when dusk grows deep,
  And mother says "Come!" and they gladly creep
    To knee and to nest at the end of day.

  Its work was all done and it longed to rest;
    The reddening apples dropped softly down;
  The leaves fell in heaps to the brown earth's breasts
  And then, of a sudden, its limbs were dressed
    (The better to sleep) in a soft white gown.

  The maples and beeches and oaks and all--
    When summer was over, each cool green tent
  Seemed suddenly turned to a banquet hall,
  Pavilions with banners, a flaming wall!
    And then all was gone and their glory spent.

  Then quickly the sky shook her blankets out,
    And robes that were softer than wool to don
  She gave all her children the winds to flout--
  I wish I knew what they are dreaming about,
    So quiet and still with their white gowns on!




  A SUMMER HOLIDAY

  Can you guess where I have been?
  On the hillsides fresh and green!
  Out where all the winds are blowing,
  Where the free, bright streamlet's flowing
  Leap and laugh and race and run
  Like a child that's full of fun!--
  Crinkle, crinkle through the meadows,
  Hiding in the woodland shadows;
  Making here and there a pool
  In some leafy covert cool
  For the Lady Birch to see
  Just how fair and sweet is she.

  Can you guess where I have been?
  By a brook where willows lean;
  With a book whereon to look,
  In some little shady nook,
  If that I should weary grow
  Of that lovelier book I know
  Whose sweet leaves the wind is turning--
  Full of lessons for my learning.
  There are little songs to hear
  If you bend a listening ear;
  And no printed book can be
  Half so dear and sweet to me.




  TWO POCKETS

  There are two bulging pockets that I have in mind.
  Just listen and see if the owners you'll find.
  In one--it's quite shocking--there's a round wad of gum,
  A china doll's head and a half finished sum,
  A thimble, a handkerchief--sticky, I fear--
  A dolly's blue cap and some jackstones are here.
  In the other are marbles and fishhooks and strings,
  Some round shiny stones and a red top that sings,
  A few apple cores and a tin full of bait,
  A big black jack-knife in a sad bladeless state.
  And now I wonder how many can guess
  Which pocket Bob owns and which one does Bess?

  REBECCA DEMING MOORE.




  MY HORSE

  I give my pony corn and hay,
    With oats to tempt him twice a week;
  I smooth and curry every day
    Until his coat is bright and sleek;
  At night he has a cosy stall;
  He does not seem to care at all.

  I mount him often, hurriedly,
    And ride him fast and ride him far;
  With whip and spur I make him fly
    Along the road where robbers are;
  But when I've galloped madly home
  He is not wet or flecked with foam.

  He does not plunge against the rein,
    Nor take a ditch nor clear a rail.
  He does not toss his flowing mane,
    He does not even switch his tail.
  Oh, well, he does his best, of course;
  He's nothing but a hobby-horse!

  NANCY BYRD TURNER.




  MAY-TIME

  Sing a song of May-time,
    And picnics in the park.
  Such a happy playtime!
    Birds are singing--hark!
  Bluebird calls to bluebird,
    Robins chirp between,
  And little lads and lasses
    Are dancing on the green.

  Marigolds are golden
    All along the brooks.
  Violets are peeping
    In the shady nooks.
  Out into the fields now!
    Choose your happy queen;
  For all the lads and lasses
    Are dancing on the green.

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  BOOKS

  My father's books are made of words,
  As long and hard as words can be,
  They look so very dull to me!
  No pictures there of beasts and birds,
  Of dear Miss Muffet eating curds,
  And things a child would like to see.

  My books have pictures, large and small,
  Some brightly colored, some just plain,
  I look them through and through again.
  Friends from their pages seem to call,
  Jack climbs his bean-stalk thick and tall,
  I know he will not climb in vain.

  Here comes Red-Riding-Hood, and here
  The Sleeping Beauty lies in state,
  The prince will come ere 'tis too late!
  And this is Cinderella dear.
  The godmother will soon appear
  And send her to her happy fate.

  Oh, father's books are very wise,
  As wise as any books can be!
  Yet he wants stories, I can see;
  For really, it's a great surprise
  How many picture-books he buys,
  And reads the fairy tales to me!

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  THE LITTLE BOOK PEOPLE

  At half past eight I say "good night" and snuggle up in bed.
  I'm never lonely, for it's then I hear the gentle tread
  Of all the tiny book people.  They come to visit me,
  And lean above my pillow just as friendly as can be!
  Sometimes they cling against the wall or dance about in air.
  I never hear them speak a word, but I can see them there.
  When Cinderella comes she smiles with happy, loving eyes,
  And makes a funny nod at me when she the slipper tries.
  Dear Peter Pan flies in and out.  I see his shadow, too,
  And often see his little house and all his pirate crew.
  I think they know I love them and that's why they come at night,
  When other people do not know that they've slipped out of sight;
  But I have often been afraid that while they visit me
  Some other little boy, perhaps, may stay up after tea,
  And when he tries to find them on the pages of his book
  He cannot see them anywhere, though he may look and look!
  That's why I never stay awake nor keep them here too long.
  I go to sleep and let them all slip back where they belong.

  EDNA A. FOSTER.




  CHARLOTTE THE CONQUEROR

  When Charlotte is playing croquet
    It's really refreshing to see.
  She wins in the cheerfullest way,
    Or loses (but rarely!) with glee.
  She chooses the ball that is blue,
    And dashes straight into the fray.
  I want to be present--don't you?--
    When Charlotte is playing croquet.

  And Charlotte is playing croquet
    From breakfast-time almost till tea.
  She coaxes us, "Please, won't you play?"
    And somehow, we always agree.
  Then oh, for the ball that is blue!
    What matter the tasks of the day?
  There's something important to do,
   For Charlotte is playing croquet!

  When Charlotte is playing croquet,
    The neighbors come over to see,
  The grocer is tempted to stay,
    The butcher's boy gives advice free,
  The doctor, forgetting his care,
    Will linger a bit on his way.
  There are partners enough and to spare,
    When Charlotte is playing croquet.

  HANNAH G. FERNALD.




  THE SCARECROW

  He doesn't wander up and down
    And hoarsely call all day,
  "O' clo'!  O' clo'!"  This old-clothes man
    Has not a word to say.

  He stands so stiff among the corn,
    His one stiff arm stuck out,
  And points a musket at the crows
    That circle all about.

  He doesn't tramp the dusty streets,
    Nor travel, ankle-deep,
  Through mush and slush, but quiet stands
    Where baby corn-cobs sleep.

  He's such a funny old-clothes man!
    I wonder if it's hard
  To stand amid the growing corn
    All summer long on guard.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A JOLLY JINGLE-BOOK***


******* This file should be named 20952.txt or 20952.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/9/5/20952



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

