The Project Gutenberg eBook, Wonder-Box Tales, by Jean Ingelow,
Illustrated by Diantha W. Horne


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Wonder-Box Tales


Author: Jean Ingelow



Release Date: April 8, 2007  [eBook #21014]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WONDER-BOX TALES***


E-text prepared by Sigal Alon, Fox in the Stars, Mary Meehan, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 21014-h.htm or 21014-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/0/1/21014/21014-h/21014-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/0/1/21014/21014-h.zip)





The Editha Series

WONDER-BOX TALES

by

JEAN INGELOW

With Illustrations by Diantha W. Horne







H. M. Caldwell Co.
Publishers
New York & Boston

Copyright, 1902
By Dana Estes & Company
All rights reserved




[Illustration: "'TO BE SURE I CAN,' REPLIED THE LARK."]




CONTENTS


The Ouphe of the Wood

The Fairy Who Judged Her Neighbors

The Prince's Dream

The Water-lily

A Lost Wand




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"'To be sure I can,' replied the Lark"

"So he sat down as close to the fire as he could, and spread out his
hands to the flames"

"Coming home on top of it, driving the four gray horses
himself"

"While she was fitting on her shoes, she saw the Lark's friend"

"Then he reclined beside the chafing-dish and inhaled the heavy
perfume"

"'I could not do so,' he replied, 'only that as I go on I keep
lightening it'"

"Lived on the borders of one of the great American forests"

"The next moment a beautiful little creature stood upon his
hand"

"'Oh, don't go,' cried Hulda. 'I am going up-stairs to fetch my
wand'"

"The pedlar had now sunk up to his waist"




WONDER-BOX TALES




THE OUPHE[1] OF THE WOOD


"An Ouphe!" perhaps you exclaim, "and pray what might that be?"

[Footnote 1: _Ouphe_, pronounced "oof," is an old-fashioned word for
goblin or elf.]

An Ouphe, fair questioner,--though you may never have heard of
him,--was a creature well known (by hearsay, at least) to your
great-great-grandmother. It was currently reported that every forest had
one within its precincts, who ruled over the woodmen, and exacted
tribute from them in the shape of little blocks of wood ready hewn for
the fire of his underground palace,--such blocks as are bought at shops
in these degenerate days, and called in London "kindling."

It was said that he had a silver axe, with which he marked those trees
that he did not object to have cut down; moreover, he was supposed to
possess great riches, and to appear but seldom above ground, and when he
did to look like an old man in all respects but one, which was that he
always carried some green ash-keys about with him which he could not
conceal, and by which he might be known.

Do I hear you say that you don't believe he ever existed? It matters not
at all to my story whether you do or not. He certainly does not exist
now. The Commissioners of Woods and Forests have much to answer for, if
it was they who put an end to his reign; but I do not think they did; it
is more likely that the spelling-book used in woodland districts
disagreed with his constitution.

After this short preface please to listen while I tell you that once in
a little black-timbered cottage, at the skirts of a wood, a young woman
sat before the fire rocking her baby, and, as she did so, building a
castle in the air: "What a good thing it would be," she thought to
herself, "if we were rich!"

It had been a bright day, but the evening was chilly; and, as she
watched the glowing logs that were blazing on her hearth, she wished
that all the lighted part of them would turn to gold.

She was very much in the habit--this little wife--of building castles in
the air, particularly when she had nothing else to do, or her husband
was late in coming home to his supper. Just as she was thinking how late
he was there was a tap at the door, and an old man walked in, who said:

"Mistress, will you give a poor man a warm at your fire?"

"And welcome," said the young woman, setting him a chair.

So he sat down as close to the fire as he could, and spread out his
hands to the flames.

[Illustration: "SO HE SAT DOWN AS CLOSE TO THE FIRE AS HE COULD, AND
SPREAD OUT HIS HANDS TO THE FLAMES."]

He had a little knapsack on his back, and the young woman did not doubt
that he was an old soldier.

"Maybe you are used to the hot countries," she said.

"All countries are much the same to me," replied the stranger. "I see
nothing to find fault with in this one. You have fine hawthorn-trees
hereabouts; just now they are as white as snow; and then you have a
noble wood behind you."

"Ah, you may well say that," said the young woman. "It is a noble wood
to us; it gets us bread. My husband works in it."

"And a fine sheet of water there is in it," continued the old man. "As I
sat by it to-day it was pretty to see those cranes, with red legs,
stepping from leaf to leaf of the water-lilies so lightly."

As he spoke he looked rather wistfully at a little saucepan which stood
upon the hearth.

"Why, I shouldn't wonder if you were hungry," said the young woman,
laying her baby in the cradle, and spreading a cloth on the round table.
"My husband will be home soon, and if you like to stay and sup with him
and me, you will be kindly welcome."

The old man's eyes sparkled when she said this, and he looked so very
old and seemed so weak that she pitied him. He turned a little aside
from the fire, and watched her while she set a brown loaf on the table,
and fried a few slices of bacon; but all was ready, and the kettle had
been boiling some time before there were any signs of the husband's
return.

"I never knew Will to be so late before," said the stranger. "Perhaps he
is carrying his logs to the saw-pits."

"Will!" exclaimed the wife. "What, you know my husband, then? I thought
you were a stranger in these parts."

"Oh, I have been past this place several times," said the old man,
looking rather confused; "and so, of course, I have heard of your
husband. Nobody's stroke in the wood is so regular and strong as his."

"And I can tell you he is the handiest man at home," began his wife.

"Ah, ah," said the old man, smiling at her eagerness; "and here he
comes, if I am not mistaken."

At that moment the woodman entered.

"Will," said his wife, as she took his bill-book from him, and hung up
his hat, "here's an old soldier come to sup with us, my dear." And as
she spoke, she gave her husband a gentle push toward the old man, and
made a sign that he should speak to him.

"Kindly welcome, master," said the woodman. "Wife, I'm hungry; let's to
supper."

The wife turned some potatoes out of the little saucepan, set a jug of
beer on the table, and they all began to sup. The best of everything was
offered by the wife to the stranger. The husband, after looking
earnestly at him for a few minutes, kept silence.

"And where might you be going to lodge to-night, good man, if I'm not
too bold?" asked she.

The old man heaved a deep sigh, and said he supposed he must lie out in
the forest.

"Well, that would be a great pity," remarked his kind hostess. "No
wonder your bones ache if you have no better shelter." As she said this,
she looked appealingly at her husband.

"My wife, I'm thinking, would like to offer you a bed," said the
woodman; "at least, if you don't mind sleeping in this clean kitchen, I
think that we could toss you up something of that sort that you need not
disdain."

"Disdain, indeed!" said the wife. "Why, Will, when there's not a tighter
cottage than ours in all the wood, and with a curtain, as we have, and a
brick floor, and everything so good about us--"

The husband laughed; the old man looked on with a twinkle in his eye.

"I'm sure I shall be humbly grateful," said he.

Accordingly, when supper was over, they made him up a bed on the floor,
and spread clean sheets upon it of the young wife's own spinning, and
heaped several fresh logs on the fire. Then they wished the stranger
good night, and crept up the ladder to their own snug little chamber.

"Disdain, indeed!" laughed the wife, as soon as they shut the door.
"Why, Will, how could you say it? I should like to see him disdain me
and mine. It isn't often, I'll engage to say, that he sleeps in such a
well-furnished kitchen."

The husband said nothing, but secretly laughed to himself.

"What are you laughing at, Will?" said his wife, as she put out the
candle.

"Why, you soft little thing," answered the woodman, "didn't you see that
bunch of green ash-keys in his cap; and don't you know that nobody would
dare to wear them but the Ouphe of the Wood? I saw him cutting those
very keys for himself as I passed to the sawmill this morning, and I
knew him again directly, though he has disguised himself as an old man."

"Bless us!" exclaimed the little wife; "is the Wood Ouphe in our
cottage? How frightened I am! I wish I hadn't put the candle out."

The husband laughed more and more.

"Will," said his wife, in a solemn voice, "I wonder how you dare laugh,
and that powerful creature under the very bed where you lie!"

"And she to be so pitiful over him," said the woodman, laughing till the
floor shook under him, "and to talk and boast of our house, and insist
on helping him to more potatoes, when he has a palace of his own, and
heaps of riches! Oh, dear! oh, dear!"

"Don't laugh, Will," said the wife, "and I'll make you the most
beautiful firmity[2] you ever tasted to-morrow. Don't let him hear you
laughing."

[Footnote 2: _Firmity_: generally written frumenty; wheat boiled in milk
with sugar and fruit.]

"Why, he comes for no harm," said the woodman. "I've never cut down any
trees that he had not marked, and I've always laid his toll of the wood,
neatly cut up, beside his foot-path, so I am not afraid. Besides, don't
you know that he always pays where he lodges, and very handsomely, too?"

"Pays, does he?" said the wife. "Well, but he is an awful creature to
have so near one. I would much rather he had really been an old soldier.
I hope he is not looking after my baby; he shall not have him, let him
offer ever so much."

The more the wife talked, the more the husband laughed at her fears,
till at length he fell asleep, whilst she lay awake, thinking and
thinking, till by degrees she forgot her fears, and began to wonder what
they might expect by way of reward. Hours appeared to pass away during
these thoughts. At length, to her great surprise, while it was still
quite dark, her husband called to her from below:

"Come down, Kitty; only come down to see what the Ouphe has left us."

As quickly as possible Kitty started up and dressed herself, and ran
down the ladder, and then she saw her husband kneeling on the floor over
the knapsack, which the Ouphe had left behind him. Kitty rushed to the
spot, and saw the knapsack bursting open with gold coins, which were
rolling out over the brick floor. Here was good fortune! She began to
pick them up, and count them into her apron. The more she gathered, the
faster they rolled, till she left off counting, out of breath with joy
and surprise.

"What shall we do with all this money?" said the delighted woodman.

They consulted for some time. At last they decided to bury it in the
garden, all but twenty pieces, which they would spend directly.
Accordingly they dug a hole and carefully hid the rest of the money, and
then the woodman went to the town, and soon returned laden with the
things they had agreed upon as desirable possessions; namely, a leg of
mutton, two bottles of wine, a necklace for Kitty, some tea and sugar, a
grand velvet waistcoat, a silver watch, a large clock, a red silk cloak,
and a hat and feather for the baby, a quilted petticoat, a great many
muffins and crumpets, a rattle, and two new pairs of shoes.

How enchanted they both were! Kitty cooked the nice things, and they
dressed themselves in the finery, and sat down to a very good dinner.
But, alas! the woodman drank so much of the wine that he soon got quite
tipsy, and began to dance and sing. Kitty was very much shocked; but
when he proposed to dig up some more of the gold, and go to market for
some more wine and some more blue velvet waistcoats, she remonstrated
very strongly. Such was the change that had come over this loving
couple, that they presently began to quarrel, and from words the woodman
soon got to blows, and, after beating his little wife, lay down on the
floor and fell fast asleep, while she sat crying in a corner.

The next day they both felt very miserable, and the woodman had such a
terrible headache that he could neither eat nor work; but the day after,
being pretty well again, he dug up some more gold and went to town,
where he bought such quantities of fine clothes and furniture and so
many good things to eat, that in the end he was obliged to buy a wagon
to bring them home in, and great was the delight of his wife when she
saw him coming home on the top of it, driving the four gray horses
himself.

[Illustration: "COMING HOME ON TOP OF IT, DRIVING THE FOUR GRAY HORSES
HIMSELF."]

They soon began to unpack the goods and lay them out on the grass, for
the cottage was far too small to hold them.

"There are some red silk curtains with gold rods," said the woodman.

"And grand indeed they are!" exclaimed his wife, spreading them over the
onion bed.

"And here's a great looking-glass," continued the woodman, setting one
up against the outside of the cottage, for it would not go in the door.

So they went on handing down the things, and it took nearly the whole
afternoon to empty the wagon. No wonder, when it contained, among other
things, a coral and bells for the baby, and five very large tea-trays
adorned with handsome pictures of impossible scenery, two large sofas
covered with green damask, three bonnets trimmed with feathers and
flowers, two glass tumblers for them to drink out of,--for Kitty had
decided that mugs were very vulgar things,--six books bound in handsome
red morocco, a mahogany table, a large tin saucepan, a spit and silver
waiter, a blue coat with gilt buttons, a yellow waistcoat, some
pictures, a dozen bottles of wine, a quarter of lamb, cakes, tarts,
pies, ale, porter, gin, silk stockings, blue and red and white shoes,
lace, ham, mirrors, three clocks, a four-post bedstead, and a bag of
sugar candy.

These articles filled the cottage and garden; the wagon stood outside
the paling. Though the little kitchen was very much encumbered with
furniture, they contrived to make a fire in it; and, having eaten a
sumptuous dinner, they drank each other's health, using the new tumblers
to their great satisfaction.

"All these things remind me that we must have another house built," said
Kitty.

"You may do just as you please about that, my dear," replied her
husband, with a bottle of wine in his hand.

"My dear," said Kitty, "how vulgar you are! Why don't you drink out of
one of our new tumblers, like a gentleman?"

The woodman refused, and said it was much more handy to drink it out of
the bottle.

"Handy, indeed!" retorted Kitty; "yes, and by that means none will be
left for me."

Thereupon another quarrel ensued, and the woodman, being by this time
quite tipsy, beat his wife again. The next day they went and got numbers
of workmen to build them a new house in their garden. It was quite
astonishing even to Kitty, who did not know much about building, to see
how quick these workmen were; in one week the house was ready. But in
the meantime the woodman, who had very often been tipsy, felt so unwell
that he could not look after them; therefore it is not surprising that
they stole a great many of his fine things while he lay smoking on the
green damask sofa which stood on the carrot bed. Those articles which
the workmen did not steal the rain and dust spoilt; but that they
thought did not much matter, for still more than half the gold was left;
so they soon furnished the new house. And now Kitty had a servant, and
used to sit every morning on a couch dressed in silks and jewels till
dinner-time, when the most delicious hot beefsteaks and sausage pudding
or roast goose were served up, with more sweet pies, fritters, tarts,
and cheese-cakes than they could possibly eat. As for the baby, he had
three elegant cots, in which he was put to sleep by turns; he was
allowed to tear his picture-books as often as he pleased, and to eat so
many sugar-plums and macaroons that they often made him quite ill.

The woodman looked very pale and miserable, though he often said what a
fine thing it was to be rich. He never thought of going to his work, and
used generally to sit in the kitchen till dinner was ready, watching the
spit. Kitty wished she could see him looking as well and cheerful as in
old days, though she felt naturally proud that her husband should always
be dressed like a gentleman, namely, in a blue coat, red waistcoat, and
top-boots.

He and Kitty could never agree as to what should be done with the rest
of the money; in fact, no one would have known them for the same people;
they quarrelled almost every day, and lost nearly all their love for one
another. Kitty often cried herself to sleep--a thing she had never done
when they were poor; she thought it was very strange that she should be
a lady, and yet not be happy. Every morning when the woodman was sober
they invented new plans for making themselves happy, yet, strange to
say, none of them succeeded, and matters grew worse and worse. At last
Kitty thought she should be happy if she had a coach; so she went to the
place where the knapsack was buried, and began to dig; but the garden
was so trodden down that she could not dig deep enough, and soon got
tired of trying. At last she called the servant, and told her the secret
as to where the money was, promising her a gold piece if she could dig
it up. The servant dug with all her strength, and with a great deal of
trouble they got the knapsack up, and Kitty found that not many gold
pieces were left. However, she resolved to have the coach, so she took
them and went to the town, where she bought a yellow chariot, with a
most beautiful coat of arms upon it, and two cream-colored horses to
draw it.

In the meantime the maid ran to the magistrates, and told them she had
discovered something very dreadful, which was, that her mistress had
nothing to do but dig in the ground and that she could make money
come--coined money: "which," said the maid, "is a very terrible thing,
and it proves that she must be a witch."

The mayor and aldermen were very much shocked, for witches were commonly
believed in in those days; and when they heard that Kitty had dug up
money that very morning, and bought a yellow coach with it, they decided
that the matter must be investigated.

When Kitty drove up to her own door, she saw the mayor and aldermen
standing in the kitchen waiting for her. She demanded what they wanted,
and they said they were come in the king's name to search the house.

Kitty immediately ran up-stairs and took the baby out of his cradle,
lest any of them should steal him, which, of course, seemed a very
probable thing for them to do. Then she went to look for her husband,
who, shocking to relate, was quite tipsy, quarrelling and arguing with
the mayor, and she actually saw him box an alderman's ears.

"The thing is proved," said the indignant mayor; "this woman is
certainly a witch."

Kitty was very much bewildered at this; but how much more when she saw
her husband seize the mayor--yes, the very mayor himself--and shake him
so hard that he actually shook his head off, and it rolled under the
dresser! "If I had not seen this with my own eyes," said Kitty, "I could
not have believed it--even now it does not seem at all real."

All the aldermen wrung their hands.

"Murder! murder!" cried the maid.

"Yes," said the aldermen, "this woman and her husband must immediately
be put to death, and the baby must be taken from them and made a slave."

In vain Kitty fell on her knees; the proofs of their guilt were so plain
that there was no hope for mercy; and they were just going to be led out
to execution when--why, then she opened her eyes, and saw that she was
lying in bed in her own little chamber where she had lived and been so
happy; her baby beside her in his wicker[3] cradle was crowing and
sucking his fingers.

[Footnote 3: _Wicker_: made of willow twigs like a basket.]

"So, then, I have never been rich, after all," said Kitty; "and it was
all only a dream! I thought it was very strange at the time that a man's
head should roll off."

And she heaved a deep sigh, and put her hand to her face, which was wet
with the tears she had shed when she thought that she and her husband
were going to be executed.

"I am very glad, then, my husband is not a drunken man; and he does
_not_ beat me; but he goes to work every day, and I am as happy as a
queen."

Just then she heard her husband's good-tempered voice whistling as he
went down the ladder.

"Kitty, Kitty," said he, "come, get up, my little woman; it's later than
usual, and our good visitor will want his breakfast."

"Oh, Will, Will, do come here," answered the wife; and presently her
husband came up again, dressed in his fustian jacket, and looking quite
healthy and good-tempered--not at all like the pale man in the blue
coat, who sat watching the meat while it roasted.

"Oh, Will, I have had such a frightful dream," said Kitty, and she began
to cry; "we are not going to quarrel and hate each other, are we?"

"Why, what a silly little thing thou art to cry about a dream," said the
woodman, smiling. "No, we are not going to quarrel as I know of. Come,
Kitty, remember the Ouphe."

"Oh, yes, yes, I remember," said Kitty, and she made haste to dress
herself and come down.

"Good morning, mistress; how have you slept?" said the Ouphe, in a
gentle voice, to her.

"Not so well as I could have wished, sir," said Kitty.

The Ouphe smiled. "_I_ slept very well," he said. "The supper was good,
and kindly given, without any thought of reward."

"And that is the certain truth," interrupted Kitty: "I never had the
least thought what you were till my husband told me."

The woodman had gone out to cut some fresh cresses, for his guest's
breakfast.

"I am sorry, mistress," said the Ouphe, "that you slept uneasily--my
race are said sometimes by their presence to affect the dreams of you
mortals. Where is my knapsack? Shall I leave it behind me in payment of
bed and board?"

"Oh, no, no, I pray you don't," said the little wife, blushing and
stepping back; "you are kindly welcome to all you have had, I'm sure:
don't repay us so, sir."

"What, mistress, and why not?" asked the Ouphe, smiling. "It is as full
of gold pieces as it can hold, and I shall never miss them."

"No, I entreat you, do not," said Kitty, "and do not offer it to my
husband, for maybe he has not been warned as I have."

Just then the woodman came in.

"I have been thanking your wife for my good entertainment," said the
Ouphe, "and if there is anything in reason that I can give either of
you--"

"Will, we do very well as we are," said his wife, going up to him and
looking anxiously in his face.

"I don't deny," said the woodman, thoughtfully, "that there are one or
two things I should like my wife to have, but somehow I've not been able
to get them for her yet."

"What are they?" asked the Ouphe.

"One is a spinning-wheel," answered the woodman; "she used to spin a
good deal when she was at home with her mother."

"She shall have a spinning-wheel," replied the Ouphe; "and is there
nothing else, my good host?"

"Well," said the woodman, frankly, "since you are so obliging, we should
like a hive of bees."

"The bees you shall have also; and now, good morning both, and a
thousand thanks to you."

So saying, he took his leave, and no pressing could make him stay to
breakfast.

"Well," thought Kitty, when she had had a little time for reflection, "a
spinning-wheel is just what I wanted; but if people had told me this
time yesterday morning that I should be offered a knapsack full of
money, and should refuse it, I could not possibly have believed them!"




THE FAIRY WHO JUDGED HER NEIGHBORS


There was once a Fairy who was a good Fairy, on the whole, but she had
one very bad habit; she was too fond of finding fault with other people,
and of taking for granted that everything must be wrong if it did not
appear right to her.

One day, when she had been talking very unkindly of some friends of
hers, her mother said to her: "My child, I think if you knew a little
more of the world, you would become more charitable. I would therefore
advise you to set out on your travels; you will find plenty of food, for
the cowslips are now in bloom, and they contain excellent honey. I need
not be anxious about your lodging, for there is no place more delightful
for sleeping in than an empty robin's nest when the young have flown.
And if you want a new gown, you can sew two tulip leaves together, which
will make you a very becoming dress, and one that I should be proud to
see you in."

The young Fairy was pleased at this permission to set out on her
travels; so she kissed her mother, and bade good-by to her nurse, who
gave her a little ball of spiders' threads to sew with, and a beautiful
little box, made of the egg-shell of a wren, to keep her best thimble
in, and took leave of her, wishing her safe home again.

The young Fairy then flew away till she came to a large meadow, with a
clear river flowing on one side of it, and some tall oak-trees on the
other. She sat down on a high branch in one of these oaks, and, after
her long flight, was thinking of a nap, when, happening to look down at
her little feet, she observed that her shoes were growing shabby and
faded. "Quite a disgrace, I declare," said she. "I must look for another
pair. Perhaps two of the smallest flowers of that snapdragon which I see
growing in the hedge would fit me. I think I should like a pair of
yellow slippers." So she flew down, and, after a little trouble, she
found two flowers which fitted her very neatly, and she was just going
to return to the oak-tree, when she heard a deep sigh beneath her, and,
peeping out from her place among the hawthorn blossoms, she saw a fine
young Lark sitting in the long grass, and looking the picture of misery.

"What is the matter with you, cousin?" asked the Fairy.

"Oh, I am so unhappy," replied the poor Lark; "I want to build a nest,
and I have got no wife."

"Why don't you look for a wife, then?" said the Fairy, laughing at him.
"Do you expect one to come and look for you? Fly up, and sing a
beautiful song in the sky, and then perhaps some pretty hen will hear
you; and perhaps, if you tell her that you will help her to build a
capital nest, and that you will sing to her all day long, she will
consent to be your wife."

"Oh, I don't like," said the Lark, "I don't like to fly up, I am so
ugly. If I were a goldfinch, and had yellow bars on my wings, or a
robin, and had red feathers on my breast, I should not mind the defect
which now I am afraid to show. But I am only a poor brown Lark, and I
know I shall never get a wife."

"I never heard of such an unreasonable bird," said the Fairy. "You
cannot expect to have everything."

"Oh, but you don't know," proceeded the Lark, "that if I fly up my feet
will be seen; and no other bird has feet like mine. My claws are enough
to frighten any one, they are so long; and yet I assure you, Fairy, I am
not a cruel bird."

"Let me look at your claws," said the Fairy.

So the Lark lifted up one of his feet, which he had kept hidden in the
long grass, lest any one should see it.

"It looks certainly very fierce," said the Fairy. "Your hind claw is at
least an inch long, and all your toes have very dangerous-looking
points. Are, you sure you never use them to fight with?"

"No, never!" said the Lark, earnestly; "I never fought a battle in my
life; but yet these claws grow longer and longer, and I am so ashamed of
their being seen that I very often lie in the grass instead of going up
to sing, as I could wish."

"I think, if I were you, I would pull them off," said the Fairy.

"That is easier said than done," answered the poor Lark. "I have often
got them entangled in the grass, and I scrape them against the hard
clods; but it is of no use, you cannot think how fast they stick."

"Well, I am sorry for you," observed the Fairy; "but at the same time I
cannot but see that, in spite of what you say, you must be a quarrelsome
bird, or you would not have such long spurs."

"That is just what I am always afraid people will say," sighed the Lark.

"For," proceeded the Fairy, "nothing is given us to be of no use. You
would not have wings unless you were to fly, nor a voice unless you were
to sing; and so you would not have those dreadful spurs unless you were
going to fight. If your spurs are not to fight with," continued the
unkind Fairy, "I should like to know what they _are_ for?"

"I am sure I don't know," said the Lark, lifting up his foot and looking
at it. "Then you are not inclined to help me at all, Fairy? I thought
you might be willing to mention among my friends that I am not a
quarrelsome bird, and that I should always take care not to hurt my wife
and nestlings with my spurs."

"Appearances are very much against you," answered the Fairy; "and it is
quite plain to me that those spurs are meant to scratch with. No, I
cannot help you. Good morning."

So the Fairy withdrew to her oak bough, and the poor Lark sat moping in
the grass while the Fairy watched him. "After all," she thought, "I am
sorry he is such a quarrelsome fellow, for that he is such is fully
proved by those long spurs."

While she was so thinking, the Grasshopper came chirping up to the Lark,
and tried to comfort him.

"I have heard all that the Fairy said to you," he observed, "and I
really do not see that it need make you unhappy. I have known you some
time, and have never seen you fight or look out of temper; therefore I
will spread a report that you are a very good-tempered bird, and that
you are looking out for a wife."

The Lark upon this thanked the Grasshopper warmly.

"At the same time," remarked the Grasshopper, "I should be glad if you
could tell me what is the use of those claws, because the question might
be asked me, and I should not know what to answer."

"Grasshopper," replied the Lark, "I cannot imagine what they are
for--that is the real truth."

"Well," said the kind Grasshopper, "perhaps time will show."

So he went away, and the Lark, delighted with his promise to speak well
of him, flew up into the air, and the higher he went the sweeter and the
louder he sang. He was so happy, and he poured forth such delightful
notes, so clear and thrilling, that the little ants who were carrying
grains to their burrow stopped and put down their burdens to listen; and
the doves ceased cooing, and the little field-mice came and sat in the
openings of their holes; and the Fairy, who had just begun to doze, woke
up delighted; and a pretty brown Lark, who had been sitting under some
great foxglove leaves, peeped out and exclaimed, "I never heard such a
beautiful song in my life--never!"

"It was sung by my friend, the Skylark," said the Grasshopper, who just
then happened to be on a leaf near her. "He is a very good-tempered
bird, and he wants a wife."

"Hush!" said the pretty brown Lark. "I want to hear the end of that
wonderful song."

For just then the Skylark, far up in the heaven, burst forth again, and
sang better than ever--so well, indeed, that every creature in the field
sat still to listen; and the little brown Lark under the foxglove leaves
held her breath, for she was afraid of losing a single note.

"Well done, my friend!" exclaimed the Grasshopper, when at length he
came down panting, and with tired wings; and then he told him how much
his friend the brown Lark, who lived by the foxglove, had been pleased
with his song, and he took the poor Skylark to see her.

The Skylark walked as carefully as he could, that she might not see his
feet; and he thought he had never seen such a pretty bird in his life.
But when she told him how much she loved music, he sprang up again into
the blue sky as if he was not at all tired, and sang anew, clearer and
sweeter than before. He was so glad to think that he could please her.

He sang several songs, and the Grasshopper did not fail to praise him,
and say what a cheerful, kind bird he was. The consequence was, that
when he asked the brown Lark to overlook his spurs and be his wife, she
said:

"I will see about it, for I do not mind your spurs particularly."

"I am very glad of that," said the Skylark. "I was afraid you would
disapprove of them."

"Not at all," she replied. "On the contrary, now I think of it, I should
not have liked you to have short claws like other birds; but I cannot
exactly say why, for they seem to be of no use in particular."

This was very good news for the Skylark, and he sang such delightful
songs in consequence, that he very soon won his wife; and they built a
delightful little nest in the grass, which made him so happy that he
almost forgot to be sorry about his long spurs.

The Fairy, meanwhile, flew about from field to field, and I am sorry to
say that she seldom went anywhere without saying something unkind or
ill-natured; for, as I told you before, she was very hasty, and had a
sad habit of judging her neighbors.

She had been several days wandering about in search of adventures, when
one afternoon she came back to the old oak-tree, because she wanted a
new pair of shoes, and there were none to be had so pretty as those made
of the yellow snapdragon flower in the hedge hard by.

While she was fitting on her shoes, she saw the Lark's friend.

[Illustration: "WHILE SHE WAS FITTING ON HER SHOES, SHE SAW THE LARK'S
FRIEND."]

"How do you do, Grasshopper?" asked the Fairy.

"Thank you, I am very well and very happy," said the Grasshopper;
"people are always so kind to me."

"Indeed!" replied the Fairy. "I wish I could say that they were always
kind to me. How is that quarrelsome Lark who found such a pretty brown
mate the other day?"

"He is not a quarrelsome bird indeed," replied the Grasshopper. "I wish
you would not say that he is."

"Oh, well, we need not quarrel about that," said the Fairy, laughing; "I
have seen the world, Grasshopper, and I know a few things, depend upon
it. Your friend the Lark does not wear those long spurs for nothing."

The Grasshopper did not choose to contend with the Fairy, who all this
time was busily fitting yellow slippers to her tiny feet. When, however,
she had found a pair to her mind--

"Suppose you come and see the eggs that our pretty friend the Lark has
got in her nest," asked the Grasshopper. "Three pink eggs spotted with
brown. I am sure she will show them to you with pleasure."

Off they set together; but what was their surprise to find the poor
little brown Lark sitting on them with rumpled feathers, drooping head,
and trembling limbs.

"Ah, my pretty eggs!" said the Lark, as soon as she could speak, "I am
so miserable about them--they will be trodden on, they will certainly be
found."

"What is the matter?" asked the Grasshopper. "Perhaps we can help you."

"Dear Grasshopper," said the Lark, "I have just heard the farmer and his
son talking on the other side of the hedge, and the farmer said that
to-morrow morning he should begin to cut this meadow."

"That is a great pity," said the Grasshopper. "What a sad thing it was
that you laid your eggs on the ground!"

"Larks always do," said the poor little brown bird; "and I did not know
how to make a fine nest such as those in the hedges. Oh, my pretty
eggs!--my heart aches for them! I shall never hear my little nestlings
chirp!"

So the poor Lark moaned and lamented, and neither the Grasshopper nor
the Fairy could do anything to help her. At last her mate dropped down
from the white cloud where he had been singing, and when he saw her
drooping, and the Grasshopper and the Fairy sitting silently before her,
he inquired in a great fright what the matter was.

So they told him, and at first he was very much shocked; but presently
he lifted first one and then the other of his feet, and examined his
long spurs.

"He does not sympathize much with his poor mate," whispered the Fairy;
but the Grasshopper took no notice of the speech.

Still the Lark looked at his spurs, and seemed to be very deep in
thought.

"If I had only laid my eggs on the other side of the hedge," sighed the
poor mother, "among the corn, there would have been plenty of time to
rear my birds before harvest time."

"My dear," answered her mate, "don't be unhappy." And so saying, he
hopped up to the eggs, and laying one foot upon the prettiest, he
clasped it with his long spurs. Strange to say, it exactly fitted them.

"Oh, my clever mate!" cried the poor little mother, reviving; "do you
think you can carry them away for me?"

"To be sure I can," replied the Lark, beginning slowly and carefully to
hop on with the egg in his right foot; "nothing more easy. I have often
thought it was likely that our eggs would be disturbed in this meadow;
but it never occurred to me till this moment that I could provide
against this misfortune. I have often wondered what my spurs could be
for, and now I see." So saying, he hopped gently on till he came to the
hedge, and then got through it, still holding the egg, till he found a
nice little hollow place in among the corn, and there he laid it and
came back for the others.

"Hurrah!" cried the Grasshopper, "Larkspurs forever!"

The Fairy said nothing, but she felt heartily ashamed of herself. She
sat looking on till the happy Lark had carried the last of his eggs to a
safe place, and had called his mate to come and sit on them. Then, when
he sprang up into the sky again, exulting and rejoicing and singing to
his mate that now he was quite happy, because he knew what his long
spurs were for, she stole gently away, saying to herself, "Well, I could
not have believed such a thing. I thought he must be a quarrelsome bird
as his spurs were so long; but it appears that I was wrong, after all."




THE PRINCE'S DREAM


If we may credit the fable, there is a tower in the midst of a great
Asiatic plain, wherein is confined a prince who was placed there in his
earliest infancy, with many slaves and attendants, and all the luxuries
that are compatible with imprisonment.

Whether he was brought there from some motive of state, whether to
conceal him from enemies, or to deprive him of rights, has not
transpired; but it is certain that up to the date of this little history
he had never set his foot outside the walls of that high tower, and that
of the vast world without he knew only the green plains which surrounded
it; the flocks and the birds of that region were all his experience of
living creatures, and all the men he saw outside were shepherds.

And yet he was not utterly deprived of change, for sometimes one of his
attendants would be ordered away, and his place would be supplied by a
new one. The prince would never weary of questioning this fresh
companion, and of letting him talk of cities, of ships, of forests, of
merchandise, of kings; but though in turns they all tried to satisfy his
curiosity, they could not succeed in conveying very distinct notions to
his mind; partly because there was nothing in the tower to which they
could compare the external world, partly because, having chiefly lived
lives of seclusion and indolence in Eastern palaces, they knew it only
by hearsay themselves.

At length, one day, a venerable man of a noble presence was brought to
the tower, with soldiers to guard him and slaves to attend him. The
prince was glad of his presence, though at first he seldom opened his
lips, and it was manifest that confinement made him miserable. With
restless feet he would wander from window to window of the stone tower,
and mount from story to story; but mount as high as he would there was
still nothing to be seen but the vast, unvarying plain, clothed with
scanty grass, and flooded with the glaring sunshine; flocks and herds
and shepherds moved across it sometimes, but nothing else, not even a
shadow, for there was no cloud in the sky to cast one. The old man,
however, always treated the prince with respect, and answered his
questions with a great deal of patience, till at length he found a
pleasure in satisfying his curiosity, which so much pleased the poor
young prisoner, that, as a great condescension, he invited him to come
out on the roof of the tower and drink sherbet with him in the cool of
the evening, and tell him of the country beyond the desert, and what
seas are like, and mountains, and towns.

"I have learnt much from my attendants, and know this world pretty well
by hearsay," said the prince, as they reclined on the rich carpet which
was spread on the roof.

The old man smiled, but did not answer; perhaps because he did not care
to undeceive his young companion, perhaps because so many slaves were
present, some of whom were serving them with fruit, and others burning
rich odors on a little chafing-dish that stood between them.

"But there are some words to which I never could attach any particular
meaning," proceeded the prince, as the slaves began to retire, "and
three in particular that my attendants cannot satisfy me upon, or are
reluctant to do so."

"What words are those, my prince?" asked the old man. The prince turned
on his elbow to be sure that the last slave had descended the tower
stairs, then replied:

"O man of much knowledge, the words are these--Labor, and Liberty, and
Gold."

"Prince," said the old man, "I do not wonder that it has been hard to
make thee understand the first, the nature of it, and the cause why most
men are born to it; as for the second, it would be treason for thee and
me to do more than whisper it here, and sigh for it when none are
listening; but the third need hardly puzzle thee; thy hookah[4] is
bright with it; all thy jewels are set in it; gold is inlaid in the
ivory of thy bath; thy cup and thy dish are of gold, and golden threads
are wrought into thy raiment."

[Footnote 4: _Hookah_: a kind of pipe for smoking tobacco, used in
Eastern Europe and Asia.]

"That is true," replied the prince, "and if I had not seen and handled
this gold, perhaps I might not find its merits so hard to understand;
but I possess it in abundance, and it does not feed me, nor make music
for me, nor fan me when the sun is hot, nor cause me to sleep when I am
weary; therefore when my slaves have told me how merchants go out and
brave the perilous wind and sea, and live in the unstable ships, and run
risks from shipwreck and pirates, and when, having asked them why they
have done this, they have answered, 'For gold,' I have found it hard to
believe them; and when they have told me how men have lied, and robbed,
and deceived; how they have murdered one another, and leagued together
to depose kings, to oppress provinces, and all for gold; then I have
said to myself, either my slaves have combined to make me believe that
which is not, or this gold must be very different from the yellow stuff
that this coin is made of, this coin which is of no use but to have a
hole pierced through it and hang to my girdle, that it may tinkle when I
walk."

"Notwithstanding this," said the old man, "nothing can be done without
gold; for it is better than bread, and fruit, and music, for it can buy
them all, since all men love it, and have agreed to exchange it for
whatever they may need."

"How so?" asked the prince.

"If a man has many loaves he cannot eat them all," answered the old man;
"therefore he goes to his neighbor and says, 'I have bread and thou hast
a coin of gold--let us exchange;' so he receives the gold and goes to
another man, saying, 'Thou hast two houses and I have none; lend me one
of thy houses to live in, and I will give thee my gold;' thus again they
exchange."

"It is well," said the prince; "but in time of drought, if there is no
bread in a city, can they make it of gold?"

"Not so," answered the old man, "but they must send their gold to a city
where there is food, and bring that back instead of it."

"But if there was a famine all over the world," asked the prince, "what
would they do then?"

"Why, then, and only then," said the old man, "they must starve, and the
gold would be nought, for it can only be changed for that which _is_; it
cannot make that which is not."

"And where do they get gold?" asked the prince. "Is it the precious
fruit of some rare tree, or have they whereby they can draw it down from
the sky at sunset?"

"Some of it," said the old man, "they dig out of the ground."

Then he told the prince of ancient rivers running through terrible
deserts, whose sands glitter with golden grains and are yellow in the
fierce heat of the sun, and of dreary mines where the Indian slaves work
in gangs tied together, never seeing the light of day; and lastly (for
he was a man of much knowledge, and had travelled far), he told him of
the valley of the Sacramento in the New World, and of those mountains
where the people of Europe send their criminals, and where now their
free men pour forth to gather gold, and dig for it as hard as if for
life; sitting up by it at night lest any should take it from them,
giving up houses and country, and wife and children, for the sake of a
few feet of mud, whence they dig clay that glitters as they wash it; and
how they sift it and rock it as patiently as if it were their own
children in the cradle, and afterward carry it in their bosoms, and
forego on account of it safety and rest.

"But, prince," he went on, seeing that the young man was absorbed in his
narrative, "if you would pass your word to me never to betray me, I
would procure for you a sight of the external world, and in a trance you
should see those places where gold is dug, and traverse those regions
forbidden to your mortal footsteps."

Upon this, the prince threw himself at the old man's feet, and promised
heartily to observe the secrecy required, and entreated that, for
however short a time, he might be suffered to see this wonderful world.

Then, if we may credit the story, the old man drew nearer to the
chafing-dish which stood between them, and having fanned the dying
embers in it, cast upon them a certain powder and some herbs, from
whence as they burnt a peculiar smoke arose. As their vapors spread, he
desired the prince to draw near and inhale them, and then (says the
fable) assured him that when he should sleep he would find himself, in
his dream, at whatever place he might desire, with this strange
advantage, that he should see things in their truth and reality as well
as in their outward shows.

[Illustration: "THEN HE RECLINED BESIDE THE CHAFING-DISH AND INHALED THE
HEAVY PERFUME."]

So the prince, not without some fear, prepared to obey; but first he
drank his sherbet, and handed over the golden cup to the old man by way
of recompense; then he reclined beside the chafing-dish and inhaled the
heavy perfume till he became overpowered with sleep, and sank down upon
the carpet in a dream.

The prince knew not where he was, but a green country was floating
before him, and he found himself standing in a marshy valley where a few
wretched cottages were scattered here and there with no means of
communication. There was a river, but it had overflowed its banks and
made the central land impassable, the fences had been broken down by it,
and the fields of corn laid low; a few wretched peasants were wandering
about there; they looked half-clad and half-starved. "A miserable
valley, indeed!" exclaimed the prince; but as he said it a man came down
from the hills with a great bag of gold in his hand.

"This valley is mine," said he to the people; "I have bought it for
gold. Now make banks that the river may not overflow, and I will give
you gold; also make fences and plant fields, and cover in the roofs of
your houses, and buy yourselves richer clothing." So the people did so,
and as the gold got lower in the bag the valley grew fairer and greener,
till the prince exclaimed, "O gold, I see your value now! O wonderful,
beneficent gold!"

But presently the valley melted away like a mist, and the prince saw an
army besieging a city; he heard a general haranguing his soldiers to
urge them on, and the soldiers shouting and battering the walls; but
shortly, when the city was well-nigh taken, he saw some men secretly
giving gold among the soldiers, so much of it that they threw down their
arms to pick it up, and said that the walls were so strong that they
could not throw them down. "O powerful gold!" thought the prince; "thou
art stronger than the city walls!"

After that it seemed to him that he was walking about in a desert
country, and in his dream he thought, "Now I know what labor is, for I
have seen it, and its benefits; and I know what liberty is, for I have
tasted it; I can wander where I will, and no man questions me; but gold
is more strange to me than ever, for I have seen it buy both liberty and
labor." Shortly after this he saw a great crowd digging upon a barren
hill, and when he drew near he understood that he was to see the place
whence the gold came.

He came up and stood a long time watching the people as they toiled
ready to faint in the sun, so great was the labor of digging up the
gold.

He saw some who had much and could not trust any one to help them to
carry it, binding it in bundles over their shoulders, and bending and
groaning under its weight; he saw others hide it in the ground, and
watch the place clothed in rags, that none might suspect that they were
rich; but some, on the contrary, who had dug up an unusual quantity, he
saw dancing and singing, and vaunting their success, till robbers
waylaid them when they slept, and rifled their bundles and carried their
golden sand away.

"All these men are mad," thought the prince, "and this pernicious gold
has made them so."

After this, as he wandered here and there, he saw groups of people
smelting the gold under the shadow of the trees, and he observed that a
dancing, quivering vapor rose up from it which dazzled their eyes, and
distorted everything that they looked at; arraying it also in different
colors from the true one. He observed that this vapor from the gold
caused all things to rock and reel before the eyes of those who looked
through it, and also, by some strange affinity, it drew their hearts
toward those who carried much gold on their persons, so that they called
them good and beautiful; it also caused them to see darkness and dulness
in the faces of those who had carried none. "This," thought the prince,
"is very strange;" but not being able to explain it, he went still
farther, and there he saw more people. Each of these had adorned himself
with a broad golden girdle, and was sitting in the shade, while other
men waited on them.

"What ails these people?" he inquired of one who was looking on, for he
observed a peculiar air of weariness and dulness in their faces. He was
answered that the girdles were very tight and heavy, and being bound
over the regions of the heart, were supposed to impede its action, and
prevent it from beating high, and also to chill the wearer, as, being of
opaque material, the warm sunshine of the earth could not get through to
warm them.

"Why, then, do they, not break them asunder," exclaimed the prince, "and
fling them away?"

"Break them asunder!" cried the man; "why, what a madman you must be;
they are made of the purest gold!"

"Forgive my ignorance," replied the prince; "I am a stranger."

So he walked on, for feelings of delicacy prevented him from gazing any
longer at the men with the golden girdles; but as he went he pondered on
the misery he had seen, and thought to himself that this golden sand did
more mischief than all the poisons of the apothecary; for it dazzled the
eyes of some, it strained the hearts of others, it bowed down the heads
of many to the earth with its weight; it was a sore labor to gather it,
and when it was gathered the robber might carry it away; it would be a
good thing, he thought, if there were none of it.

After this he came to a place where were sitting some aged widows and
some orphan children of the gold-diggers, who were helpless and
destitute; they were weeping and bemoaning themselves, but stopped at
the approach of a man whose appearance attracted the prince, for he had
a very great bundle of gold on his back, and yet it did not bow him down
at all; his apparel was rich, but he had no girdle on, and his face was
anything but sad.

"Sir," said the prince to him, "you have a great burden; you are
fortunate to be able to stand under it."

[Illustration: "'I COULD NOT DO SO,' HE REPLIED, 'ONLY THAT AS I GO ON I
KEEP LIGHTENING IT.'"]

"I could not do so," he replied, "only that as I go on I keep lightening
it;" and as he passed each of the widows, he threw gold to her, and,
stooping down, hid pieces of it in the bosoms of the children.

"You have no girdle," said the prince.

"I once had one," answered the gold-gatherer; "but it was so tight over
my breast that my heart grew cold under it, and almost ceased to beat.
Having a great quantity of gold on my back, I felt almost at the last
gasp; so I threw off my girdle, and being on the bank of a river, which
I knew not how to cross, I was about to fling it in, I was so vexed!
'But no,' thought I, 'there are many people waiting here to cross
besides myself. I will make my girdle into a bridge, and we will cross
over on it.'"

"Turn your girdle into a bridge!" said the prince, doubtfully, for he
did not quite understand.

The man explained himself.

"And, then, sir, after that," he continued, "I turned one-half of my
burden into bread, and gave it to these poor people. Since then I have
not been oppressed by its weight, however heavy it may have been; for
few men have a heavier one. In fact, I gather more from day to day."

As the man kept speaking, he scattered his gold right and left with a
cheerful countenance, and the prince was about to reply, when suddenly a
great trembling under his feet made him fall to the ground. The refining
fires of the gold-gatherers sprang up into flames, and then went out;
night fell over everything on the earth, and nothing was visible in the
sky but the stars of the southern cross.

"It is past midnight," thought the prince, "for the stars of the cross
begin to bend."

He raised himself upon his elbow, and tried to pierce the darkness, but
could not. At length a slender blue flame darted out, as from ashes in a
chafing-dish, and by the light of it he saw the strange pattern of his
carpet and the cushions lying about. He did not recognize them at first,
but presently he knew that he was lying in his usual place, at the top
of his tower.

"Wake up, prince," said the old man.

The prince sat up and sighed, and the old man inquired what he had seen.

"O man of much learning!" answered the prince, "I have seen that this is
a wonderful world; I have seen the value of labor, and I know the uses
of it; I have tasted the sweetness of liberty, and am grateful, though
it was but in a dream; but as for that other word that was so great a
mystery to me, I only know this, that it must remain a mystery forever,
since I am fain to believe that all men are bent on getting it; though,
once gotten, it causeth them endless disquietude, only second to their
discomfort that are without it. I am fain to believe that they can
procure with it whatever they most desire, and yet that it cankers their
hearts and dazzles their eyes; that it is their nature and their duty to
gather it; and yet that, when once gathered, the best thing they can do
is to scatter it!"

The next morning, when he awoke, the old man was gone. He had taken with
him the golden cup. And the sentinel was also gone, none knew whither.
Perhaps the old man had turned his golden cup into a golden key.




THE WATER-LILY


My father and mother were gone out for the day, and had left me charge
of the children. It was very hot, and they kept up a continual fidget. I
bore it patiently for some time, for children will be restless in hot
weather, but at length I requested that they would get something to do.

"Why don't you work, or paint, or read, Hatty?" I demanded of my little
sister.

"I'm tired of always grounding those swans," said Harriet, "and my
crochet is so difficult; I seem to do it quite right, and yet it comes
wrong."

"Then why don't you write your diary?"

"Oh, because Charlie won't write his."

"A very bad reason; his not writing leaves you the more to say; besides,
I thought you promised mamma you would persevere if she would give you a
book."

"And so we did for a long time," said Charlie; "why, I wrote pages and
pages of mine. Look here!"

So saying, he produced a copy-book with a marbled cover, and showed me
that it was about half-full of writing in large text.

"If you wrote all that yourself, I should think you might write more."

"Oh, but I am so tired of it, and besides, this is such a very hot day."

"I know that, and to have you leaning on my knee makes me no cooler; but
I have something for you to do just now, which I think you will like."

"Oh, what is it, sister? May we both do it?"

"Yes, if you like. You may go into the field to gardener, and ask him to
get me a water-lily out of the stream; I want one to finish my sketch
with."

"You really do want one? you are not pretending, just to give us
something to do?"

"No, I really want one; you see these in the glass begin to wither."'

"Make haste then, Hatty. Sister, you shall have the very best lily we
can find."

Thereupon they ran off, leaving me to inspect the diary. Its first page
was garnished with the resemblance of a large swan with curly wings;
from his beak proceeded the owner's name in full, and underneath were
his lucubrations. The first few pages ran as follows:

"_Wednesday._ To-day mamma said, as all the others were writing diaries,
I might do one too if I liked, so I said I should, and I shall write it
every day till I am grown up. I did a long division sum, a very hard
one. We dined early to-day, and we had a boiled leg of mutton and an
apple pudding, but I shall not say another time what we had for dinner,
because I shall have plenty of other things to say."

"_Friday._ Gardener has been mending the palings; he gave me five nails;
they were very good ones, such as I like. He said if any boy that he
knew was to pull nails out of his wall trees when _he'd_ done them, he
should certainly tell their papa of them. Aunt Fanny came and took away
Sophy to spend a fortnight. Uncle Tom came too; he said I was a fine
boy, and gave me a shilling."

"_Saturday._ My half-holiday. Hurrah! I went and bought two hoop-sticks
for me and Hatty; they cost fourpence each."

"_Sunday._ On Sunday I went to church."

"_Monday._ To-day I had a cold, and after school I was just going to
bowl my hoop when Orris said to mamma it rained, and ma said she
couldn't think of my going out in the rain, and so I couldn't go. After
that Orris called me to come into her room, and gave me a fourpenny
piece and two pictures, so now I've got eightpence. Orris is very kind,
but sometimes she thinks she ought to command, because she is the
eldest."

"_Tuesday._ I shall not write my diary every day, unless I like."

"_Wednesday._ I dined late with papa and mamma and the elder ones: it
rained. If the others won't tell me what to say, of course I don't
know."

"_Friday._ I went to the shop and bought some tin _tax_. I don't like
writing diaries particularly. It will be a good thing to leave off till
the holidays."

I had only got so far when the children ran in with a beautiful
water-lily. They had scarcely deposited it in my hand when they both
exclaimed in a breath:

"And what are we to do now?"

"You may bring me a glass of water to put it in."

This was soon done, and then the question was repeated. I saw there was
but one chance of quiet, so I resolved to make a virtue of necessity,
and say that if they would each immediately begin some ordinary
occupation, I would tell them a story. What child was ever proof against
a story?

"But we are to choose what it shall be about?" said one of them.

"Why?"

"Oh, never mind why. Shall we tell her, Harriet? Well, it's because you
tell cheating stories: you say, 'I'll tell you a story about a girl, or
a cottage, or a thimble, or anything you like,' and it really is
something about us."

"You may choose, then."

"Then it shall be about the lily we got for you."

"Give me ten minutes to think about it, and collect your needles and
pencils."

Upon this they brought together a heap of articles which they were not
at all likely to want, and after altering the position of their stools
and discussing what they would do, and changing their minds many times,
declared at length that they were quite ready.

[Illustration: "LIVED ON THE BORDERS OF ONE OF THE GREAT AMERICAN
FORESTS."]

"Now begin, please. _There was once--_" So I accordingly began. "There
was once a boy who was very fond of pictures. There were not many
pictures for him to look at, for his mother, who was a widow, lived on
the borders of one of the great American forests. She had come out from
England with her husband, and now that he was dead, the few pictures
hanging on her walls were almost the only luxuries she possessed.

"Her son would often spend his holidays in trying to copy them, but as
he had very little application, he often threw his half-finished
drawings away, and once he was heard to say that he wished some
kind-hearted fairy would take it in hand and finish it for him.

"'Child,' said the mother, 'for my part I don't believe there are any
such things as fairies. I never saw one, and your father never did; but
by all accounts, if fairies there be, they are a jealous and revengeful
race. Mind your books, my child, and never mind the fairies.'

"'Very well, mother,' said the boy.

"'It makes me sad to see you stand gazing at the pictures,' said his
mother, coming up to him and laying her hand on his curly head; 'why,
child, pictures can't feed a body, pictures can't clothe a body, and a
log of wood is far better to burn and warm a body.'

"'All that is quite true, mother,' said the boy.

"'Then why do you keep looking at them, child?'

"The boy hesitated, and then answered, 'I don't know, mother.'

"'You don't know! nor I neither. Why, child, you look at the dumb things
as if you loved them. Put on your cap and run out to play.'

"So the boy went out, and wandered toward the forest till he came to the
brink of a sheet of water. It was too small to be called a lake, but it
was deep, clear, and overhung with crowds of trees. It was evening, and
the sun was getting low. There was a narrow strip of land stretching out
into the water. Pine-trees grew upon it; and here and there a plane-tree
or a sumach dipped its large leaves over, and seemed intent on watching
its own clear reflection.

"The boy stood still, and thought how delightful it was to see the sun
red and glorious between the black trunks of the pine-trees. Then he
looked up into the abyss of clear sky overhead, and thought how
beautiful it was to see the little frail clouds folded over one another
like a belt of rose-colored waves. Then he drew still nearer to the
water, and saw how they were all reflected down there among the leaves
and flowers of the lilies; and he wished he were a painter, for he said
to himself, 'I am sure there are no trees in the world with such
beautiful leaves as these pines; I am sure there are no other clouds in
the world so lovely as these; I know this is the sweetest piece of water
in the world, and, if I could paint it, every one else would know it
too.' He stood still for awhile, watching the water-lilies as they
closed their leaves for the night, and listening to the slight sound
they made when they dipped their heads under water. 'The sun has been
playing tricks with these lilies as well as with the clouds,' he said to
himself, 'for when I passed by in the morning they swayed about like
floating snowballs, and now there is not a bud of them that has not got
a rosy side. I must gather one, and see if I cannot make a drawing of
it.' So he gathered a lily, sat down with it in his hand, and tried very
hard to make a correct sketch of it in a blank leaf of his copy-book. He
was far more patient than usual, but he succeeded so little to his own
satisfaction, that at length he threw down the book, and, looking into
the cup of his lily, said to it, in a sorrowful voice, 'Ah, what use is
it my trying to copy anything so beautiful as you are? How much I wish I
were a painter!'

"As he said these words he felt a slight quivering in the flower; and,
while he looked, the cluster of stamens at the bottom of the cup floated
upward, and glittered like a crown of gold; the dewdrops which hung upon
them changed into diamonds before his eyes; the white petals flowed
together; the tall pistil was a golden wand; and the next moment a
beautiful little creature stood upon his hand, clad in a robe of the
purest white, and scarcely taller than the flower from which she sprung.

[Illustration: "THE NEXT MOMENT A BEAUTIFUL LITTLE CREATURE STOOD UPON
HIS HAND."]

"Struck with astonishment, the boy kept silence. She lifted up her face,
and opened her lips more than once. He expected her to say some
wonderful thing; but, when at length she did speak, she only said,
'Child, are you happy?'

"'No,' said the boy, in a low voice, 'because I want to paint, and I
cannot.'

"'How do you know that you cannot?' asked the fairy.

"'Oh, fairy,' replied the boy, 'because I have tried a great many times.
It is of no use trying any longer.'

"'What if I were to help you?' said the fairy.

"'There would then indeed be some pleasure in the work and some chance
of success,' said the boy.

"'I was just closing my leaves for the night,' answered the fairy, 'when
you drew me out of the water; and I should have made you feel the
effects of my resentment if it had not happened that you are the
favorite of our race. Under the water, at the bottom of this lake, are
our palaces and castles; and when, after visiting the upper world, we
wish to return to them, we close one of these lilies over us, and sink
in it to our home. The wish that I heard you utter just now induced me
to appear to you. I know a powerful charm which will ensure your success
and the accomplishment of your highest wishes; but it is one which
requires a great deal of care and patience in the working, and I cannot
put you in possession of it unless you will promise the most implicit
obedience to my directions.'

"'Spirit of a water-lily!' said the boy, 'I promise with all my heart.'

"'Go home, then,' continued the fairy, 'and you will find lying on the
threshold a little key: take it up.'

"'I will,' answered the boy; 'and what then shall I do?'

"'Carry it to the nearest pine-tree,' said the fairy, 'strike the trunk
with it, and a keyhole will appear. Do not be afraid to unlock that
magic door. Slip in your hand, and you will bring out a wonderful
palette. I have not time now to tell you half its virtues, but they will
soon unfold themselves. You must be very careful to paint with colors
from that palette every day. On this depends the success of the charm.
You will find that it will soon give grace to your figures and beauty to
your coloring; and I promise you that, if you do not break the spell,
you shall not only in a few years be able to produce as beautiful a copy
of these flowers as can be wished, but your name shall become known to
fame, and your genius shall be honored, and your pictures admired on
both sides the Atlantic.'

"'Can it be possible?' said the boy; and the hand trembled on which
stood the fairy.

"'It shall be so, if only you do not break the charm,' said the fairy;
'but lest, like the rest of your ungrateful race, you should forget what
you owe to me, and even when you grow older begin to doubt whether you
have ever seen me, the Lily you gathered will never fade till my promise
is accomplished.'

"So saying, she gathered around her the folds of her robe, crossed her
arms, and dropping her head on her breast, trembled slightly; and,
before the boy could remark the change, he had nothing in his hand but a
flower.

"He looked up. All the beautiful rosy flowers were faded to a shady
gray. The gold had disappeared from the water, and the forest was dense
and gloomy. He arose with the lily in his hand, went slowly home, laid
it in a casket to protect it from injury, and then proceeded to search
for the palette, which he shortly found; and, lest he should break the
spell, he began to use it that very night.

"Who would not like to have a fairy friend? Who would not like to work
with a magic palette? Every day its virtues become more apparent. He
worked very hard, and it was astonishing how soon he improved. His deep,
heavy outlines soon became light and clear; and his coloring began to
assume a transparent delicacy. He was so delighted with the fairy
present that he even did more than was required of him. He spent nearly
all his leisure time in using it, and often passed whole days beside the
sheet of water in the forest. He painted it when the sun shone, and it
was spotted all over with the reflection of fleeting white clouds; he
painted it covered with water-lilies rocking on the ripples; by
moonlight, when two or three stars in the empty sky shone down upon it;
and at sunset, when it lay trembling like liquid gold.

"But the fairy never came to look at his work. He often called to her
when he had been more than usually successful; but she never made him
any answer, nor took the least notice of his entreaties that he might
see her again.

"So a long time--several years--passed away. He was grown up to be a
man, and he had never broken the charm; he still worked every day with
his magic palette.

"No one in these parts cared at all for his pictures. His mother's
friends told him he would never get his bread by painting; his mother
herself was sorry that he chose to waste his leisure so; and the more
because the pictures on her walls were brighter far than his, and had
clouds and trees of far clearer color, not like the common clouds and
misty hills that he was so fond of painting, and his faintly colored
distant forest, with uncertain and variable hues, such as she could see
any day when she looked out at her window.

"It made the young man unhappy to hear all this fault found with his
proceedings, but it never made him leave off using the fairy's palette,
though about this time he himself began to doubt whether he should ever
be a painter. One evening he sat at his easel, trying in vain to give
the expression he wished to an angel's face, which seemed to get less
and less like the face in his heart with every touch he gave it. On a
sudden he threw down his brush, and with a feeling of bitter
disappointment upbraided himself for what he now thought his folly in
listening to the fairy, and accepting her delusive gift. What had he got
by it hitherto? Nothing but his mother's regrets and the ridicule of his
companions. He threw himself on his bed. It grew dark; he could no
longer be vexed with the sight of his unfinished angel; and presently he
fell asleep and forgot his sorrow.

"In the middle of the night he suddenly awoke. His chamber was full of
moonlight. The lid of the casket where he kept the lily had sprung open,
and his fairy friend stood near it.

"'American painter,' she said, in a reproachful voice, 'since you think
I have been rather a foe than a friend to you, I am ready to take back
my gift.'

"But sleep had now cooled the young painter's mind, and softened his
feelings of vexation, so that he did not find himself at all willing to
part with the palette. While he hesitated how to excuse himself, she
further said, 'But if you still wish to try what it can do for you, take
this ring which _my sister_ sends you; wear it, and it will greatly
assist the charm.'

"The youth held out his hand and took the ring. As he cast his eyes upon
it, the fairy vanished. He turned it to the moonlight, and saw that it
was set with a stone of a transparent blue color. It had the property of
reflecting everything bright that came near it; and there was a word
engraven upon it. He thought--he could not be sure--but he thought the
word was 'Hope.'

"After this, and during a long time, I can tell you no more about him:
whether he finished the angel's face, and whether it pleased him at
last, I do not know. I only know that, in process of time, his mother
died--that he came to Europe--and that he was quite unknown and very
poor.

"The next thing recorded of him is this, that on a sudden he became
famous. The world began to admire his works, and to seek his company. He
was considered a great man, and wealth and honors flowed in upon him. It
happened to him that one day in travelling he came to a great city,
where there was a large collection of pictures. He went to see them, and
among them he saw many of his own pictures; some of them he had painted
before he had left his forest home; others were of more recent date. All
the people and all the painters praised them. But there was one that
they liked better than the others; and when he heard them call it his
masterpiece, he went and sat down opposite to it, that he might think
over again some of the thoughts that he had had when he painted it.

"It was a picture of a little child, holding in its hands several
beautiful water-lilies; and the crowd that gathered round it praised the
lightness of the drapery, the beauty of the infant form, the soft light
shed down upon it, and, above all, the innocent expression of the baby
features.

"He was pleased, but not elated. He called to mind the words of his
fairy benefactress, and acknowledged to himself that at length they were
certainly fulfilled.

"And then it drew toward evening, and the people one by one disappeared,
till he was left alone with his masterpiece. The excitement of the day
had made him anxious for repose. He was thinking of leaving the place,
when suddenly he fell asleep, and dreamed that he was standing behind
the sheet of water in his native country, and lingering, as of old, to
watch the rays of the setting sun as they melted away from its surface.
He thought, too, that his beautiful lily was in his hand, and that while
he looked at it the leaves withered and fell at his feet. Then followed
a confused recollection of his conversation with the fairy; and after
that his thoughts became clearer, and, though still asleep, he
remembered where he was, and in what place he was sitting. His
impressions became more vivid. He dreamed that something lightly touched
his hand. He looked up, and his fairy benefactress was at his side,
standing on the arm of his chair.

"'O wonderful enchantress!' said the dreaming painter, 'do not vanish
before I have had time to thank you for your magic gift. I have nothing
to offer you but my gratitude in return; for the diamonds of this world
are too heavy for such an ethereal being, and the gold of this world is
useless to you who have no wants that it can supply. The fame I have
acquired I cannot impart to you, for few of my race believe in the
existence of yours. What, then, can I do? I can only thank you for your
goodness. But tell me at least your name, if you have a name, that I may
cut it on a ring, and wear it always on my finger.'

"'My name,' replied the fairy, 'is Perseverance.'"

"Well!" said the children, looking at each other, "she has cheated us
after all!"




A LOST WAND


More than a hundred years ago, at the foot of a wild mountain in Norway,
stood an old castle, which even at the time I write of was so much out
of repair as in some parts to be scarcely habitable.

In a hall of this castle a party of children met once on Twelfth-night
to play at Christmas games and dance with little Hulda, the only child
of the lord and lady.

The winters in Norway are very cold, and the snow and ice lie for months
on the ground; but the night on which these merry children met it froze
with more than ordinary severity, and a keen wind shook the trees
without, and roared in the wide chimneys like thunder.

Little Hulda's mother, as the evening wore on, kept calling on the
servants to heap on fresh logs of wood, and these, when the long flames
crept around them, sent up showers of sparks that lit up the brown
walls, ornamented with the horns of deer and goats, and made it look as
cheerful and gay as the faces of the children. Hulda's grandmother had
sent her a great cake, and when the children had played enough at all
the games they could think of, the old gray-headed servants brought it
in and set it on the table, together with a great many other nice things
such as people eat in Norway--pasties made of reindeer meat, and castles
of the sweet pastry sparkling with sugar ornaments of ships and flowers
and crowns, and cranberry pies, and whipped cream as white as the snow
outside; but nothing was admired so much as the great cake, and when the
children saw it they set up a shout which woke the two hounds who were
sleeping on the hearths, and they began to bark, which roused all the
four dogs in the kennels outside who had not been invited to see either
the cake or the games, and they barked, too, shaking and shivering with
cold, and then a great lump of snow slid down from the roof, and fell
with a dull sound like distant thunder on the pavement of the yard.

"Hurrah!" cried the children, "the dogs and the snow are helping us to
shout in honor of the cake."

All this time more and more nice things were coming in--fritters,
roasted grouse, frosted apples, and buttered crabs. As the old servants
came shivering along the passages, they said, "It is a good thing that
children are not late with their suppers; if the confects had been kept
long in the larder they would have frozen on the dishes."

Nobody wished to wait at all; so, as soon as the supper was ready, they
all sat down, more wood was heaped on to the fire, and when the moon
shone in at the deep casements, and glittered on the dropping snowflakes
outside, it only served to make the children more merry over their
supper to think how bright and warm everything was inside.

This cake was a real treasure, such as in the days of the fairies, who
still lived in certain parts of Norway, was known to be of the kind they
loved. A piece of it was always cut and laid outside in the snow, in
case they should wish to taste it. Hulda's grandmother had also dropped
a ring into this cake before it was put into the oven, and it is well
known that whoever gets such a ring in his or her slice of cake has only
to wish for something directly, and the fairies are bound to give it,
_if they possibly can_. There have been cases known when the fairies
could not give it, and then, of course, they were not to blame.

On this occasion the children said: "Let us all be ready with our
wishes, because sometimes people have been known to lose them from being
so long making up their minds when the ring has come to them."

"Yes," cried the eldest boy. "It does not seem fair that only one should
wish. I am the eldest. I begin. I shall wish that Twelfth-night would
come twice a year."

"They cannot give you that, I am sure," said Friedrich, his brother, who
sat by him.

"Then," said the boy, "I wish father may take me with him the next time
he goes out bear-shooting."

"I wish for a white kitten with blue eyes," said a little girl whose
name was Therese.

"I shall wish to find an amber necklace that does not belong to any
one," said another little girl.

"I wish to be a king," said a boy whose name was Karl. "No, I think I
shall wish to be the burgomaster, that I may go on board the ships in
the harbor, and make their captains show me what is in them. I shall see
how the sailors make their sails go up."

"I shall wish to marry Hulda," said another boy; "when I am a man I
mean. And besides that, I wish I may find a black puppy in my room at
home, for I love dogs."

"But that is not fair," said the other children. "You must only wish for
one thing, as we did."

"But I really wish for both," said the boy.

"If you wish for both perhaps you will get neither," said little Hulda.

"Well, then," answered the boy, "I wish for the puppy."

And so they all went on wishing till at last it came to Hulda's turn.

"What do you wish for, my child?" said her mother.

"Not for anything at all," she answered, shaking her head.

"Oh, but you must wish for something!" cried all the children.

"Yes," said her mother, "and I am now going to cut the cake. See, Hulda,
the knife is going into it. Think of something."

"Well, then," answered the little girl, "I cannot think of anything
else, so I shall wish that you may all have your wishes."

Upon this the knife went crunching down into the cake, the children gave
three cheers, and the white waxen tulip bud at the top came tumbling on
the table, and while they were all looking it opened its leaves, and out
of the middle of it stepped a beautiful little fairy woman, no taller
than your finger. She had a white robe on, a little crown on her long
yellow hair; there were two wings on her shoulders, just like the downy
brown wings of a butterfly, and in her hand she had a little sceptre
sparkling with precious stones.

"Only one wish," she said, jumping down on to the table, and speaking
with the smallest little voice you ever heard. "Your fathers and mothers
were always contented if we gave them one wish every year."

As she spoke, Hulda's mother gave a slice of cake to each child, and,
when Hulda took hers, out dropped the ring, and fell clattering on her
platter.

"Only one wish," repeated the fairy. And the children were all so much
astonished (for even in those days fairies were but rarely seen) that
none of them spoke a word, not even in a whisper. "Only one wish. Speak,
then, little Hulda, for I am one of that race which delights to give
pleasure and to do good. Is there really nothing that you wish, for you
shall certainly have it if there is?"

"There was nothing, dear fairy, before I saw you," answered the little
girl, in a hesitating tone.

"But now there is?" asked the fairy. "Tell it me, then, and you shall
have it."

"I wish for that pretty little sceptre of yours," said Hulda, pointing
to the fairy's wand.

The moment Hulda said this the fairy shuddered and became pale, her
brilliant colors faded, and she looked to the children's eyes like a
thin white mist standing still in her place. The sceptre, on the
contrary, became brighter than ever, and the precious stones glowed like
burning coals.

"Dear child," she sighed, in a faint, mournful voice, "I had better have
left you with the gift of your satisfied, contented heart, than thus
have urged you to form a wish to my destruction. Alas! alas! my power
and my happiness fade from me, and are as if they had never been. My
wand must now go to you, who can make no use of it, and I must flutter
about forlornly and alone in the cold world, with no more ability to do
good, and waste away my time--a helpless and defenceless thing."

"Oh, no, no!" replied little Hulda. "Do not speak so mournfully, dear
fairy. I did not wish at first to ask for it. I will not take the wand
if it is of value to you, and I should be grieved to have it against
your will."

"Child," said the fairy, "you do not know our nature. I have said
whatever you wished should be yours. I cannot alter this decree; it
_must_ be so. Take my wand; and I entreat you to guard it carefully, and
never to give it away lest it should get into the hands of my enemy; for
if once it should, I shall become his miserable little slave. Keep my
wand with care; it is of no use to you, but in the course of years it is
possible I may be able to regain it, and on Midsummer night I shall for
a few hours return to my present shape, and be able for a short time to
talk with you again."

"Dear fairy," said little Hulda, weeping, and putting out her hand for
the wand, which the fairy held to her, "is there nothing else that I can
do for you?"

"Nothing, nothing," said the fairy, who had now become so transparent
and dim that they could scarcely see her; only the wings on her
shoulders remained, and their bright colors had changed to a dusky
brown. "I have long contended with my bitter enemy, the chief of the
tribe of the gnomes--the ill-natured, spiteful gnomes. Their desire is
as much to do harm to mortals as it is mine to do them good. If now he
should find me I shall be at his mercy. It was decreed long ages ago
that I should one day lose my wand, and it depends in some degree upon
you, little Hulda, whether I shall ever receive it again. Farewell."

And now nothing was visible but the wings; the fairy had changed into a
moth, with large brown wings freckled with dark eyes, and it stood
trembling upon the table, till at length, when the children had watched
it some time, it fluttered toward the window and beat against the panes,
as if it wished to be released, so they opened the casement and let it
out in the wind and cold.

Poor little thing! They were very sorry for it; but after a while they
nearly forgot it, for they were but children. Little Hulda only
remembered it, and she carefully enclosed the beautiful sceptre in a
small box. But Midsummer day passed by, and several other Midsummer
days, and still Hulda saw nothing and heard nothing of the fairy. She
then began to fear that she must be dead, and it was a long time since
she had looked at the wand, when one day in the middle of the Norway
summer, as she was playing on one of the deep bay windows of the castle,
she saw a pedlar with a pack on his back coming slowly up the avenue of
pine-trees, and singing a merry song.

"Can I speak to the lady of this castle?" he said to Hulda, making at
the same time a very low bow.

Hulda did not much like him, he had such restless black eyes and such a
cunning smile. His face showed that he was a foreigner; it was as brown
as a nut. His dress also was very strange; he wore a red turban, and had
large earrings in his ears, and silver chains wound round and round his
ankles.

Hulda replied that her mother was gone to the fair at Christiana, and
would not be back for several days.

"Can I then speak with the lord of the castle?" asked the pedlar.

"My father is gone out to fish in the fiord," replied little Hulda; "he
will not return for some time, and the maids and the men are all gone to
make hay in the fields; there is no one left at home but me and my old
nurse."

The pedlar was very much delighted to hear this. However, he pretended
to be disappointed.

"It is very unfortunate," he said, "that your honored parents are not at
home, for I have got some things here of such wonderful beauty that
nothing could have given them so much pleasure as to have feasted their
eyes with the sight of them--rings, bracelets, lockets, pictures--in
short, there is nothing beautiful that I have not got in my pack, and if
your parents could have seen them they would have given all the money
they had in the world rather than not have bought some of them."

"Good pedlar," said little Hulda, "could you not be so very kind as just
to let me have a sight of them?"

The pedlar at first pretended to be unwilling, but after he had looked
all across the wide heath and seen that there was no one coming, and
that the hounds by the doorway were fast asleep in the sun, and the very
pigeons on the roof had all got their heads under their wings, he
ventured to step across the threshold into the bay window, and begin to
open his pack and display all his fine things, taking care to set them
out in the sunshine, which, made them glitter like glowworms.

Little Hulda had never seen anything half so splendid before. There were
little glasses set round with diamonds, and hung with small tinkling
bells which made delightful music whenever they were shaken; ropes of
pearls which had a more fragrant scent than bean-fields or hyacinths;
rings, the precious stones of which changed color as you frowned or
smiled upon them; silver boxes that could play tunes; pictures of
beautiful ladies and gentlemen, set with emeralds, with devices in coral
at the back; little golden snakes, with brilliant eyes that would move
about; and so many other rare and splendid jewels that Hulda was quite
dazzled, and stood looking at them with blushing cheeks and a beating
heart, so much she wished that she might have one of them.

"Well, young lady," said the cunning pedlar, "how do you find these
jewels? Did I boast too much of their beauty?"

"Oh, no!" said Hulda, "I did not think there had been anything so
beautiful in the world. I did not think even our queen had such fine
jewels as these. Thank you, pedlar, for the sight of them."

"Will you buy something, then, of a poor man?" answered the pedlar.
"I've travelled a great distance, and not sold anything this many a
day."

"I should be very glad to buy," said little Hulda, "but I have scarcely
any money; not half the price of one of these jewels, I am sure."

Now there was lying on the table an ancient signet-ring set with a large
opal.

"Maybe the young lady would not mind parting with this?" said he, taking
it up. "I could give her a new one for it of the latest fashion."

"Oh, no, thank you!" cried Hulda, hastily, "I must not do so. This ring
is my mother's, and was left her by my grandmother."

The pedlar looked disappointed. However, he put the ring down, and said,
"But if my young lady has no money, perhaps she has some old trinkets or
toys that she would not mind parting with--a coral and bells, or a
silver mug, or a necklace, or, in short, anything that she keeps put
away, and that is of no use to her?"

"No," said the little girl, "I don't think I have got anything of the
kind. Oh, yes! to be sure, I have got somewhere up-stairs a little gold
wand, which I was told not to give away; but I'm afraid she who gave it
me must have been dead a long while, and it is of no use keeping it any
longer."

Now this pedlar was the fairy's enemy. He had long suspected that the
wand must be concealed somewhere in that region, and near the sea, and
he had disguised himself, and gone out wandering among the farmhouses
and huts and castles to try if he could hear some tidings of it, and get
it if possible into his power. The moment he heard Hulda mention her
gold wand, he became excessively anxious to see it. He was a gnome, and
when his malicious eyes gleamed with delight they shot out a burning
ray, which scorched the hound who was lying asleep close at hand, and he
sprang up and barked at him.

"Peace, peace, Rhan!" cried little Hulda; "lie down, you unmannerly
hound!" The dog shrank back again growling, and the pedlar said in a
careless tone to Hulda:

"Well, lady, I have no objection just to look at the little gold wand,
and see if it is worth anything."

"But I am not sure that I could part with it," said Hulda.

"Very well," replied the pedlar, "as you please; but I may as well look
at it. I should hope these beautiful things need not go begging." As he
spoke he began carefully to lock up some of the jewels in their little
boxes, as if he meant to go away.

"Oh, don't go," cried Hulda. "I am going up-stairs to fetch my wand. I
shall not be long; pray wait for me."

[Illustration: "'OH, DON'T GO,' CRIED HULDA. 'I AM GOING UP-STAIRS TO
FETCH MY WAND.'"]

Nothing was further from the pedlar's thought than to go away, and while
little Hulda was running up to look for the wand he panted so hard for
fear that after all he might not be able to get it that he woke the
other hound, who came up to him, and smelt his leg.

"What sort of a creature is this?" said the old hound to his companion,
speaking, of course, in the dogs' language.

"I'm sure I can't say," answered the other. "I wonder what he is made
of,--he smells of mushrooms! quite earthy, I declare! as if he had lived
underground all his life."

"Let us stand one on each side of him, and watch that he doesn't steal
anything."

So the two dogs stood staring at him; but the pedlar was too cunning for
them. He looked out of the window, and said, "I think I see the master
coming," upon which they both turned to look across the heath, and the
pedlar snatched up the opal ring, and hid it in his vest. When they
turned around he was folding up his trinkets again as calmly as
possible. "One cannot be too careful to count one's goods," he said,
gravely. "Honest people often get cheated in houses like these, and
honest as these two dogs look, I know where one of them hid that
leg-of-mutton bone that he stole yesterday!" Upon hearing this the dogs
sneaked under the table ashamed of themselves. "I would not have it on
my conscience that I robbed my master for the best bone in the world,"
continued the pedlar, and as he said this he took up a little silver
horn belonging to the lord of the castle, and, having tapped it with his
knuckle to see whether the metal was pure, folded it up in cotton, and
put it in his pack with the rest of his curiosities.

Presently Hulda came down with a little box in her hand, out of which
she took the fairy's wand.

The pedlar was so transported at the sight of it that he could scarcely
conceal his joy; but he knew that unless he could get it by fair means
it would be of no use to him.

"How dim it looks!" said little Hulda; "the stones used to be so very
bright when first I had it."

"Ah! that is a sign that the person who gave it you is dead," said the
deceitful pedlar.

"I am sorry to hear she is dead," said Hulda, with a sigh. "Well, then,
pedlar, as that is the case, I will part with the wand if you can give
me one of your fine bracelets instead of it."

The pedlar's hand trembled with anxiety as he held it out for the wand,
but the moment he had got possession of it all his politeness vanished.

"There," he said, "you have got a very handsome bracelet in your hand.
It is worth a great deal more than the wand. You may keep it. I have no
time to waste; I must be gone." So saying, he hastily snatched up the
rest of his jewels, thrust them into his pack, and slung it over his
shoulder, leaving Hulda looking after him with the bracelet in her hand.
She saw him walk rapidly along the heath till he came to a gravel-pit,
very deep, and with overhanging sides. He swung himself over by the
branches of the trees.

"What can he be going to do there?" she said to herself. "But I will run
after him, for I don't like this bracelet half so well as some of the
others."

So Hulda ran till she came to the edge of the gravel-pit, but was so
much surprised that she could not say a word. There were the great
footmarks made by the pedlar down the steep sides of the pit; and at the
bottom she saw him sitting in the mud, digging a hole with his hands.

"Hi!" he said, putting his head down. "Some of you come up. I've got the
wand at last. Come and help me down with my pack."

"I'm coming," answered a voice, speaking under the ground; and presently
up came a head, all covered with earth, through the hole the pedlar had
made. It was shaggy with hair, and had two little bright eyes, like
those of a mole. Hulda thought she had never seen such a curious little
man. He was dressed in brown clothes, and had a red-peaked cap on his
head; and he and the pedlar soon laid the pack at the bottom of the
hole, and began to stamp upon it, dancing and singing with great
vehemence. As they went on the pack sank lower and lower, till at last,
as they still stood upon it, Hulda could see only their heads and
shoulders. In a little time longer she could only see the top of the red
cap; and then the two little men disappeared altogether, and the ground
closed over them, and the white nettles and marsh marigolds waved their
heads over the place as if nothing had happened.

Hulda walked away sadly and slowly. She looked at the beautiful
bracelet, and wished she had not parted with the wand for it, for she
now began to fear that the pedlar had deceived her. Nevertheless, who
would not be delighted to have such a fine jewel? It consisted of a gold
hoop, set with turquoise, and on the clasp was a beautiful bird, with
open wings, all made of gold, and which quivered as Hulda carried it.
Hulda looked at its bright eyes--ruby eyes, which sparkled in the
sunshine--and at its crest, all powdered with pearls, and she forgot her
regret.

"My beautiful bird!" she said, "I will not hide you in a dark box, as
the pedlar did. I will wear you on my wrist, and let you see all my
toys, and you shall be carried every day into the garden, that the
flowers may see how elegant you are. But stop! I think I see a little
dust on your wings. I must rub it off." So saying, Hulda took up her
frock and began gently rubbing the bird's wings, when, to her utter
astonishment, it opened its pretty beak and sang:

    "My master, oh, my master,
      The brown hard-hearted gnome,
    He goes down faster, faster,
      To his dreary home.
    Little Hulda sold her
      Golden wand for me,
    Though the fairy told her
      That must never be--
    Never--she must never
      Let the treasure go.
    Ah! lost forever,
      Woe! woe! woe!"

The bird sang in such a sorrowful voice, and fluttered its golden wings
so mournfully, that Hulda wept.

"Alas! alas!" she said, "I have done very wrong. I have lost the wand
forever! Oh, what shall I do, dear little bird? Do tell me."

But the bird did not sing again, and it was now time to go to bed. The
old nurse came out to fetch Hulda. She had been looking all over the
castle for her, and been wondering where she could have hidden herself.

In Norway, at midsummer, the nights are so short that the sun only dips
under the hills time enough to let one or two stars peep out before he
appears again. The people, therefore, go to bed in the broad sunlight.

"Child," said the old nurse, "look how late you are--it is nearly
midnight. Come, it is full time for bed. This is Midsummer day."

"Midsummer day!" repeated Hulda. "Ah, how sorry I am! Then this is a day
when I might have seen the fairy. How very, very foolish I have been!"

Hulda laid her beautiful bracelet upon a table in her room, where she
could see it, and kissed the little bird before she got into bed. She
had been asleep a long time when a little sobbing voice suddenly awoke
her, and she sat up to listen. The house was perfectly still; her cat
was curled up at the door, fast asleep; her bird's head was under its
wing; a long sunbeam was slanting down through an opening in the green
window-curtain, and the motes danced merrily in it.

"What could that noise have been?" said little Hulda, lying down again.
She had no sooner laid her head on the pillow than she heard it again;
and, turning round quickly to look at the bracelet, she saw the little
bird fluttering its wings, and close to it, with her hands covering her
face, the beautiful, long lost fairy.

"Oh, fairy, fairy! what have I done!" said Hulda. "You will never see
your wand again. The gnome has got it, and he has carried it down under
the ground, where he will hide it from us forever."

The fairy could not look up, nor answer. She remained weeping, with her
hands before her face, till the little golden bird began to chirp.

"Sing to us again, I pray you, beautiful bird!" said Hulda; "for you are
not friendly to the gnome. I am sure you are sorry for the poor fairy."

"Child," said the fairy, "be cautious what you say--that gnome is my
enemy; he disguised himself as a pedlar the better to deceive you, and
now he has got my wand he can discover where I am; he will be constantly
pursuing me, and I shall have no peace; if once I fall into his hands, I
shall be his slave forever. The bird is not his friend, for the race of
gnomes have no friends. Speak to it again, and see if it will sing to
you, for you are its mistress."

"Sing to me, sweet bird," said Hulda, in a caressing tone, and the
little bird quivered its wings and bowed its head several times; then it
opened its beak and sang:

      "Where's the ring?
    Oh the ring, my master stole the ring,
      And he holds it while I sing,
    In the middle of the world.
      Where's the ring?
    Where the long green Lizard curled
      All its length, and made a spring
    Fifty leagues along.
      There he stands,
      With his brown hands,

    And sings to the Lizard a wonderful song.
    And he gives the white stone to that Lizard fell,
      For he fears it--and loves it passing well."

"What!" said Hulda, "did the pedlar steal my mother's ring--that old
opal ring which I told him I could not let him have?"

"Child," replied the fairy, "be not sorry for his treachery; this theft
I look to for my last hope for recovering the wand."

"How so?" asked Hulda.

"It is a common thing among mortals," replied the fairy, "to say the
thing which is not true, and do the thing which is not honest; but among
the other races of beings who inhabit this world the penalty of mocking
and imitating the vices of you, the superior race, is, that if ever one
of us can be convicted of it, that one, be it gnome, sprite, or fairy,
is never permitted to appear in the likeness of humanity again, nor to
walk about on the face of the land which is your inheritance. Now the
gnomes hate one another, and if it should be discovered by the brethren
of this my enemy that he stole the opal ring, they will not fail to
betray him. There is, therefore, no doubt, little Hulda, that he carries
both the ring and the wand about with him wherever he goes, and if in
all your walks and during your whole life you should see him again, and
go boldly up to him and demand the stolen stone, he will be compelled
instantly to burrow his way down again into the earth, and leave behind
him all his ill-gotten gains."

"There is, then, still some hope," said Hulda, in a happier voice; "but
where, dear fairy, have you hidden yourself so long?"

"I have passed a dreary time," replied the fairy. "I have been compelled
to leave Europe and fly across to Africa, for my enemy inhabits that
great hollow dome which is the centre of the earth, and he can only come
up in Europe; but my poor little brown wings were often so weary in my
flight across the sea that I wished, like the birds, I could drop into
the waves and die; for what was to me the use of immortality when I
could no longer soothe the sorrow of mortals? But I cannot die; and
after I had fluttered across into Egypt, where the glaring light of the
sun almost blinded me, I was thankful to find a ruined tomb or temple
underground, where great marble sarcophagi were ranged around the walls,
and where in the dusky light I could rest from my travels, in a place
where I only knew the difference between night and day by the redness of
the one sunbeam which stole in through a crevice, and the silvery blue
of the moonbeam that succeeded it.

"In that temple there was no sound but the rustling of the bats' wings
as they flew in before dawn, or sometimes the chirping of a swallow
which had lost its way, and was frightened to see all the grim marble
faces gazing at it. But the quietness did me good, and I waited, hoping
that the young King of Sweden would marry, and that an heir would be
born to him (for I am a Swedish fairy), and then I should recover my
liberty according to an ancient statute of the fairy realm, and my wand
would also come again into my possession; but alas! he is dead, and the
reason you see me to-day is, that, like the rest of my race, I am come
to strew leaves on his grave and recount his virtues. I must now return,
for the birds are stirring; I hear the cows lowing to be milked, and the
maids singing as they go out with their pails. Farewell, little Hulda;
guard well the bracelet; I must to my ruined temple again. Happy for me
will be the day when you see my enemy (if that day ever comes); the bird
will warn you of his neighborhood by pecking your hand.

"One moment stay, dear fairy," said Hulda. "Where am I most likely to
see the gnome?"

"In the south," replied the fairy, "for they love hot sunshine. I can
stay no longer. Farewell."

So saying, the fairy again became a moth and fluttered to the window.
Little Hulda opened it, the brown moth settled for a moment upon her
lips as if it wished to kiss her, and then it flew out into the
sunshine, away and away.

Little Hulda watched her till her pretty wings were lost in the blue
distance; then she turned and took her bracelet, and put it on her
wrist, where, from that day forward, she always wore it night and day.

Hulda now grew tall, and became a fair young maiden, and she often
wished for the day when she might go down to the south, that she might
have a better chance of seeing the cruel gnome, and as she sat at work
in her room alone she often asked the bird to sing to her, but he never
sang any other songs than the two she had heard at first.

And now two full years had passed away, and it was again the height of
the Norway summer, but the fairy had not made her appearance.

As the days began to shorten, Hulda's cheeks lost their bright color,
and her steps their merry lightness; she became pale and wan. Her
parents were grieved to see her change so fast, but they hoped, as the
weary winter came on, that the cheerful fire and gay company would
revive her; but she grew worse and worse, till she could scarcely walk
alone through the rooms where she had played so happily, and all the
physicians shook their heads and said, "Alas! alas! the lord and lady of
the castle may well look sad: nothing can save their fair daughter, and
before the spring comes she will sink into an early grave."

The first yellow leaves now began to drop, and showed that winter was
near at hand.

"My sweet Hulda," said her mother to her one day, as she was lying upon
a couch looking out into the sunshine, "is there anything you can think
of that would do you good, or any place we can go to that you think
might revive you?"

"I had only one wish," replied Hulda, "but that, dear mother, I cannot
have."

"Why not, dear child?" said her father. "Let us hear what your wish
was."

"I wished that before I died I might be able to go into the south and
see that wicked pedlar, that if possible I might repair the mischief I
had done to the fairy by restoring her the wand."

"Does she wish to go into the south?" said the physicians. "Then it will
be as well to indulge her, but nothing can save her life; and if she
leaves her native country she will return to it no more."

"I am willing to go," said Hulda, "for the fairy's sake."

So they put her on a pillion, and took her slowly on to the south by
short distances, as she could bear it. And as she left the old castle,
the wind tossed some yellow leaves against her, and then whirled them
away across the heath to the forest. Hulda said:

    "Yellow leaves, yellow leaves,
      Whither away?
    Through the long wood paths
      How fast do ye stray!"

The yellow leaves answered:

    "We go to lie down
      Where the spring snowdrops grow,
    Their young roots to cherish
      Through frost and through snow."

Then Hulda said again to the leaves:

    "Yellow leaves, yellow leaves,
      Faded and few,
    What will the spring flowers
      Matter to you?"

And the leaves said:

    "We shall not see them,
      When gaily they bloom,
    But sure they will love us
      For guarding their tomb."

Then Hulda said:

"The yellow leaves are like me: I am going away from my place for the
sake of the poor fairy, who now lies hidden in the dark Egyptian ruin;
but if I am so happy as to recover her wand by my care, she will come
back glad and white, like the snowdrops when winter is over, and she
will love my memory when I am laid asleep in my tomb."

So they set out on their journey, and every day went a little distance
toward the south, till at last, on Christmas Eve, they came to an
ancient city at the foot of a range of mountains.

"What a strange Christmas this is!" said Hulda, when she looked out the
next morning. "Let us stay here, mother, for we are far enough to the
south. Look how the red berries hang on yonder tree, and these myrtles
on the porch are fresh and green, and a few roses bloom still on the
sunny side of the window."

It was so fine and warm that the next day they carried Hulda to a green
bank where she could sit down. It was close by some public gardens, and
the people were coming and going. She fell into a doze as she sat with
her mother watching her, and in her half-dream she heard the voices of
the passers-by, and what they said about her, till suddenly a voice
which she remembered made her wake with a start, and as she opened her
frightened eyes, there, with his pack on his back, and his cunning eyes
fixed upon her, stood the pedlar.

"Stop him!" cried Hulda, starting up. "Mother, help me to run after
him!"

"After whom, my child?" asked her mother.

"After the pedlar," said Hulda. "He was here but now, but before I had
time to speak to him, he stepped behind that thorn-bush and
disappeared."

"So that is Hulda," said the pedlar to himself, as he went down the
steep path into the middle of the world. "She looks as if a few days
more would be all she has to live. I will not come here any more till
the spring, and then she will be dead, and I shall have nothing to
fear."

But Hulda did not die. See what a good thing it is to be kind. The soft,
warm air of the south revived her by degrees--so much, that by the end
of the year she could walk in the public garden and delight in the warm
sunshine; in another month she could ride with her father to see all the
strange old castles in that neighborhood, and by the end of February she
was as well as ever she had been in her life; and all this came from her
desire to do good to the fairy by going to the south.

"And now," thought the pedlar, "there is no doubt that the daisies are
growing on Hulda's grave by this time, so I will go up again to the
outside of the world, and sell my wares to the people who resort to
those public places."

So one day when in that warm climate the spring flowers were already
blooming on the hillsides, up he came close to the ruined walls of a
castle, and set his pack down beside him to rest after the fatigues of
his journey.

"This is a cool, shady place," he said, looking round, "and these dark
yew-trees conceal it very well from the road. I shall come here always
in the middle of the day, when the sun is too hot, and count over my
gains. How hard my mistress, the Lizard, makes me work! Who would have
thought she would have wished to deck her green head with opals down
there, where there are only a tribe of brown gnomes to see her? But I
have not given her that one out of the ring which I stole, nor three
others that I conjured out of the crozier of the priest as I knelt at
the altar, and they thought I was rehearsing a prayer to the Virgin."

After resting some time, the pedlar took up his pack and went boldly on
to the gardens, never doubting but that Hulda was dead; but it so
happened that at that moment Hulda and her mother sat at work in a shady
part of the garden under some elder-trees.

"What is the matter, my sweet bird?" said Hulda, for the bird pecked her
wrist, and fluttered its wings, and opened its beak as if it were very
much frightened.

"Let us go, mother, and look about us," said Hulda.

So they both got up and wandered all over the gardens; but the pedlar,
in the meantime, had walked on toward the town, and they saw nothing of
him.

"Sing to me, my sweet bird," said Hulda that night as she lay down to
sleep. "Tell me _why_ you pecked my wrist."

Then the bird sang to her:

    "Who came from the ruin, the ivy-clad ruin,
    With old shaking arches, all moss overgrown,
              Where the flitter-bat hideth,
              The limber snake glideth,
    And chill water drips from the slimy green stone?"

"Who did?" asked Hulda. "Not the pedlar, surely? Tell me, my pretty
bird." But the bird only chirped a little and fluttered its golden
wings, so Hulda ceased to ask it, and presently fell asleep, but the
bird woke her by pecking her wrist very early, almost before sunrise,
and sang:

    "Who dips a brown hand in the chill shaded water,
    The water that drips from a slimy green stone?
              Who flings his red cap
              At the owlets that flap
    Their white wings in his face as he sits there alone?"

Hulda, upon hearing this, arose in great haste and dressed herself; then
she went to her father and mother, and entreated that they would come
with her to the old ruin. It was now broad day, so they all three set
out together. It was a very hot morning, the dust lay thick upon the
road, and there was not air enough to stir the thick leaves of the trees
which hung overhead.

They had not gone far before they found themselves in a crowd of people,
all going toward the castle ruin, for there, they told Hulda, the
pedlar, the famous pedlar from the north, who sold such fine wares, was
going to perform some feats of jugglery of most surprising cleverness.

"Child," whispered Hulda's mother, "nothing could be more fortunate for
us; let us mingle with the crowd and get close to the pedlar."

Hulda assented to her mother's wish, but the heat and dust, together
with her own intense desire to rescue the lost wand, made her tremble so
that she had great difficulty in walking. They went among gypsies,
fruit-women, peasant girls, children, travelling musicians, common
soldiers, and laborers; the heat increased, and the dust and the noise,
and at last Hulda and her parents were borne forward into the old ruin
among a rush of people running and huzzaing, and heard the pedlar shout
to them:

"Keep back, good people; leave a space before me; leave a large space
between me and you."

So they pressed back again, jostling and crowding each other, and left
an open space before him from which he looked at them with his cunning
black eyes, and with one hand dabbling in the cold water of the spring.

The place was open to the sky, and the broken arches and walls were
covered with thick ivy and wall flowers. The pedlar sat on a large gray
stone, with his red cap on and his brown fingers adorned with splendid
rings, and he spread them out and waved his hands to the people with
ostentatious ceremony.

"Now, good people," he said, without rising from his seat, "you are
about to see the finest, rarest, and most wonderful exhibition of the
conjuring art ever known!"

"Stop!" cried a woman's voice from the crowd, and a young girl rushed
wildly forward from the people, who had been trying to hold her back.

"I impeach you before all these witnesses!" she cried, seizing him by
the hand. "See justice done, good people. I impeach you, pedlar. Where's
the ring--my mother's ring--which you stole on Midsummer's day in the
castle?"

"Good people," said the pedlar, pulling his red cap over his face, and
speaking in a mild, fawning voice, "I hope you'll protect me. I hope you
won't see me insulted."

"My ring, my ring!" cried Hulda; "he wore it on his finger but now!"

"Show your hand like a man!" said the people. "If the lady says falsely,
can't you face her and tell her so? Never hold it down so cowardly!"

The pedlar had tucked his feet under him, and when the people cried out
to him to let the rings on his hand be seen, he had already burrowed
with them up to his knees in the earth.

[Illustration: "THE PEDLAR HAD NOW SUNK UP TO HIS WAIST."]

"Oh, he will go down into the earth!" cried Hulda. "But I will not let
go! Pedlar, pedlar, it is useless! If I follow you before the Lizard,
your mistress, I will not let go!"

The pedlar turned his terrified, cowardly eyes upon Hulda, and sank
lower and lower. The people were too frightened to move.

"Stop, child," cried her mother. "Oh, he will go down and drag thee with
him."

But Hulda would not and could not let go. The pedlar had now sunk up to
his waist. Her mother wrung her hands, and in an instant the earth
closed upon them both, and, after falling in the dark down a steep
abyss, they found themselves, not at all the worse, standing in a dimly
lighted cave with a large table in it piled with mouldy books. Behind
the table was a smooth and perfectly round hole in the wall about the
size of a cartwheel.

Hulda looked that way, and saw how intensely dark it was through this
hole, and she was wondering where it led to when an enormous green
Lizard put its head through into the cave, and gazed at her with its
great brown eyes.

"What is thy demand, fine child of the daylight?" said the Lizard.

"Princess," replied Hulda, "I demand that this thy servant should give
up to me a ring which he stole in my father's castle when I was a
child."

The pedlar no sooner heard Hulda boldly demand her rights than he fell
on his knees and began to cry for mercy.

"Mercy rests with this maiden," said the Lizard. At the same time she
darted out her tongue, which was several yards in length and like a
scarlet thread, and with it stripped the ring from the gnome's finger
and gave it to Hulda.

"Speak, maiden, what reparation do you demand of this culprit, and what
shall be his punishment?"

"Great princess," replied Hilda, "let him restore to me a golden wand
which I sold to him, for it belongs to a fairy whom he has long
persecuted."

"Here it is, here it is!" cried the cowardly gnome, putting his hand
into his bosom and pulling it out, shaking all the time, and crying out
most piteously, "Oh, don't let me be banished from the sunshine!"

"After this double crime no mercy can be shown you," said the Lizard,
and she twined her scarlet tongue round him, and drew him through the
hole to herself. At the same instant it closed, and a crack came in the
roof of the cave, through which the sunshine stole, and as Hulda looked
up in flew a brown moth and settled on the magic bracelet. She touched
the moth with the wand, and instantly it stood upon her wrist--a
beautiful and joyous fairy. She took her wand from Hulda's hand, and
stood for a moment looking gratefully in her face without speaking. Then
she said to the wand:

"Art thou my own again, and wilt thou serve me?"

"Try me," said the wand.

So she struck the wall with it, and said, "Cleave, wall!" and a hole
came in the wall large enough for Hulda to creep through, and she found
herself at the foot of a staircase hewn in the rock, and, after walking
up it for three hours, she came out in the old ruined castle, and was
astonished to see that the sun had set. The moment she appeared her
father and mother, who had given her over for lost, clasped her in their
arms and wept for joy as they embraced her.

"My child," said her father, "how happy thou lookest, not as if thou
hadst been down in the dark earth!"

Hulda kissed her parents and smiled upon them; then she turned to look
for the fairy, but she was gone. So they all three walked home in the
twilight, and the next day Hulda set out again with her parents to
return to the old castle in Norway. As for the fairy, she was happy from
that day in the possession of her wand; but the little golden bird
folded its wings and never sang any songs again.


THE END.



       *       *       *       *       *




The Editha Series

NEW EDITION, 1906


     1 Editha's Burglar, By Burnett

     2 Pinocchio's Adventures

     3 Burglar's Daughter, By Penrose

     4 J. Cole, By Gellibrand

     5 Laddie

     6 Miss Toosey

     7 A Child's Garden of Verses, By Stevenson

     8 Little Rosebud, By Harraden

     9 Wonder Book Stories, By Hawthorne

    10 The Golden Apple, By Hawthorne

    11 Little Lame Prince, By Mulock

    12 Sleeping Beauty, By Mulock

    13 Adventures of a Brownie, By Mulock

    14 The Pygmies, By Hawthorne

    15 The Brownies, By Ewing

    16 Cuckoo Clock, By Molesworth

    17 Christmas Carol, By Dickens

    18 Jackanapes, By Ewing

    19 Alice in Wonderland, By Carroll

    20 Rab and His Friends, By Dr. John Brown

    21 Through a Looking-Glass, By Lewis Carroll

    22 The Prince of the Pin Elves, By Charles Lee Sleight

    23 Snap-Dragons and Other Stories, By J. H. Ewing

    24 Madam Liberality, By J. H. Ewing

    25 Millicent in Dreamland, By Edna S. Brainerd

    26 Flower Fables, By Louisa M. Alcott

    27 The Legend of Sleepy Hollow, By Washington Irving

    28 Lives of Two Cats, By Pierre Loti

    29 Wonder-Box Tales, By Jean Ingelow

    30 Boss and Other Dogs, By Maria L. Pool


    H. M. CALDWELL COMPANY
    Publishers
    NEW YORK AND BOSTON



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WONDER-BOX TALES***


******* This file should be named 21014.txt or 21014.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/1/0/1/21014



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

