The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wild Bill's Last Trail, by Ned Buntline

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Wild Bill's Last Trail

Author: Ned Buntline

Release Date: April 16, 2007 [EBook #21113]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD BILL'S LAST TRAIL ***




Produced by Richard Halsey




Wild Bill's Last Trail.

By NED BUNTLINE,
Author of "Harry Bluff, The Reefer," "Navigator Ned," etc.


CHAPTER I.
THE AVENGER.

"Bill! _Wild Bill!_ Is this you, or your ghost? What, in great
Creation's name, are you doing here?"

"Gettin' toward sunset, old pard--gettin' toward sunset, before I pass
in my checks!"

The first speaker was an old scout and plainsman, Sam Chichester by
name, and he spoke to a passenger who had just left the west-ward-bound
express train at Laramie, on the U.P.R.R.

That passenger was none other than J. B. Hickok, or "Wild Bill," one of
the most noted shots, and certainly the most desperate man of his age
and day west of the Mississippi River.

"What do you mean, Bill, when you talk of passing in your checks? You're
in the very prime of life, man, and---"

"Hush! Talk low! There are listening ears everywhere, Sam! I don't know
why, but there is a chill at my heart, and I know my time has about run
out. I've been on East with Buffalo Bill and Texas Jack, trying to show
people what our plains life is. But I wasn't at home there. There were
crowds on crowds that came to see us, and I couldn't stir on the streets
of their big cities without having an army at my heels, and I got sick
of it. But that wasn't all. There was a woman that fell in love with me,
and made up her mind to marry me. I told her that I was no sort of a man
to tie to--that I was likely to be wiped out any day 'twixt sunrise and
sunset, for I had more enemies than a candidate for President; but she
wouldn't listen to sense, and so--_we buckled!_ Thank Heaven, I've
coaxed her to stay East with friends while I've come out here; for, Sam,
she'll be a widow inside of six weeks!"

"Bill, you've been hitting benzine heavy of late haven't you?

"No; I never drank lighter in my life than I have for a year past. But
there's a shadow cold as ice on my soul! I've never felt right since I
pulled on that red-haired Texan at Abilene, in Kansas. You remember, for
you was there. It was kill or get killed, you know, and when I let him
have his ticket for a six-foot lot of ground he gave one shriek--it
rings in my ears yet. He spoke but one word--'Sister!' Yet that word has
never left my ears, sleeping or waking, from that time to this. I had a
sister once myself, Sam, and I loved her a thousand times more than I
did life. In fact I never loved life after I lost her. And I can't tell
you all about her--I'd choke if I tried. It is enough that she died, and
the cause of her death died soon after, and I wasn't far away when--when
he went under. But that isn't here nor there, Sam--let's go and warm up.
Where do you hang out?"

"I'm in camp close by. I'm heading a party that is bound in for the
Black Hills. Captain Jack Crawford is along. You know him. And
California Joe, too."

"Good! It is the first streak of luck I've had in a year. I'll join your
crowd, Sam, if you'll let me. Captain Jack and Joe are as good friends
as I ever had--always barring one."

"And that is?"

"My old six-shooter here. Truth-Teller I call it. It never speaks
without saying something. But come, old boy--I see a sign ahead. I must
take in a little benzine to wash the car-dust out of my throat."

Bill pointed to a saloon near at hand, and the two old scouts and
companions moved toward it.

As they did so, a young man, roughly dressed, with a face fair and
smooth, though shadowed as if by exposure to sun and and wind, stepped
from behind a shade tree, where he had stood while these two talked,
listening with breathless interest to every word. His hair, a deep, rich
auburn, hung in curling masses clear to his shoulders, and his blue eyes
seemed to burn with almost feverish fire as he gazed in the direction
the scouts had taken.

"So! He remembers Abilene, does he?"

And the tone of the young man was low and fierce us an angered serpent's
hiss.

"And he thinks his time is near. So do I. But he shall not die in a
second, as his victim did, I would prolong his agonies for years, if
every hour was like a living death; a speechless misery. Let him go with
Sam Chichester and his crowd. The avenger will be close at hand! His
Truth-Teller will lie when he most depends on it. For I--I have sworn
that he shall go where he has sent so many victims; go, like them all,
unprepared, but not unwarned. No, he thinks that death is near; I'll
freeze the thought to his very soul! He is on the death-trail now? With
me rests when and where it shall end."

The face of the young man was almost fiendish in its expression as he
spoke. It seemed as if his heart was the concentration of hate and a
fell desire for revenge.

He strode along the streets swiftly, and, glancing in at the saloon
which the two men had entered, paused one second, with his right hand
thrust within his vest, as if clutching a weapon, and debating in his
mind whether or not to use it.

A second only he paused, and then muttering, "It is not time yet," he
passed on.

"He went a little way up the same street and entered a German
restaurant. Throwing himself heavily on a seat, he said:

"Give me a steak, quick. I'm hungry and dry. Give me a bottle of the
best brandy in your house."

"We've got der steak, und pread, und peer, und Rhein wine, but no
prandy," said the German, who kept the place.

"Cook the steak in a hurry, and send for some brandy then!" cried the
young man, throwing down a golden eagle. "Your beer and wine are like
dishwater to me. I want fire--fire in my veins now."

"Dunder and blixen! I shouldn't dink as you wus want much more fire as
dere is in your eyes, young fellow. But I send for your prandy."

The young man threw one glance around the room to see if he were the
only occupant.

There was another person there, one who had evidently just come in, a
traveler, judging by a good-sized valise that was on the floor beside
his chair. This person looked young, for the face, or as much of it as
was not hidden by a very full black beard, was fair and smooth as that
of a woman; while the hair which shaded his white brow was dark as
night, soft and glossy as silk, hanging on short, curling masses about
his face and neck.

He was dressed rather better than the usual run of travelers; in a good
black broad-cloth suit--wore a heavy gold watch-chain, had on a fine
linen shirt, with a diamond pin in the bosom, and appeared to feel quite
satisfied with himself, from the cool and easy manner in which he gave
his orders for a good, substantial meal, in a voice rather low and
musical for one of his apparent age.

The last comer eyed this person very closely, and a smile almost, like
contempt rose on his face, when the dark-eyed stranger called for claret
wine, or if they had not that, for a cup of tea.

But his own strong drink was now brought in, and pouring out a glassful
of undiluted brandy he drank it down and muttered:

"That's the stuff! It will keep up the fire. My veins would stiffen
without it. It has carried me so far, and it must to the end. Then--no
matter!"

The stranger or traveler looked as if wondering that the young man could
take such a fearful dose of fiery liquor, and the wonder must have
increased when a second glassful was drained before the food was on the
table.

But the latter came in now, and the traveler and the young man with
auburn hair, at separate tables, were apparently too busy in disposing
of the eatables to take any further notice of each other.

When the first had finished, he took a roll of cigarettes from one of
his pockets, selected one, took a match from a silver box, drawn from
the same pocket, and lighting his cigarette, threw a cloud of smoke
above his head.

The second, pouring out his third glass of brandy, sipped it
quietly--the first two glasses having evidently supplied the fire he
craved so fiercely.

The traveler, as we may call him, for want of any other knowledge, now
rose, and as if impelled by natural politeness, tendered a cigarette to
the other.

The man with auburn hair looked surprised, and his fierce, wild face
softened a little, as he said:

"Thank you, no. I drink sometimes, like a fish, but I don't smoke.
Tobacco shakes the nerves, they say, and I want my nerves steady.

"Strong drink will shake them more, I've heard," said the traveler, in
his low, musical voice. "But you seem to have a steady hand though you
take brandy as if used to it."

"My hand is steady, stranger." was the reply. "There is not a man on the
Rio Grande border, where I came from, that can strike a center at twenty
paces with a revolver as often as I. And with a rifle at one hundred
yards I can most generally drop a deer with a ball between his eyes, if
he is looking at me, or take a wild turkey's head without hurting his
body."

"Then, you are from Texas?"

"Yes, sir. And you?"

"From the East, sir. I have traveled in the South--all over, in
fact--but my home is in the old Empire State.

"If it isn't impudent, which way are you bound now?"

"I haven't quite decided. I may go to the Black Hills--may remain around
here awhile--it seems to be rather a pleasant place."

"Yes, for them that like it. I'm off for the Black Hills, myself."

"Ah! with a company?"

"Not much! But there's a company going. I'm one of them that don't care
much for company, and can take better care of myself alone than with a
crowd about me."

"So! Well, it is a good thing to be independent. Do you know the party
that is going?"

"Some of 'em, by sight. The captain is Sam Chichester, and he has
California Joe, Cap'n Jack, and about twenty more in his party. And Wild
Bill has just come on the train, and I heard him say he was going with
the crowd."

"Wild Bill!" cried the stranger, flushing up. "Did you say he was
going?"

"Yes."

"Then I'd like to go, too--but I'd like to go with another party, either
just before or behind that party. Do you know Wild Bill?"

"_Know_ him! Who does not? Hasn't he killed more men than any other
white man in the States and Territories--I'll not say _how_, but is he
not a hyena, sopped in blood?"

"You do not like him?"

"Who says I don't?"

"_You_ do! Your eyes flash hate while you speak of him."

"Do they? Well, maybe I don't like him as well as I do a glass of
brandy--maybe I have lost some one I loved by his hand. It isn't at all
unlikely."

The traveler sighed, and with an anxious look, said:

"You don't bear him any grudge, do you? You wouldn't harm him?"

A strange look passes like a flash over the face of the other: he seemed
to read the thoughts or wishes of the traveler in a glance.

"Oh, no," he said, with assumed carelessness. "Accidents will happen in
the best families. It's not in me to bear a grudge, because Bill may
have wiped out fifteen or twenty Texans, while they were foolin' around
in his way. As to harm--he's too ready with his six-shooter, old
Truth-Teller, he calls it, to stand in much danger. I'm quick, but he is
quicker. You take a good deal of interest in him? Do you know him?"

"Yes; that is, I know him by sight. He is thought a great deal of by an
intimate friend of mine, and that is why I feel an interest in him."

"And that friend is a woman?"

"Why do you think so?"

"It is a fancy of mine."

"Well, I will not contradict you. For her sake I would hate to see any
evil befall him."

There was a cynical smile on the face of the young man with auburn hair.

"If a woman loved him, she ought, not to leave him, for his life is
mighty uncertain," said the latter. "I heard him say to Captain
Chichester, not half an hour ago, that he didn't believe he would live
long, and such a man as he is sure to die with his boots on!"

"Did he say that?" asked the traveler.

"Yes; and he seemed to feel it, too. He had to do as I do, fire up with
something strong to get life into his veins."

"Poor fellow! He had better have staid East when he was there, away from
this wild and lawless section."

"Stranger, there mayn't be much _law_ out this way, but justice isn't
always blind out here. If you stay long enough, you may learn that."

"Very likely; but you spoke of going to those Black Hills."

"Yes, I'm going."

"Will you let me go with you?"

"You don't look much like roughing it, and the trip is not only hard,
but it may be dangerous. The redskins are beginning to act wolfish on
the plains."

"I think I can stand as much hardship as you. You are light and
slender."

"But tough as an old buffalo bull, for all that. I've been brought up in
the saddle, with rifle and lasso in hand. I'm used to wind and weather,
sunshine and storm--they're all alike to me."

"And Indians?"

"Yes--to Comanche, Kiowa, and Apache. But these Cheyennes and Sioux are
a tougher breed, they tell me. I'll soon learn them too, I reckon.
There's one thing sure, I don't go in no crowd of twenty or thirty, with
wagons or pack mules along to tempt the cusses with, while they make the
travel slow. You want either a big crowd or a very small one, if you
travel in an Indian country.

"You have not answered my question yet. Will you let me go through to
the Black Hills with you?"

"Why don't you go with the other party? They'll take you, I'll bet."

"I do not want to go where Wild Bill will see me. He may think his wife
has sent me as a spy on his movements and actions."

"His _wife!_ Is he married? It must be something new."

"It is. He was married only a short time ago to a woman who almost
worships him. She did all she could to keep him from going out into his
old life again, but she could not."

"You _can_ go with me!" said the other, abruptly, after a keen and
searching look in the traveler's face.

"What is your name?"

"Willie Pond."

"Rather a _deep_ Pond, if I know what water is," said the auburn-haired
man, to himself, and then he asked, in a louder tone, "have you horse
and arms?"

"No; I just came on the train from the East. But there is money--buy me
a good horse, saddle, and bridle. I'll see to getting arms."

And Mr. Willie Pond handed the other a five-hundred dollar treasury
note.

"You don't ask my name, and you trust me with money as if you knew I was
honest."

"You'll tell me your name when you feel like it!" was the rejoinder. "As
to your honesty, if I think you are safe to travel with, you're safe to
trust my money with!"

"You're right. Your money is safe. As to my name, call me Jack. It is
short, if it isn't sweet. Some time I'll tell you the rest of it."

"All right, Jack. Take your own time. And now get all ready to start
either ahead or just behind the other party."

"We'll not go ahead. Where will you stay to-night?"

"Wherever you think best."

"All right. This old Dutchman keeps rooms for lodgers. You'd better stay
here, and if you don't want Bill to see you, keep pretty close in doors.
He'll be out in the Black Hillers' camp, or in the saloons where they
sell benzine and run faro banks. Bill is death on cards."

"So I've heard," said Mr. Pond, with a sigh.

Jack now went out, and Pond called the Dutch landlord to him and engaged
a room.


CHAPTER II.
PERSIMMON BILL.

As soon as the auburn-haired man who called himself Jack had left the
German restaurant, he went to a livery-stable near by, called for his
own horse, which was kept there, and the instant it was saddled he
mounted, and at a gallop rode westward from the town.

He did not draw rein for full an hour, and then he had covered somewhere
between eight and ten miles of ground, following no course or trail, but
riding in a course as straight as the flight of an arrow.

He halted then in a small ravine, nearly hidden by a growth of thick
brush, and gave a peculiar whistle. Thrice had this sounded, when a man
came cautiously out of the ravine, or rather out of its mouth. He was
tall, slender, yet seemed to possess the bone and muscle of a giant. His
eyes were jet black, fierce and flashing, and his face had a stern,
almost classic beauty of feature, which would have made him a model in
the ancient age of sculpture. He carried a repeating rifle, two
revolvers, and a knife in his belt. His dress was buckskin, from head to
foot.

"You are Persimmon Bill?" said Jack, in a tone of inquiry. "Yes. Who are
you, and how came you by the signal that called me out?"

"A woman in town gave it to me, knowing she could trust me."

"Was her first name Addie?"

"Her last name was Neidic."

"All right. I see she has trusted you. What do you want?"

"Help in a matter of revenge."

"Good! You can have it. How much help is wanted?"

"I want one man taken from a party, alive, when he gets beyond civilized
help, so that I can see him tortured. I want him to die by inches."

"How large is his party, and where are they now?"

"The party numbers between twenty and thirty; they are in camp in the
edge of Laramie, and will start for the Black Hills in a few days."

"If all the party are wiped out but the one you want, will it matter to
you?"

"No; they are his friends, and as such I hate them!"

"All right. Get me a list of their numbers and names, how armed, what
animals and stores they have, every fact, so I can be ready. They will
never get more than half way to the Hills, and the one you want shall be
delivered, bound into your hands. All this, and more, will I do for her
who sent you here!"

"You love her?"

"She loves me! I'm not one to waste much breath on talking love. My
Ogallalla Sioux warriors know me as the soldier-killer. Be cautious when
you go back, and give no hint to any one but Addie Neidic that there is
a living being in Dead Man's Hollow, for so this ravine is called in
there."

"Do not fear. I am safe, for I counsel with no one. I knew Addie Neidic
before I came here, met her by accident, revealed myself and wants, and
she sent me to you."

"It is right. Go back, and be cautious to give the signal if you seek
me, or you might lose your scalp before you saw me."

"My scalp?"

"Yes; my guards are vigilant and rough."

_"Your guards?"_

Persimmon Bill laughed at the look of wonder in the face of his visitor,
and with his hand to his mouth, gave a shrill, warbling cry.

In a second this mouth of the ravine was fairly blocked with armed and
painted warriors--Sioux, of the Ogallalla tribe. There were not less
than fifty of them.

"You see my guards--red devils, who will do my bidding at all times, and
take a scalp on their own account every chance they get," said Persimmon
Bill.

Then he took an eagle feather, with its tip dipped in crimson, from the
coronet of the chief, and handed it, in the presence of all the Indians,
to Jack.

"Keep thus, and when out on the plains, wear it in your hat, where it
can be seen, and the Sioux will ever pass you unharmed, and you can
safely come and go among them. Now go back, get the list and all the
news you can, and bring it here as soon as you can. Tell Addie to ride
out with you when you come next."

Jack placed the feather in a safe place inside his vest, bowed his head,
and wheeling his horse, turned toward the town. Before he had ridden a
hundred yards he looked back. Persimmon Bill had vanished, not an Indian
was in sight, and no one unacquainted with their vicinity could have
seen a sign to show that such dangerous beings were near.

No smoke rose above the trees, no horses were feeding around, nothing to
break the apparent solitude of the scene.

"And that was Persimmon Bill?" muttered the auburn-haired rider, as he
galloped back. "So handsome, it does not seem as if he could be the
murderer they call him. And yet, if all is true, he has slain tens,
where Wild Bill has killed one. No matter, he will be useful to me. That
is all I care for now."


CHAPTER III.
A WARNING.

When Wild Bill and Sam Chichester entered the saloon alluded to in our
first chapter, they were hailed by several jovial-looking men, one of
whom Wild Bill warmly responded to as California Joe, while he grasped
the hand of another fine-looking young man whom he called Captain Jack.

"Come, Crawford," said he, addressing the last named, "let's wet up! I'm
dry as an empty powder-horn!"

"No benzine for me, Bill," replied Crawford, or "Captain Jack." "I've
not touched a drop of the poison in six months."

"What? Quit drinking, Jack? Is the world coming to an end?"

"I suppose it will sometime. But that has nothing to do with my
drinking. I promised old Cale Durg to quit, and I've done it. And I
never took a better trail in my life. I'm fresh as a daisy, strong as a
full-grown elk, and happy as an antelope on a wide range."

"All right, Jack. But I must drink. Come, boys--all that will--come up
and wet down at my expense."

California Joe and most of the others joined in the invitation, and
Captain Jack took a cigar rather than "lift a shingle from the roof," as
he said.

"Where are you bound, Bill?" asked Captain Jack, as Bill placed his
empty glass on the counter, and turned around.

"To the Black Hills with your crowd--that is if I live to get there."

"Live! You haven't any thought of dying, have you? I never saw you look
better."

"Then I'll make a healthy-looking corpse, Jack. For I tell you my time
is nearly up; I've felt it in my bones this six months. I've seen ghosts
in my dreams, and felt as if they were around me when I was awake. It's
no use, Jack, when a chap's time comes he has got to go."

"Nonsense, Bill; don't think of anything like that. A long life and a
merry one--that's my motto. We'll go out to the Black Hills, dig out our
fortunes, and then get out of the wilderness to enjoy life."

"Boy, I've never known the happiness outside of the wilderness that I
have in it. What you kill there is what was made for killing--the food
we need. What one kills among civilization is only too apt to be of his
own kind."

And Bill shuddered as if he thought of the many he had sent into
untimely graves.

"Stuff, Bill! You're half crazed by your dramatic trip. You've acted so
much, that reality comes strange. Let's go out to camp and have a talk
about what is ahead of us."

"Not till I buy a horse, Jack. I want a good horse under me once more;
I've ridden on cars and steamboats till my legs ache for a change."

"There's a sale's stable close by. Let's go and see what stock is
there," said Sam Chichester.

"Agreed!" cried all hands, and soon Bill and his friends were at the
stable, looking at some dozen or more horses which were for sale.

"There's the beauty I want," said Wild Bill, pointing to a black horse,
full sixteen hands high, and evidently a thoroughbred. "Name your price,
and he is my meat!"

"That horse isn't for sale now. He was spoken for an hour ago, or maybe
less by a cash customer of mine--a red-haired chap from Texas."

_"Red-haired_ chap from Texas!" muttered Bill, "Red-haired cusses from
Texas are always crossin' my trail. That chap from Abilene was a Texas
cattle-man, with hair as red as fire. Where is your cash customer, Mr.
Liveryman?"

"Gone out riding somewhere," replied the stable-keeper.

"When he comes back, tell him Wild Bill wants that horse, and I reckon
he'll let Wild Bill buy him, if he knows when he is well off! I wouldn't
give two cusses and an amen for all the rest of the horses in your
stable; I want _him!_"

"I'll tell Jack," said the stableman; "but I don't think it will make
much odds with him. He has as good as bought the horse, for he offered
me the money on my price, but I couldn't change his five hundred-dollar
treasury note. It'll take more than a name to scare him. He always goes
fully armed."

"You tell him what I said, and that I'm a-coming here at sunset for that
horse," said Bill, and he strode away, followed by his crowd.

An hour later the auburn-haired man from Texas reined in his own horse,
a fiery mustang from his own native plains, in front of the stable.

Though the horse was all afoam with sweat, showing that it had been
ridden far and fast; it did not pant or show a sign of weariness. It was
of a stock which will run from rise of sun to its going down, and yet
plunge forward in the chill of the coming night.

"You want the Black Hawk horse you spoke for this morning, don't you?"
asked the stableman, as Jack dismounted.

"Of course I do. I've got the change; there is his price. Three hundred
dollars you said?"

"Yes; but there's been a chap here looking at that horse who told me to
tell you his name, and that he intended to take that horse. I told him a
man had bought it, but he said: 'Tell him Wild Bill wants it, and that
Wild Bill will come at sunset to take it.'"

"He will?"

It was hissed rather than spoken, while the young Texan's face grew
white as snow, his blue eyes darkening till they seemed almost black.

"He will! Let him try it! A sudden death is too good for the
blood-stained wretch! But if he will force it on, why let it come. The
horse is bought: let him come at sunset if he dares!"

And the young man handed the stable-keeper three one hundred-dollar
greenback notes.


CHAPTER IV.
"GIVE UP THAT HORSE, OR DIE!"

Leaving the livery-stable, the young Texan went directly to the German
restaurant, and asked for Willie Pond.

He was shown up to the room, recently engaged by the traveler, and found
him engaged in cleaning a pair of fine, silver mounted Remington
revolvers.

"Getting ready, I see," said the Texan. "I have bought you a horse--the
best in this whole section; I gave three hundred dollars. There is your
change."

"Keep the two hundred to buy stores with for our trip," said Pond.

"No need of it I've laid in all the stores we need. You can buy yourself
a couple of blankets and an India-rubber for wet weather. A couple of
tin cans of pepper and salt is all that I lay in when I'm going to rough
it on the plains. The man that can't kill all the meat he needs isn't
fit to go there."

"Maybe you're right. The less we are burdened the better for our horses.
Are we likely to meet Indians on the route?"

"None that will hurt _me_--or you, when you're in my company. The Sioux
know me and will do me no harm."

"That is good. The Indians were my only dread."

"I've a favor to ask."

"It is granted before you ask it--what is it?"

"I want to break your horse to the saddle before you try it. You are not
so used to the saddle, I reckon, as I am. I will take a ride at sunset,
and bring him around here for you to look at."

"That is right. I am only thankful to have you ride him first, though
you may find me a better rider than you think!"

"Perhaps. But he looks wild, and I like to tame _wild_ uns. I'll have
him here between sundown and dark."

"All right. I told you I'd see to getting arms. I had these revolvers,
and cartridges for them, but I want a light repeating rifle. Get me a
good one, with as much ammunition as you think I'll need!"

"All right. I'll get a now model Winchester. They rattle out lead faster
than any other tool I ever carried."

The Texan now left. He had not spoken of Wild Bill's desire to possess
that horse, because he had an idea that Mr. Willie Pond would weaken,
and give up the horse, rather than risk bloodshed for its possession.
And perhaps he had another idea--a mysterious one, which we do not care
to expose at this stage of the story.

This young Texan hastened from the German restaurant to a small, neat
house in the outskirts of the town. Knocking in a very peculiar manner,
he was admitted at once by a tall and strikingly beautiful young woman,
whom he addressed as if well acquainted with her.

"I'm here, Addie, and I've seen _him._"

"You found him all right, when you told him who sent you, did you not?"
asked the lady, leading the way to a sitting-room in the rear of the
cottage.

"Yes, ready to do anything for one you recommend."

"Poor Bill! A braver man and a truer friend never lived. He loves me,
and I fear it will be his ruin, for he will too often come within the
reach of those who would destroy him, if they only knew where and how to
reach him. Persecution and cruelty placed him on the bloody path he has
had to follow, and now--now he is an outlaw, beyond all chance for
mercy, should he ever be taken."

"He never will be taken, guarded as he is."

"You saw his guards, then?"

"Yes, forty or fifty of them, and I would rather have them as friends
than foes. He wants you to ride out with me to meet him when I go next
with some information that he needs."

"When will that be?" asked the lady.

"In the early morning, or perhaps to-night, if nothing happens to me
between now and sunset to make it unnecessary!"

"Between now and sunset? That is within two hours. Do you anticipate any
danger?"

"Not much. I have a little task before me. I have a horse to break, and
a man known as Will Bill to tame."

"Wild Bill!--the dead-shot, the desperado, who has killed at least one
man for every year of his life?"

"Yes, the same. But ask me no more questions now. After I have tamed him
I will report--or, if he has settled me, there will be no need of it."

"Do not run this risk."

"It must be done. He has, in a manner, defied me, and I accept his
defiance!"

"Surely he does not know---"

"No, he knows nothing of what you would say if I did not interrupt you.
Nor do I intend he shall at present. It is enough that you know it, and
will care for both my body and my good name, should I fail."

"You know I will. But you must not fall."

"I do not intend to. I think I can crush him by a look and a word. I
shall try, at least. If all goes well, I will be here by eight to-night
to arrange for our visit."

"I hope you will come, and safely."

"I will, Addie. Until the cup of vengeance is full. Heaven will surely
spare me. But I must go. I have no time to spare."

The young Texan glanced at the chambers of a handsome six-shooter which
he carried, to see if it was ready for use, replaced it in his belt, and
then, with a cheerful smile, left the room and house.

Hastening to the stable, he selected a saddle, lengthened the stirrups
to suit himself, took a stout bridle from among a lot hanging in the
store-room, and accompanied by the stable-keeper, approached the newly
purchased Black Hawk horse.

"I may as well have him ready," he said; "for if Wild Bill is to be here
at sunset, that time is close at hand. You say the horse has not been
ridden?"

"No," said the stable-keeper. "My regular breaker was not here when I
bought him. Black Joe tried to mount him, but the horse scared him."

"Well, I'll soon see what he is made of, if I can get saddle and bridle
on him," said the Texan.

They now together approached the large box stall in which the stallion
was kept. The horse, almost perfect in symmetry, black as night, with a
fierce, wild look, turned to front them as they approached the barred
entrance.

"Steady, boy--steady!" cried the Texan, as he sprang lightly over the
bars, and at once laid his hand on the arched neck of the horse.

To the wonder of the stableman, the horse, instead of rearing back or
plunging at the intruder, turned his eyes upon him, and with a kind of
tremor in his frame, seemed to wait to see what his visitor meant.

"So! Steady, Black Hawk! steady, old boy!" continued the Texan, kindly
passing his hand over the horse's neck and down his face.

The horse uttered a low neigh, and seemed by his looks pleased with his
attentions.

"That beats me!" cried the stable-keeper. "Old Joe had to lasso him and
draw him down to a ringbolt before he could rub him off."

"Hand me the saddle and bridle," said the Texan, still continuing to
"pet" the beautiful and spirited animal.

In a few seconds, without difficulty, the same kind and skillful hands
had the horse both saddled and bridled.

The Texan now led the horse out on the street, where quite a crowd
seemed to be gathering, perhaps drawn there by some rumor of a fight in
embryo.

And as he glanced up the street the Texan saw Wild Bill himself, with
his six-shooters in his belt, come striding along, with California Joe
and a dozen more at his heels.

In a second, the Texan vaulted upon the back of the horse, which made
one wild leap that would have unseated most riders, and then reared on
its hind legs as if it would fall back and crush its would-be master.

At this instant, Wild Bill rushing forward, pistol in hand, shouted:

"Give up that horse, or die!"


CHAPTER V.
A SQUARE BACK-DOWN.

The Texan paid no heed to the words of the desperado, but bending
forward on the horse with his full weight, drove his spurs deeply into
its flanks. Startled and stung with pain, the noble animal, at one wild
bound, leaped far beyond where Bill and his friends stood, and in a
second more sped in terrific leaps along the street.

"The cowardly cuss is running away!" yelled Bill derisively.

"It is false! He is _no_ coward! He will tame the horse first and then
_you_!" cried a voice so close that Bill turned in amazement to see who
dare thus to speak to him, the _"Terror of the West."_

"A woman!" he muttered, fiercely, as he saw a tall and queenly-looking
girl standing there, with flashing eyes, which did not drop at his gaze.

_"Yes_--a woman, who has heard of Wild Bill, and neither fears nor
admires him!" she said, undauntedly.

"Is the fellow that rode off on the horse your husband or lover that you
take his part?" asked Bill, half angrily and half wondering at the
temerity of the lovely girl who thus braved his anger.

"He is neither," she replied, scornfully.

"I'm glad of it. I shall not make you a widow or deprive you of a future
husband when he comes under my fire, if he should be fool enough to come
back."

"He comes now. See for yourself. He has tamed the horse--now comes your
turn, coward and braggart!"

Bill was white with anger; but she was a woman, mind no matter what he
felt, too well he knew the chivalry of the far West to raise a hand or
even speak a threatening word to her. But he heard men around him murmur
her name.

It was Addie Neidic.

And then he turned his eyes upon the black horse and rider. The animal,
completely under control, though flecked with foam, came down the street
slowly and gently, bearing his rider with an air of pride rather than
submission. As he passed the German restaurant, the rider raised his hat
in salutation to Willie Pond, who stood in his window, and said, in a
cheerful voice:

"Remain in your room. I have news for you and will be there soon."

Without checking his horse the rider kept on until he was within half a
length of the horse of Wild Bill, then checking the animal, he said, in
a mocking tone:

"You spoke to me just as I rode away. I've come back to hear you out."

What was the matter with Wild Bill? He stood staring wildly at the
Texan, his own face white as if a mortal fear had come upon him.

"Where have I seen that face before?" he gasped. "Can the dead come back
to life?"

The Texan bent forward till his own face almost touched that of Wild
Bill and hissed out one word in a shrill whisper:

"Sister!"

It was all he said, but the instant Wild Bill heard it, he shrieked out:

"'Tis him--_'tis him I shot at Abilene!_" and with a shuddering groan he
sank senseless to the pavement.

In an instant Bill's friends, who had looked in wonder at this strange
scene, sprang to his aid, and, lifting his unconscious form, carried it
into the saloon where Bill had met Californian Joe, Captain Jack, and
the rest of their crowd.

Left alone, the young Texan said a few words to Addie Neidic, then
dismounted and told the stable-keeper to keep that horse saddled and
bridled, and to get his own Texan mustang ready for use.

"I must be out of town before sunrise, or Wild Bill and his friends may
have questions to ask that I don't want to answer just now," he said.

And then, he walked a little way with Miss Neidic, talking earnestly.
But soon he left her, and while she kept on in the direction of her own
house, he turned and went to the German restaurant.

Entering the room of Willie Pond, he said, abruptly:

"If you want to go to the Black Hills with me on your own horse we'll
have to leave this section mighty sudden. Wild Bill has set his mind on
having the horse I bought and broke for you, and he has a rough crowd to
back him up."

"If I had known Bill wanted the horse so badly I could have got along
with another," said Pond, rather quietly.

"What! let _him_ have the horse? Why it hasn't its equal on the plains
or in the mountains. It is a thoroughbred--a regular racer, which a
sporting man was taking through to the Pacific coast on speculation. He
played faro, lost, got broke, and put the horse up for a tenth of its
value. I got him for almost nothing compared to his worth. On that horse
you can keep out of the way of any red who scours the plains. If you
don't want him I do, for Wild Bill shall never put a leg over his back!"

"I'll keep him. Don't get mad. I'll keep him and go whenever you are
ready," said Pond, completely mastered by the excitement which this
young Texan exhibited.

"Well, we'll get the horses out of town and in a safe place to-night.
And for yourself, I'll take you to the house of a lady friend of mine to
stay to-night and to-morrow, and by to-morrow night I'll know all I want
to about the movements of the other party, and we can move so as to be
just before or behind them, as you and I will decide best."

"All right, Jack. I leave it to you. Are you sure the horse will be safe
for me to ride?"

"Yes. A horse like that once broken is broken for life. They never
forget their first lesson. A mongrel breed, stupid, resentful, and
tricky, is different. Be ready to mount when I lead him around, I will
send for your traveling-bag, and you will find it at the house where we
stop."

"I will be ready," said Pond.

The Texan now left, and Pond watched him as he hurried off to the
stable.

"The man hates Wild Bill with a deadly hatred!" he murmured. "I must
learn the cause. Perhaps it is a providence that I have fallen in with
him, and I have concluded to keep his company to the Black Hills. But I
must call the landlord and close up my account before the other comes
back with the horses."

The German was so put out by the sudden giving up of a room, which he
hoped to make profitable, that he asked an extra day's rent, and to his
surprise, got it.


CHAPTER VI.
OFF TO THE HILLS.

It was some time before Wild Bill became fully conscious after he was
carried into the saloon, and when he did come to he raved wildly about
the red-haired man he shot in Abilene, and insisted it was his ghost,
and not a real man, he had seen.

Bill's friends tried to cheer and reassure him, and got several stiff
draughts of liquor down his throat, which finally "set him up." as they
said, till he began to look natural. But he still talked wildly and
strangely.

"I told you, Joe," he said to his old friend; "I told you my time was
nigh up. This hasn't been my first warning. That Abilene ghost has been
before me a thousand times, and he has hissed that same word,
'_sister,_' in my ear."

"Bah! old boy. What's the use of your talking foolish. You've seen no
ghost. That red-haired chap was as live as you are."

"He did have red hair and blue eyes, then?"

"Yes; but there are lots of such all over the world. Red hair and blue
eyes generally travel in company. But he was nothing to scare you. You
could have wiped him out with one back-handed blow of your fist, let
alone usin' shootin' irons, of which there wasn't 'casion, seein' he
didn't draw."

"Where is he now?"

"I'll go and see. I suppose he is over at the stable."

Joe went out, but soon returned to say that the Texan had just ridden
off, after paying his bill; the stable-keeper did not know where.

"Let him go," murmured Bill. "If he _is_ a man, and not a ghost, I
wouldn't raise a hand to hurt him, not for all the gold in the Black
Hills. He was so like--_so_ like the chap I dropped in Abilene!"

Bill took another drink, but it seemed as if nothing could lift the
gloom which weighed down his heart. Only once did his face brighten.
That was when Sam Chichester said there was no use hanging on at Laramie
any longer for a bigger crowd; they were strong enough now, and would
start for the Hills inside of four-and-twenty hours.

"That's the talk for me!" cried Bill. "I want to get out of here as soon
as I can, Joe, and pick me out some sort of a horse. I don't care what,
so it'll carry me to the Hills, I can't breathe free any longer where
there's such a lot of folks."

"I'll get you a first-chop horse, Bill," said Joe. "There's some
half-breeds in a corral just out of town, as tough as grizzlies, and
heavy enough for your weight or mine."

"I don't weigh down, as I did," said Bill, with a sigh. "I've been
losin' weight for six months back. No matter. It'll be less trouble to
tote me when I go under. Remember, boys, when I do, bury me with my
boots on, just as I die."

"Stop your clatter about dyin', Bill. I'm sick o' that kind of talk.
It's time enough to talk of death when its clutch is on you."

"I can't help it, Joe, old pard. It keeps a stickin' in my throat, and
if it didn't come out, I'd choke."

"Let's go to camp," said Chichester. "Can you walk now, Bill?'

"Yes."

And the party rose, took a parting drink with the landlord, and started
for camp.

Outside, Bill gave a startled, wild glance toward the spot where he had
seen the Texan; but no one was there now, and he moved on with his
companions toward their camp, listening to, but not joining in their
conversation.

On arriving at camp, Chichester, as captain, gave orders that each man
should report on paper, or verbally, so it could be taken down, just how
much ammunition he had, the number and kind of his arms, private stores,
etc., so that if there was not enough to make the trip safely, more
could be provided. The number and condition of horses, pack-mules, etc.,
was also to be given.

No man would be fitted to lead such a party did he not consider and post
himself fully in all these particulars.

Quite a crowd of townspeople followed the party out, for the news soon
spread that they intended to leave in a short time; so around their
blazing camp-fire there were many visitors. Toward these Wild Bill cast
many a stealthy glance, but he did not see the red-haired Texan there.


CHAPTER VII.
THE OUTLAW'S LOVE.

Willie Pond was much surprised when he found that his ride only extended
to a small but pretty cottage just on the outskirts of the town, where
the young Texan, introducing him to Miss Neidic as his temporary
hostess, left him while he took the horses to a safe place of
concealment not far away.

Miss Neidic look her new visitor into the rear sitting-room, and while
giving him a cordial welcome, and passing the usual salutations, scanned
him with a keen and critical eye. The impression left must have been
rather favorable, for the lady seemed to feel none of the embarrassment
usual when strangers held a first interview, but talked on as easily and
naturally as if she had known him half a lifetime.

"How long have you been in town, Mr. Pond?" was one of her many
questions.

"Only a day. I arrived on the express, westward bound, which passed this
morning," was the answer.

"Why, that was the same train the desperado, Wild Bill came on."

"Yes, he was pointed out to me by the conductor. But why do you call him
a desperado?"

"Because that is his character."

"I thought none but outlaws were celled desperadoes."

"There is where the mistake comes in. Most outlaws are desperadoes, but
a man _can_ be a desperado, and yet not an _outlaw._ If to be always
ready to shoot for a look or a word--whether his opponent is ready or
not--is not being a desperado. I do not know what is. But excuse me. He
may be a friend of yours."

"Oh, no," said Pond, with some confusion in his manner. "But a very dear
friend of mine married him not long since, and for her sake I feel a
sort of interest in the man. I fancied that he was rather wild when
under the influence of liquor, but for all, a brave and generous man,
when truly himself."

"Brave, as brutes are, when he feels he has the power to _kill_ in his
hands; but _generous?_ _Never!_" said Miss Neidic.

"You are his enemy."

"No; for he has never done me, personally, an injury; but he has injured
friends of mine--sent more than one down to untimely graves."

"There, I said it--you are his enemy, because of what he has done to
your friends.

"I am _not_ his friend, nor do I wish to be the friend of such a man.
But the enmity of a woman is nothing to him. He looks for friends among
such men as he now consorts with--California Joe, Sam Chichester, and
that crowd. I know but one real gentleman in the party, and that one is
Jack Crawford."

"I know none of them."

"You lose nothing, then, for it is little honor one gains by such
acquaintances. They suit Wild Bill, for they drink, gamble, and shoot on
little cause; they are ready for any adventure, never stopping to count
risks or look back when evil is commenced or ruin wrought, no matter
what may be its nature."

The entrance of the young Texans now caused a change in the topic of
conversation.

"I have learned when that party start." he said. "They are making their
final preparations to-night, and will break camp in this morning early
enough to make Twenty-mills Creek for their first night's halt--probably
about ten o'clock."

"Do you propose to go ahead of them?" asked Pond.

"No; it will be more easy and safe to fellow their trail. They will not
have over fifty animals all told, and there will be lots of feed left
for us even if we keep close by. And we can get as much game as we need
any time, for we can use but little. One pack horse will carry all our
stuff, and still be able to travel at speed, if need be."

"You understand it better than I," said Pond. "Arrange things to suit
yourself, and I will conform to your plans."

"All right. You had better turn in early, so as to get a good rest. For
after we are out, long rides and night-watches will tell on you, for you
are not used to them."

"I will show you to a chamber, your valise is already in it," said Miss
Neidic.

Mr. Pond followed her, and the Texan was left alone to his thoughts,
which he carelessly expressed aloud.

"So far all works well," he said. "Mr. Willie Pond is as soft as mush;
but I've read him through and through. He wouldn't go with me if he
didn't think he'd have a chance to serve Wild Bill, for, though he shuns
Bill, he thinks more of Bill than he would have me think, I'll bet Addie
has found that out."

"Found out what?" said the lady herself, who had returned so noiselessly
that Jack had not heard her.

"That Mr. Pond, as he calls himself, is a friend of Wild Bill's."

"All of that, and maybe something more, as you may find out before you
are through your trip."

"What do you mean?"

"Nothing but this--keep your eyes open, and study your Mr. Pond
closely."

"There is nothing dangerous about him?"

Miss Neidic laughed heartily.

"Nothing very dangerous to you, at any rate," she said; "but if they all
go in the morning, we must see Persimmon Bill to-night."

"That is so. Shall I bring the horses round?"

"No. We might be overheard. I will go to the stables. Get the horses
ready. I have some things to put up for Bill, and I will come as soon as
I pack them in a pair of saddle-bags."

Jack now left for the stable, and Miss Neidic, with a woman's
forethought, began to gather up many little things which might be useful
to her outlaw lover, who had little chance to procure articles of
comfort, not to speak of luxury, except when on some raid in the
settlements.

In ten minutes she was ready and on her way to the stables.

Jack had her own favorite horse saddled, while for himself he chose the
Black Hawk beauty.

In a few seconds both were mounted, and in the darkness they sped away
over the same route which Jack had taken when he went to visit Persimmon
Bill.

Little was said as they rode on, for the horses were kept at a swift
gallop, and before the hour was up they had approached the ravine as
near as they deemed safe before giving the signal.

Scarcely was it given before it was answered, and a second later
Persimmon Bill himself was by the side of Addie Neidic's horse, and she
was pressed to the outlaw's bosom with a fervor that showed he had a
heart more than half-human left in his breast.

"It's kind of you, Addie, to come out here in the chill of the night to
see a wild cuss like me, outlawed by man, and forsaken by Heaven!"

"It's safer to come by night than by day, for you and for me, Bill," she
said. "And I couldn't bear you should go away again till I had seen you.
And I've brought you a lot of things I know you'll need."

"I shall not need much of anything, Addie, on the trail I'm soon to
take. Your friend here I know is safe, or I wouldn't say so much. But
the truth is, the reds are going to rise in a body all over the north
and northwest, and we'll sweep the Black Hills, and clean out every
'blue-coat' that is sent to check the rising. The Sioux have made me a
big chief, and I'll have my hands full. If you hear of the 'White Elk,'
as second only to Sitting Bull himself, you'll know who it is."

"You, of course!"

"Yes, Addie; that is the name they have given me. And if the Sioux fight
as I think they will, and all the northern tribes join, we'll force a
treaty that will give us all the Black Hills and the Yellowstone, Powder
River, and Big Horn Country for ourselves forever. Then, my girl, and
not till then, can I make a safe home for you, and not till then will I
ask you to be my wife. For then the outlaw will be safe, and can live in
peace, and look for days of home and happiness."

"Bill, when you ask it, be it in peace or war, I am yours. You are brave
as the bravest, and had you never been treated wrongfully, would not now
be a hunted outlaw. I love you, and you know it."

"Yes, Addie, and I love you too well to ask you to share my lot till I
can see some sunshine. But this stranger has news for me."

Persimmon Bill turned to the Texan, who had drawn his horse away a
little, so as not to intrude on the conversation between the lovers.

"I have the news you asked for," said Jack. "The party, all told, who
will start at nine or ten in the morning, and camp twenty miles out
to-morrow, number twenty-nine men, all well armed, the most of them with
repeating rifles and six-shooters. Half of them are old scouts, the rest
are miners, gamblers, and a couple of them are traders. They have fifty
animals, saddle and pack, and carry no wagons. The mules are loaded
pretty heavy, at least them that belong to the traders, and are well
worth capture."

"All right, And there is one of the party you don't want hurt until he
is in your hands?"

"Yes, that man is Wild Bill. I want him in my power so that I may see
him die slowly, surely, awfully!"

"There is another man in that party, Bill, who mustn't be hurt. He did
me a kindness once, down at Cheyenne--saved me from insult and wrong.
His name is Crawford--Captain Jack, they call him!"

"Yes, I know him. No harm shall befall him, if I can help it."

"Thank you, Bill; you needn't be jealous of him, for it is only what he
did that makes me ask a favor for him!"

"I know it, Addie."

"No woman on earth can make me jealous of you. I've too much confidence
in your truth and love. But you'll not attack the party anywhere near
here?"

"No, not till they are far beyond all the military posts. I want no
pursuit when I do my work. Our animals are in good order for the
war-path now, and I want to keep them so. I'm drilling my braves at
every chance, so as to fit them to meet such men as Crook, Custer, and
Carr. All they want is drill and discipline to make them the best
soldiers in the world, and they're coming into it finely."

"Well, you were a soldier yourself long enough to know all that should
be done."

"A soldier too long, girl--too long a slave to men who held authority
only to abuse it," said Bill, in a bitter tone. "The cruelty exercised
on me then turned my best blood to gall, and made me what I am. I hate
the name, and my blood boils beyond all restraint when my eye falls upon
a uniform. Rightly have the Sioux called me the "Soldier Killer," for
never do I let one who wears the button escape if he comes within my
reach. But you must not stay too long. Good-night--I will not say
good-by, for we will meet again."

"Good-night, Bill."

"One word to your friend here," added the outlaw. "Follow the trail of
Chichester, about three hours back, whenever he moves. I will probably,
for three or four days, be about as far behind you. On the night of the
third or fourth day out, or, if it is bad weather for travel, a day or
two later, I will surround you, and take you and your friend prisoners,
to all appearances. But of course no harm will come to you, and you will
be free when the other work is done. Then I will close up and wipe out
Chichester's gang, saving the two who are to be spared. Then I will be
ready for the war-path, for I need the arms and ammunition these people
have to finish arming the drilled marines who are specially under me."

"All right, sir; we understand each other," said the Texan, wheeling his
horse to take the back trail.

Addie Neidic, as if from some uncontrollable reason, turned once more
toward her lover, and bending from her saddle, threw her arms about his
tall and splendid form, and kissed him again and again with passionate
tenderness.

"Do be careful of your life, dear Bill," she said. "You are all in all
to me. If you perish, life will be valueless to me."

"Addie, I'll try to live for your sake, and work my uttermost to achieve
what will give you and me peace and quiet in the end. Good-night, once
more good-night, my beautiful, my own."

"Good night, Bill--God bless you!" she sobbed; as she turned her horse,
and followed the Texan at a gallop.


CHAPTER VIII.
FOILED BY A WOMAN.

It was their last night in town before breaking up camp, and the Black
Hillers, as they already called themselves, under Chichester, were
determined to have a lively time of it.

They commenced "wetting up," or pouring down liquid lightning in camp,
but, being reminded that what they used there would be missed on their
journey, they started to skin the saloons in town, and finish out their
spree where it would not diminish their own stores.

As Wild Bill said, they were going where money would be of little
account, if all the stories about the gold to be found were true; so
what they spent now they wouldn't have to carry. And they went in, as
such reckless men generally do, spending their money as freely as they
could, and drinking with a "looseness" that promised headaches on the
morrow, if nothing more.

Wild Bill went in on the spree with a rush, as if he wished to drown the
remembrance of his late fright, and despite the cautions of his friend,
Captain Jack, who strove hard to keep him within bounds.

California Joe of course was in his element, and in a little while all
the party became so turbulent that Crawford left them in disgust. For,
as Addie Neidic had said of him, despite his associations, he was a
gentleman.

By midnight every saloon had been visited, and many of them pretty well
cleaned out, and now Bill proposed to go and break a faro bank that some
of the party spoke of.

"I have seven hundred dollars left out of a thousand my woman gave me
before I started," said he. "I'll lose that, or break the bank; see if I
don't."

All of the party who were sober enough went with Bill, and soon he was
before the green board.

Without even waiting to get the run of the game, be planked a hundred
dollars on the king, and lost. Without a word, he put two hundred
dollars more on the same card, and won. He left the four hundred down,
and in another turn he had eight hundred.

"Luck is with me, boys!" He shouted. "I'll break the bank! Let her swing
for the king once more, Mr. Dealer!"

To the wonder of all, though it was the last turn of the cards, the
king won, and Wild Bill picked up sixteen hundred dollars.

His friends now urged him to quit, but the demon of the game had entered
his soul, and he swore, with a terrible oath, that he would play till he
broke the bank, or was broke himself.

A new pack was now put in the box, and once more the dealer cried out:

"Make your bets gentlemen--make year bets! The game is ready!"

Bill, with a reckless bravado, as much of rum as of his own nature,
again laid all his winnings on one card--this time the queen. And with
wonderful luck--it could be nothing else--he again doubled his pile,
this time his gains being thirty-two hundred dollars.

"Stop now, Bill!" cried California Joe, "This can't last!"

"It shall last! The bank can't stand more than two more such pulls!"
shouted Bill, wildly.

And again on the same card he staked his entire winnings.

The dealer and banker were one; he turned pale, but when all bets were
down, he pulled his cards without a tremor in his hand. But a groan
broke from his lips as the queen once more came out on the winning side.

Once more Bill's stakes were doubled, and this time he changed his card.

The banker hesitated. His capital would hardly cover the pile if Bill
won again.

"Keep on," whispered a voice in his ear; "if he breaks you, I'll stake
your bank."

The banker looked up and saw, though she was disguised in male attire, a
face he well knew. It was that of Addie Neidic, and he knew she was able
to keep her word.

Wild Bill had heard the whisper, and his face was white with rage, for
he thought the bank would succumb before it would risk another chance
with his wonderful luck.

But he let his money lay where he put it, and cried out to the banker to
go on with his game if he dared.

The latter; with firm set lips, cried out:

"Game ready, gentlemen--game ready."

The cards were drawn, and once more Wild Bill had won.

Coolly, as if money was no more than waste paper, Bill gathered up the
pile, and began to thrust it away in his pockets, when the disguised
woman, Addie Neidic, thrust a roll of thousand dollar notes into the
hands of the banker, and cried out:

"This bank is good for fifty thousand dollars. Let no braggart go away
and say he has bluffed the bank, till he breaks it!"

Wild Bill trembled from head to foot.

"I know you!" he hissed. "You are the woman who bluffed me at the
livery-stable. I'll win your fifty thousand dollars, and then blow the
top of any man's head off who'll take your part!"

"Play, don't boast; put up your money!" was the scornful reply.

In an instant Bill put every dollar he had won, every cent he had in the
world, and a gold watch on top of that, on the Jack.

Not another man around the table made a bet. A pin could have been
heard, had it fallen to the floor, so complete was the silence.

The banker cried out, "Game ready," and slowly drew the cards.

"Jack loses!" he cried, a second after, and Bill's pile, watch and all,
was raked in.

"Devil! woman or not, you shall die for this!" he shouted, and his hand
went to his belt.

But even as his hand touched his pistol, he heard that fearful whisper,
"sister," and saw a white face, wreathed in auburn hair rise over Addie
Neidic's shoulder, and with a groan, or a groaning cry of terror, he
fell back insensible to the floor.


CHAPTER IX.
THE GHOST AGAIN APPEARS.

When Wild Bill fell, the banker declared his game closed for the night;
and while Bill's friends gathered about him and sought to bring him to,
the woman, Addie Neidic, took up her money, and left by the rear
entrance, and the banker, with two or three of his friends, escorted her
home, fearing Bill and his gang might annoy her, if the latter came to
before she reached her residence.

The auburn-haired Texan did not go with her, but with a slouched hat
drawn over his head, and a Mexican blanket over his shoulders, stood
back in a corner, unobserved, to hear Bill's words when he came to, and
to see what next would appear on the desperado's programme.

"That ghost again! He came to break my luck."

These were the last words that Wild Bill spoke, when recovering his
consciousness; he glared out upon the crowd with bloodshot eyes.

"It was a woman who broke your luck. Addie Neidic backed the bank, or
'twould have given in," cried another.

"Who is Addie Neidic?" asked Bill, with a wondering gaze. "Oh! I
remember--the woman who called me a coward over at the livery-stable.
Who is she? Where does she live?"

"In a cottage west of town. They say she's rich! Let's go and clean out
her crib!" cried a ruffian who did not belong to Bill's party, but most
likely held some spite against Miss Neidic.

"Ay! That's the word! Let's clean out the house and set fire to it!"
cried another, a chum of the first speaker.

It required but a leader now to set the vile work going. And Wild Bill,
gradually recovering his reason, but mad with drink, and just realizing
that every dollar he had, and even his watch was gone, was just the man
for such a leader.

"I'll go! Show me the house, and we'll teach her to wear her own
clothes, and let men's games alone!" shouted Wild Bill.

In a moment fifty men were ready to go; but first they made an onslaught
on the wines and liquors on the sideboard of the gambling-room.

While they were madly pouring these down, the auburn-haired Texan
slipped from the room, and ran swiftly to the cottage of his fair
friend.

"Addie," he cried, as she opened the door to his signal, "Wild Bill and
a crowd of full fifty men are coming here to rob you, and burn your
house. They are mad with drink, and even if the stranger up stairs will
fight, we three can hardly hold them at bay, no matter how well we are
armed."

"We will not try it!" said Addie, calmly. "I had about made up my mind
to go with Persimmon Bill. He loves me so well that I ought to be able
and willing to bear hardship for his sake. I care little for the house
and furniture, though they are mine, and cost me a large sum. I have
money and jewelry that we can carry off. I will rouse my two servants
while you call your friend, and we will all be out of the house before
they come. No one but you knows where your horses are kept. Let that be
the place of rendezvous, and before daylight we will be safe with my
lover."

"No; I do not want to be with him yet, Addie. I will take this newly
found friend and see you safely in reach of Bill, but we will make camp
elsewhere till Bill's party starts. Then we'll be on his trail, and you
on ours, as it was agreed upon."

"As you, like, Jack. But we must hurry."

"All right--as soon as I bring my friend down, do you go with him and
your servants to the stable, carrying off what you can. Leave me here,
for I want to give Wild Bill one more good scare."

"As you please, but be careful he don't kill you while you scare him.
Ah! I hear their yells. We must be quick."

Willie Pond had a white, scared face when he came from his chamber, for
while the Texan told him of the danger, the yells and shouts of the
drunken ruffians who were approaching could be plainly heard. It seemed
as if a gang of demons from the lower regions had been let loose on
earth.

"Come with me," cried Addie Neidic, as Mr. Pond came down with his
valise in hand. "Be quick, or there will be murder under this roof."

Pond, seemingly dazed and bewildered, obeyed, and out by a rear door
hastened the fair owner of the doomed house, with her maid, or
man-servant, and Willie Pond, while the Texan, telling them he soon
would follow, remained.

Plainly now the shouts and vile threats of the drunken marauders came to
the ears of the single listener.

"I wish I had a barrel or two of gunpowder here," he muttered. "I'd make
them sing another tune."

Nearer and nearer they came, and now the Texan extinguished every light
but one, which he shaded with his hat. Then he looked to the front door
and windows and saw that they were all barred, except a single shutter
which he left so he could open it.

A minute later, and the tramp of a hundred hurrying feet came loudly on
his ear. Then shouts:

"Clean her out. Kill her and burn her crib!"

In a minute the crowd brought up before the closed doors.

"Open your doors, woman, or we'll shatter them!" cried Wild Bill.

"Open, or down goes everything!" shouted the crowd.

"Here, Bill; here is a shutter loose!" cried one.

Wild Bill sprang toward it, and as he did so the shutter flew open; he
saw a white face surrounded by auburn hair; he heard one gasping
cry--"sister"--and he fell back in terror, crying out:

"The ghost! the ghost!"

But some one fired a shot, the light went out, and all was dark where
the light had been.

Bill recovered from his shock almost as soon as he felt it, and joined
with the shout:

"Down with the doors! Down with the doors."

The crash that followed, told that the frail obstacles had given way,
and Bill cried out:

"In and clean the crib out. Ghost or no ghost, give us light, and clean
the crib out!"

Cheer after cheer told that the house was entered, and a minute later,
torches made from splintered doors and shutters, blazed in a dozen hands
as the ruffians ran to and for in search of plunder.

"The ghost. Find the ghost, or the woman!" yelled Bill.


CHAPTER X.
A MYSTERY.

The excited and ruffianly crowd dashed to and fro, overturning the
furniture, tearing aside curtains, and looking for plunder, but unable
to find anything of value, beyond the furniture, or to see a single
living person under the roof. Not a dollar in money, not a piece of
plate rewarded their search.

"Fire the crib! fire the crib!" came from fifty throats, and almost as
soon as spoken, the act was consummated.

Wild Bill, angered to find no one on whom to vent his wrath, or shake
his thirst for revenge, looked on the blaze as it rose with gloomy
satisfaction, muttering that he only wished the witch of a woman was
burning in it.

The crowd increased as the flames rose higher and tighter, but no one
tried to check them, and soon it was but a smoldering mass of ruins
where the pretty cottage had stood.

But the late occupant, unharmed, was a mile away, and having just paid
off and discharged her faithful servants, was on the point of mounting
to ride off with the Texan and Mr. Pond, when the last shout of the
dispersing crowd reached her ears.

She smiled when she heard it, and said:

"I can afford all the harm they have done, I led but a lonesome life
there. I feel that the change I am about to make will be for the
better."

The three, with two loaded horses besides those they rode, now moved
quietly but swiftly out of the suburbs of the town, where the horses had
been stabled, and with the Texan leading the way, steered to the
westward, having no compass but the stars.

For an hour the three rode on, and then, pointing to some timber ahead,
the Texan said:

"Addie, there is where you will find him whom you seek. Tell him I have
not altered any of my plans, and that I shall lay in camp to-morrow at
Lone-tree Spring, an hour's gallop south of the Twenty-mile Creek. The
next morning I will follow the trail we spoke of. And now, Addie,
good-by, and don't forgot me."

"You know I will not, I hope yet to see you happy, and to be happier
than I am now. We shall meet again, perhaps, Mr. Pond, but good-night
for now."

And while the Texan and Mr. Pond remained still on their horses, she
rode on, leading one pack-horse, toward a growth of trees seen dimly
ahead.

The Texan remained where he was until he heard her give the signal and
receive an answer, and then turning to Pond, he said:

"She is safe; we may as well move on. We have a long ride to where I
intend to camp."

"All right," said the other, "This night's work seems almost like a
dream. I can hardly realize that Wild Bill would lead such a disgraceful
crowd of ruffians, and do such a dastardly act as to burn a woman out of
house and home."

"Rum takes all the _man_ out of those who use it," said the Texan. "I
use it myself sometimes, I know, but it is when I feel as if I was all
giving out, and couldn't go through what was before me. And I feel
abashed when I think I need such a stimulant to fire up my flagging
nature."

Pond made no reply, but rode on thoughtfully at the rapid pace which the
other led, the pack animal keeping close in the rear. At last he asked:

"Who did Miss Neidic expect to meet where we left her?"

"A brave man who loves her dearly, but who has been driven in his
desperation by cruel injustice to do some work which keeps him outside
of towns and settlements for the present. His love is returned by her,
and henceforth she will share his dangers and his hardships."

"None can tell but those who test it, how deeply, how entirely, and how
lasting a true woman loves," said Pond, with a sigh.

"And none but a woman wronged can tell how bitterly she can hate!" said
the other, as he dashed his spurs into his horse and galloped on.

Miles were swiftly passed over, and the gray of dawn was just beginning
to soften night's darkness in the east, when the Texan exclaimed:

"Here we are; now for a rest of one day, at least."

And as he spoke he drew up his horse by the side of a small pool of
water, which trickled out from under the roots of a single large tree.
For an acre or so around it there were bushes growing as high as the
horses, but when light came, no other growth but that of short buffalo
grass and prickly cactus could be seen.

The Texan unsaddled his horse, and unloaded the pack animal before Pond
could get his saddle ungirthed. Then the Texan sprang to his assistance,
finished stripping the horse, and with a long lariat picketed it out in
the best grass. His own horses he turned loose, saying they never would
stray from camp.

Then, taking his rifle, he stepped out from camp, saying he was going
after meat.

In fifteen or twenty minutes, Pond heard the crack of his rifle and in
less than half an hour the young man was back, with the fat saddle of a
young antelope on his shoulder.

"Here is meat enough for to-day and to-morrow," he said. "Next day we
will be on buffalo ground, and we'll have some hump ribs to roast."

Gathering a few dry, light sticks, he soon had a hot and almost
smokeless fire ablaze. On the coals of this he set his coffee-pot,
broiled some meat, and while Mr. Pond looked on in surprise, he quickly
had a nice breakfast of antelope steak, coffee, and a few hard biscuit
which were in the pack.

While Pond took hold and ate heartily, praising the food by his actions
much as his words, the Texan ate lightly, yet all that he wanted--not
touching the bread, but using meat entirely.

"There'll be the more left for you," said he, when Pond noticed that he
ate no bread. "I never care for anything but meat on the plains. It
gives bone and muscle, and that is what we need here. The more simple
the food, the better the health. We use ourselves to salt, but we would
be just as well off without it. Eat hearty, and take a good nap. We have
nothing to do to-day. The party whose trail will be our guide to the
"Hills" will not start till late. We shall not move until to-morrow
morning, and then I'll show you the coals of the camp-fire which they'll
light to-night. There will be no need for any shelter but this tree
overhead. Everything looks clean and dry sky-ward--there's no better
camping ground than this for a couple on the plains. The water is good,
feed plenty, and we don't require much fire this time of year."

Pond, tired and sleepy, was only too glad to take the Texan's advice, so
he spread his blanket, lay down, and soon was in the land of dreams.

Meantime the Texan, with a small field-glass in his hand, mounted the
tree, and from a perch on its uppermost limbs, scanned the prairie in
all directions, but most often in the direction from which they had
come.

Nothing was in sight but wild game, scattered here and there, and he
soon came down and prepared to take a rest on his own account.

"They'll not pass till afternoon," he muttered, "and I may as well rest
a few hours while I can in peace and safety."

He took a long and curious look at the form of his sleeping traveling
companion, and a strange smile flitted over his face, as he muttered:

"A mystery, but I can solve it."


CHAPTER XI.
IN THE WILDS.

If ever a man was astonished, when he responded to that after midnight
signal at the mouth of Dead Man's Hollow, it was the outlaw, Persimmon
Bill. He came from his place of concealment expecting to meet the Texan
with news, and found instead Addie Neidic, and with her, on a pack
horse, all the wealth and apparel she had in the world.

"Addie, love, what does this mean?" he cried, as she sprang from the
horse and threw herself into his arms.

"It means this, Bill. I have come to stay with you, go where you go,
live as you live, and die where you die!"

"Addie, dearest, did I not tell you to wait till I could give you a home
in peace and quietness!"

"Yes, Bill, but there were those that would not let me wait. To-night,
had it not been for thy Texan friend, most likely I would have been
murdered by a mob of drunken ruffians led on by Wild Bill. Warned in
time, I escaped with all that I had worth saving, except my house and
furniture. Those they burned; I saw the blaze from my stable, where I
went to get my horses to come to you."

"By all that's fiendish, this is more than I can bear! I'll ride in with
my Sioux and burn the cursed town!"

"No, Bill; for my sake keep cool and hear me. I am glad it is done. I
was wretched and lonely there--how lonely no words may tell. I was in
constant anxiety on your account. I trembled daily, hourly, lest I
should hear of your death or capture. Now I shall be with you, know of
your safety, or if you are in peril, share the danger with you."

"But, Addie, you can never endure the privations and the fatigue of such
a life as I must lead at present. Soon I must be on a bloody war-path.
We will have regular troops to meet, great battles to fight."

"And it will be my glory and pride to be with you in all your perils--to
show your red allies what a pale-faced woman dares and can do for him
whom she loves."

"Dearest, I see not how it can be helped. But I grieve to see you
suffer."

"Do not grieve, my love, while my face is bright with smiles. Do not let
your heart be heavy while mine is full of joy. Think but this--I am
thine until death. We will never part while life thrills our veins. Your
triumphs shall be mine; I will glory in your courage, and in your
enterprise. I have arms and well know their use. No warrior in all your
following can ride better than I. That I am fearless I really believe,
for twice inside of ten hours have I defied Wild Bill in his anger, and
laughed when his hand was on his pistol. But take me to your camp. I am
tired, and the night air is chilly; and take care of the pack horse. My
silver and over one hundred thousand dollars in money is on his back,
and what clothing I shall need for a time."

"You bring a rich dowry, Addie, but your love is worth more than all the
treasures the world could show. Come, darling, I will take you as the
most precious gift a wild, bad man ever received."

"You are not bad, Bill. You are my hero and my love!"

Bill could only press his answer on her lips, and then with the bridle
of her horses in his hand, and her arm linked in his, he walked back up
the winding bed of the ravine for near a quarter of a mile.

Then he emerged into an open space where there were full a hundred
Indian ponies staked out, with their owners lying in groups about near
small smoldering camp-fires. A few only were on guard, and these on
seeing their white chief appear paid no apparent attention to the
companion, though they doubtless saw her. It is the Indian's nature to
be stoical and never to manifest surprise, no matter what occurs.

Inside the line where the ponies were staked was a small brush house,
and in front of this Bill halted with his led horses, with his own hands
unsaddled one and unpacked the other, leaving packs and saddles in front
of the house.

Well he knew they were as safe there as they would have been behind
bolts and bars in the settlements--even more safe.

"Come in, my love," he said. "The Sioux will care for the horses. Come
in and receive the best a fond heart can give in the way of shelter and
comfort."

"It is all I ask," she murmured, as with him she entered the "Outlaw's
Home."


CHAPTER XII.
ON THE TRAIL.

It was high noon when the young Texan woke up and when he rose Pond
still lay sleeping. The former laughed lightly, as he rose and bathed
his face in the limpid water, for the beard of the sleeper had got all
awry, showing that it was false.

"No need for a disguise here," said the Texan. "But let him keep it up.
When the time comes I'll read him a lesson."

Cutting some antelope stakes, the Texan built up a smokeless fire, and
had them nicely broiled when Willie Pond woke up.

"Mercy! how I have slept!" he said, as he looked at the sun, already
fast declining toward the west.

"You are not used to passing sleepless nights," said the Texan. "When we
are fairly launched into the Indian country you may not sleep so sound.
Take hold and eat. A hearty eater on the plains generally stands travel
best. To-morrow, it is likely, we'll have a fifty-mile ride or more, if
those Black Hillers get sobered down to their work. They'll do well if
they make their twenty to-day."

Pond went and bathed his face and hands in the limpid water before
eating, and as he expressed it, "rubbed the sleep" out of his eyes; then
he went at the toothsome steak with appetite not at all impaired by the
pure open air he was breathing.

The meal, taken with comfort and deliberation, occupied a half hour or
more, and as there were no dishes to wash, "clearing up things" only
consisting in tossing the bones out of the way, wiping their knives on a
bunch of grass, scouring them with a plunge or two in the dry sand, they
were all ready for next meal-time.

"Your horse hears something, so does mine," said the Texan, pointing to
the animals, which suddenly stopped feeding, and with their ears pricked
forward, looked off to the east-ward.

"I can see nothing. What can alarm them!" said Pond.

"They hear the tramp of the Black Hills party, I think. Horses have far
better hearing than we have, and will feel a jar of the ground that
would not attract our attention. I want no better sentinel than my
mustang, and your Black Hawk seems to take to the watch by instinct. I
will go up on my look-out post and see if anything is in sight."

Slinging the strap of his field-glass over his shoulder, the Texan
hurriedly climbed up the tree. Seated among the top-most limbs, he
adjusted his glass and looked away to the northeast.

"There they are!" he cried.

"Who? What?" exclaimed Pond, rather nervously.

"The Black Hillers, struggling along mighty careless. Their route covers
half a mile in length; when in good marching order it should not cover a
hundred yards, with scouts in the rear, front, and on both flanks, at
twice the distance. That is the way we travel in Texas."

"Wild Bill has been a scout so long I should think he would know all
about it," said Pond.

"A heap them scouts know who travel with Uncle Sam's troop's!" said the
Texan, in a tone of contempt. "Let them ride with a gang of Texan
Rangers a few months and they'd learn something. Your troops can't move,
or stop to water, without sounding their bugles to tell the Indians
where they are. In the morning, all day, and at night, it is toot, toot
with their infernal horns, and the reds know just where to find 'em. One
of our Texan Ranger bands will travel a hundred miles and you'll not
hear noise enough to wake a coyote from them all. These Black Hillers
travel slow to-day. They're sore-headed from their spree, I reckon."

"They deserve to be. Drunkenness always punishes the drunkard. I have no
pity for them."

"Can you see any sign of them from where you stand?" asked the Texan.

Pond looked carefully off in the direction the other pointed, and
replied:

"No. They do not even raise dust."

"Then we are safe here from observation. They go too slow to make dust,
and they're moving over grass any way. It will be dark before they reach
their camping-ground. But to make the next, which is full fifty miles
away, they'll have to start earlier. Ah! what does that mean?"

"What startles you?"

"Nothing _startles_ me, but a couple of men from that party have dashed
out from the line at a gallop, and they ride this way."

"Heaven! I hope Bill--Wild Bill--is not one of them!" cried Pond,
greatly excited. "Are you sure they are coming here?"

"Riding _this way_ does not assume that they're coming _here!"_ said the
Texan, coolly. "They may have flanked off to look for some fresh meat.
Yes, that is it," he added. "They bear up to the north now; they want to
go ahead of the party so as to kill something fresh for supper. Captain
Jack kept sober when all the rest were drinking last night, and I'll
wager he is one of the hunters, and most likely Sam Chichester is the
other. We're safe from observation, Mr. Pond, so don't get nervous.
We'll not see Wild Bill to-day."

Pond smiled, but there was a tremor about him that showed he was easy to
take alarm and hard to get over it.

The Texan came down from the tree and busied himself in gathering some
dry fuel--small sticks which would make a quick hot blaze and little or
no smoke. Then he cut off some long thin flakes of antelope flesh from
the saddle hanging on the tree, and half cooked, half dried it.

"Meat may be a little unhandy to get in the rear of that straggling
band," he said. "If we have a little on hand, it will do no hurt."

"You are thoughtful," said Pond. "I would make a poor manager, I fear,
on the plains. I should forget everything until it was needed."

"You are not too old to learn," said the Texan, laughing.

"Excuse my asking the question, but have you long been acquainted with
that strange and beautiful woman, Addie Neidic?"

"Not very long, myself. But I had a brother who knew her very well, and
loved her almost to madness, She was his true friend, but she did not
love him."

"Is he living now?"

"Living? _No!_ If ever you meet Wild Bill--but no, it is my secret. Ask
me no more about him."

Every word just spoken flew from the Texan's lips like sheets of fire;
his eyes flashed and his face flushed, while his form trembled from head
to foot.

"Forgive me! I did not mean to wound your feelings!" said Pond, moved by
the excitement of the other.

"No matter; I know you didn't. No matter. It will all come right one of
these days. I wish my heart was stone!"

Pond was silent, for he saw the Texan's eyes fill with tears, and he
seemed to know that nothing which he could say could soften a grief so
deeply felt.

The Texan was the first to speak.

"Addie Neidic is a strange, but a noble girl," he said. "Her father was
a rough sporting man, but her mother was a lady born and bred. The
mother lived long enough to educate Addie in her own ways, but she died
just as Addie was budding into beauty. Addie met her lover when he was a
soldier at Fort Russell, near Cheyenne. After he was driven to desertion
by cruelty and injustice, she met him from time to time, and when her
father died, leaving her all his fortune, she moved up to Laramie. I
think I know now the reason why--she could, meet him more often."

"You said that he was an outlaw."

"Yes; when he deserted he killed the two sentinels who were on guard
over him, then killed a mounted officer and rode away on his horse. He
was hunted for by whole companies as fast as they could be mounted, but
he could not be taken. But after that, if a soldier or an officer rode
alone a mile or more from the post, he seldom returned, but his body
told that Persimmon Bill, the 'Soldier Killer,' as he was called, still
lived around. Wild Bill has done bloody work--cruel work in his time,
but Persimmon Bill has killed ten men to his one."

"It is strange that an intelligent woman like Addie Neidic should love
such a man."

"No--he is both a martyr and a hero in her eyes. A more stately form, a
nobler face, never met favor in the eyes of woman. To his foes fierce
and relentless, to her he is gentle and kind. She will never meet aught
but tenderness at his hands."

"I wish I could have seen him."

"You may yet see him, Mr. Pond. He travels the plains as free as the
antelopes which bound from ridge to ridge. Adopted by the Sioux nation,
known to them as the 'White Elk,' he has become a great chief, and their
young braves follow in his lead with a confidence which makes them
better than the solders sent to subdue them."


CHAPTER XIII.
THE BLACK HILLERS EN ROUTE.

The young Texan had judged rightly when he conjectured that it was Sam
Chichester and Captain Jack that had ridden out from the straggling
column of the Black Hillers, as he saw from his eyrie in the tree.

They had two objects in doing so. The ostensible object was to reach the
camping-ground first with some game for supper, but another was to
converse, unheard by the others, on the probable dangers of the trip,
and means to meet and overcome such dangers.

"There is no doubt the Sioux are on the war-path," said Chichester to
Captain Jack, as they rode on side by side.

"None in the world. They've taken a hundred scalps or more already on
the Black Hills route. The troops have been ordered to move up the
Missouri and Yellowstone, and that will make them worse than ever. We'll
be lucky if we get through without a brush. That was a mean thing, the
burning out of that Neidic girl last night, wasn't it?"

"Yes, Crawford, and if Persimmon Bill ever comes across Wild Bill, _his
goose is cooked!_ Mark that. There is not a surer shot, or a deadlier
foe on earth then Persimmon Bill. He has defied the whole border for the
past three years--ridden right into a military post and shot men down,
and got away without a scratch. They say he has been adopted by the
Sioux, and if he has, with such backing he'll do more mischief than
ever."

"I don't believe Bill would have injured the woman had he been sober. It
was a mean thing to do any way, and I'm sorry any of our party had a
hand in it."

"So am I. But look, Jack, you can see tree-tops ahead. That is the
timber on Twenty-mile Creek. There we camp. We'll spread a little here,
and the one who sees a fat elk first will drop him. We'll keep within
sight and hearing of each other, and if one fires the other will close
on him."

"All right, Sam."

And the brave young scout, all the better for being ever temperate and
steady, gently diverged to the right, while Chichester bore off to the
left.

Game in the shape of prairie hens rose right and left as they rode on,
and every little while a band of antelopes, taking the alarm, would be
seen bounding over the sandy ridges, while an elk farther off startled
by the antelope, would take fright and trot off in style.

The two hunters were now nearing the timber, and they rode more slowly
and with greater caution.

Suddenly, as Chichester rose over a small ridge, he came upon a band of
a dozen or more noble elk, which trotted swiftly off to the right, where
Captain Jack, seeing them coming, had sprung from his horse and crouched
low on the ridge.

Chichester saw his movement, and lowered the rifle which he had raised
for a flying shot, for he knew by their course the elk would go so close
to Crawford that he could take his pick among them and make a sure shot.

The result justified his movement, for the noble animals, seeing only a
riderless horse, scented no danger, and kept on until they were within
easy pistol-shot of the experienced hunter.

Crack went his rifle, and the largest, fattest elk of the band gave one
mighty bound and fell, while the rest bounded away in another course,
fully alarmed at the report of a gun so close and its effects so deadly
to the leader of the band.

"You've got as nice a bit of meat here as ever was cut up," cried
Chichester to Captain Jack, as he came in at a gallop, while Crawford
was cutting the throat of the huge elk. "The boys will have enough to
choke on when we get to camp."

"I reckon they'll not growl over this," said Jack, laughing. "I never
had an easier shot. They came down from your wind, and never saw me till
I raised with a bead on this one's heart."

The two hunters had their meat all cut up and in condition for packing
to camp when the column came up.

One hour later, just as the sun began to dip beyond the trees on the
creek side, the party went into camp, and soon, over huge and carelessly
built camp-fires, slices of elk steak and elk ribs were roasting and
steaming in a most appetizing way.

The party were hungry, and the hungriest among them were those who had
drank the hardest the night before, for till now they had not been able
to eat. But the day's travel had worked some of the poison rum out of
them, and their empty stomachs craved something good and substantial,
and they had it in the fresh, juicy elk meat.

It was a hard and unruly crowd to manage on the start. Chichester found
it difficult to get men to act as sentinels, for they mostly declared
that there was no danger of Indians and no need to set guards.

Little did they dream that even then, within three hours' ride, or even
less, there were enough blood-thirsty Sioux to meet them in fair fight,
and defeat them, too.

Only by standing a watch himself and putting Crawford on for the most
dangerous hour, that of approaching dawn, did Captain Chichester manage
to have his first night's camp properly guarded.

Wild Bill, gloomy and morose, said he didn't "care a cuss" if all the
Indians of the Sioux nation pitched upon them. He knew his time was
close at hand, and what did it matter to him whether a red wore his
scalp at his belt or some white man gloried in having wiped him out.

But the night passed without disturbance, and a very early start was
made next morning.

Chichester made the men all fill their canteens with water, and the
animals were all led into the stream to drink their fill, for there was
a long, dry march to the next camping-ground.

Chichester and Captain Jack both knew the route well, for they had both
been over it in one of the first prospecting parties to the "Hills."


CHAPTER XIV.
POND SEIZED WITH TERROR.

Nothing of note occurred in the little camp at the Lone-tree Spring that
first night. Just before sunset the young Texan and Willie Pond took a
gallop of four or five miles to exercise their horses and use themselves
to the saddle, and when they came back with freshened appetites, ate
heartily, and afterward slept soundly.

The next morning both woke with the sun, and after a hearty meal the
pack-horse was loaded, the other animals saddled, and the route taken
for the Hills.

A ride of six or seven miles brought them into the trail of the larger
party, and at noon, or a little before, the Texan halted on the
camping-ground occupied by that party the night before.

The embers of their fires were yet alive, and over them the Texan cooked
dinner for himself and companion.

Pointing to the bones and scraps of meat thrown around, the Texan
laughed, and said:

"They've plenty now, but before they get through they'll be more
careful, for if the Indians are thick, game will be hard to get; and I'm
thinking they'll find Indians before they're three days out."

"You said the Sioux would be friendly to you?"

"Yes; I have a talisman. Did you not see me put this eagle feather,
tipped with crimson, in my hat last night before I rode out?"

"Yes. Is that your talisman?"

"It is. It is from the coronet of a Sioux chief, and was given to me as
a safeguard."

"I wish I had one."

"Keep with me and you will not need it."

"Do not fear that I will go far from you. Alone, I should feel utterly
lost on these prairies. Where will we camp to-night?"

"Very close to the party that is ahead of us. They will go to a creek
and a piece of timber that is fully fifty miles from here. About a mile
from where I think they will camp there is a small ravine, in which we
will find what grass and water we need. It will be near nightfall when
we get there, if we do our best in travel. But if we ride hard, we'll
take the longer rest. I do not care to keep too close to them as a
general thing, but to-night we can't help it."

Their nooning was short, and taking the precaution to water their horses
well, and fill their canteens, they rode forward over the well-defined
trail quite swiftly.

Toward night they could see the trail freshened, but nothing was in
sight except a distant mark when night fell, which the Texan said was
the timber where the party ahead would camp. Just as the sun was setting
smoke was seen to rise in that direction, and the Texan spoke
contemptuously of the carelessness which would thus expose a
camping-place to those who were miles distant.

"If a captain of a ranger band would do such a thing in Texas," he said,
"his men would reduce him to the ranks and put one in his place who knew
how to be cautious."

"It surely is imprudent. But they are a large party to cook for, and
must have large fires," said Pond.

The young Texan laughed scornfully.

"Let every man make his own fire, make such fires as you have seen me
make, and the smoke could not be seen a rifle-shot away," was the
answer. "That party will never reach the Hills. Mark that! If Indians
are within twenty miles they'll see a smoke like that. But what is it to
us? We're safe."

"I am not so selfish as to wish harm to reach them, even if we are
safe!" said Pond, testily.

"That is as much as to say that I am selfish. Well, I acknowledge it. I
go in for number one. If they can't take ordinary care of themselves,
let them suffer."

Willie Pond made no answer, but rode on in silence. Night was now upon
them, and all was still except the thud of the galloping hoofs upon the
plain.

Suddenly a gleam of fire was seen far ahead. The Texan noted it, and
swerved off to the left.

"There is the camp," he said. "I can easily find our resting-place now.
I was afraid we would not see their fires until we were right up to the
timber. But they are careless with their fire as they are with their
smoke. We shall have moonlight in an hour, and in less time we'll be in
camp."

He rode on now, more slowly, for the horses were tired, and he seemed to
know so well where to go that there was no haste.

The moon was just above the trees when the Texan led the way into a
narrow ravine, with heavy timber on either side. Up this, full ten
minutes they rode, and then an exclamation of pleased wonder broke from
the lips of Willie Pond. For they came out into an open circular plain
or area of several acres in extent, covered with rich grass and centered
by a bright, mirror-like lake.

"What a lovely spot!" cried Pond. "Who on earth would dream of finding
such a paradise inside of gates so dark and rude."

"One who had been here before," said the Texan. "But speak low, for
careless as they may be over there in camp, some one might be outside
listening."

"Why, it is over a mile away, is it not?"

"Yes, along the line of the wood. But over this cliff, were it crossed,
it is not a quarter of that distance."

And the Texan pointed to a rugged tree-crowned cliff on their right.

"I will be careful," said Pond. "My enthusiasm breaks out when I see
beautiful things. I can hardly restrain myself."

"We will unsaddle and camp. Our horses are tired, and need food and
drink," was all that the Texan said.

And he at once unloaded the pack-horse, and unsaddled his mustang.

Pond, becoming more handy, now did the same for Black Hawk, who seemed
to take quite a fancy to his new master, curving his back proudly under
his caressing touch.

"Shall I picket him, as we did at the last camp?" asked Pond, when he
had unsaddled his horse.

"No, let him go with mine. They have been together long enough to mate,
and they'll feed peaceably in company. Mine will never stray or
stampede, and the other will not go off alone."

The simple camp was soon fixed; and as they had cooked meat left, and
biscuit, with plenty of water to drink, both agreed that there was no
necessity to build any fire.

"The smell of smoke might reach some sharp-nosed scout over there," said
the Texan, "for the wind blows that way. We'll eat, and then turn in,
for rest will come good to both of us."

The horses plunged off to the water and drank, and then went to
cropping the luxuriant grass, while their masters ate their suppers
with appetites strengthened by their long and wearying ride.

After they had supped, Willie Pond would, as usual, have enjoyed his
dainty cigarette, had not the Texan warned him that tobacco smoke would
scent farther than any other, and might be more dangerous, in betraying
their presence, than anything else.

So Mr. Pond had to forego his smoke. He took a blanket, and moving up to
a little mossy knoll just under the edge of the cliff, threw himself
down to sleep.

The Texan also took his blanket, but he lay down near the saddles and
packs.

Pond was so very weary that he soon fell asleep. How long he slept he
did not know, but a strange, oppressive dream woke him, and with the
moonlight, shining full in the valley, while he lay shaded beneath a
tree and the overhanging cliff, he saw a sight which froze his very
heart with a mortal terror.

The ravine by which he and his companion had entered was filled with
mounted Indians, who were riding silently into the little valley.


CHAPTER XV.
CHEATED OF THEIR PREY.

Literally dumb with terror, so weak that he could not rise, Pond saw
this strange cavalcade moving up toward the little lake, and looked to
the spot where the Texan had lain down to see if he had yet taken the
alarm.

To his wonder and redoubled alarm, he saw the Texan not alone, but with
a white man, dressed in buckskin, by his side, and a woman also,
apparently in friendly converse, calmly waiting the Indian advance.

Recognizing at a glance the woman as Addie Neidic, Pond realized that
the man must be no other than Persimmon Bill, and that his followers
were the blood-thirsty Sioux, whom he headed.

"Heaven help me! There is some fearful treachery here. Wild Bill and his
companions are lost if they are not warned in time. How can it be done?"

How strangely, as if by intuition, strategy, and cunning thought come to
some when environed by unlooked-for danger.

Without a moment's hesitation, Pond so arranged his blanket that if
glanced at it would appear he was yet sleeping under it, for he left his
hat on the stone where his head had been, and his rifle leaning against
the tree right over it.

Then, bare-headed, with no weapons but his pistols and knife in his
belt, he crept off up the hill-side with the silence and stealth of a
scout who had been a life-time in the business. He wondered at himself
as he began to scale the mountain-side, not daring to look back, how he
could creep up amid those fearful crags so noiselessly, and how he could
have got away unseen, when the Texan and those who were with him were
not a pistol shot away.

On, on he kept, ever seeking the shadowed spots, where no moonlight
could reveal his form, until at last he was on the very crest of the
hill. Looking down he plainly saw the camp-fires of the Black Hillers
below. They were most likely buried in slumber, and, if they had
sentinels out, his life would be endangered by a rapid approach. But of
this he seemed not to think as he hurried almost recklessly down through
thickets, over crags, and along rugged gulches.

How he got down he hardly knew, but he was down, and rushing toward the
nearest fire, when he heard a stern, short summons close in his front:

"Halt! Who comes there?"

A man, armed with rifle and pistols, stepped from the shadow of a tree,
and Pond gasped out:

"A friend. A friend come to save all your lives. There are a hundred
Indians within a mile of you, led by the desperado Persimmon Bill."

"Who are you?" was the stern inquiry.

"Wild Bill will know me. Take me to him, quick!" was the response.

"To our captain first. Come along!" said the sentinel.

The next moment Willie Pond was in the presence of Sam Chichester and
Captain Jack, telling his story.

"It looks like truth, and if it is, the quicker we get out of here the
better. If we can get fifteen or twenty miles the start we may keep it,"
said Chichester.

"He says Wild Bill knows him. Where is Bill?" cried Jack. "Ah, there he
comes."

Bill, awakened by hearing his name called, was rising, and now
approached the party.

Pond sprang forward, and addressed him hurriedly in whispered tones.

Wild Bill for an instant seemed lost in astonishment, his first
exclamation being, "Great Heaven! you here?"

But after he heard the whispered words he only added, addressing
Chichester:

"Captain, this friend of mine will not lie. We are in danger, and he has
risked his life to save us. I want a spare horse for him, and the sooner
we get from here, the better for our hair."

With as little noise as possible, the whole party were aroused, and the
danger explained. Quickly the animals were saddled, and in less than
twenty minutes the camp-ground was all deserted, though more fuel had
been purposely heaped on the fires to keep up the appearance of
occupation, if scouts should be sent to examine the camp.

"It lacks four hours yet to daylight!" said Chichester to Captain Jack,
"We'll get just that much start, for they'll make no attack until just
as day begins to break. I know the ways of them red cusses only too
well."

"You haven't much the advantage of me in that kind of knowledge, Sam.
But if that fellow was anywhere right as to their numbers, and the Sioux
are well mounted, they'll bother us yet before we get to the hills, no
matter if we do get eighteen or twenty miles the start!"

"We'll give 'em a long race and a tough tussle before they get our hair
any way!" said Chichester. "I wonder who that fellow is? Bill seems to
like him right well, for they ride as close as their horses can move
together. Bill has supplied him with a hat--he came in bare-headed, you
know."

"Yes; he must have had a terrible climb to get over to us. The only
wonder is he got away undiscovered."

"He said he left his blanket in a shape to make them think he was
sleeping under it."

"He must be an old hand to fool them so nicely."

"He doesn't look like it, He doesn't ride like a scout or a
plainsman--he sits his horse too gracefully."

"No matter; one thing is certain. Wild Bill knows him well, trusts him,
and they stick as close together as twins."

"Yes, Captain Jack, I wish you'd take the rear and make those packers
keep up. There must be no lagging. If a horse or mule fails they must be
left. I'll keep the advance going."

Thus the Black Hillers swept on at a gallop, knowing that a merciless
fate was theirs if overtaken by the Sioux.


CHAPTER XVI.
THE PURSUIT.

The young Texan had not dreamed of being followed so soon by Persimmon
Bill and his Indians, and he had lain down to sleep as honestly and
confidently as Willie Pond, when he dropped down by the saddles and
pack.

He was aroused by a touch on his shoulder, when he awoke and was
surprised to find Bill and Addie Neidic standing by his side.

"Where are your Indians?" was the first question the Texan asked, as
Bill whispered, in a low tone:

"I am here. I have followed the trail a little sooner than I thought I
would. The Indians are in the ravine waiting for my signal to come in
and let their horses feed and rest before we attack. Where is your
friend?" continued Bill.

"Sound asleep under that tree up there. He sleeps like a log, and will
not wake till I shake him up. I never saw such a sleeper. Yesterday he
spent most of the day snoring."

"It is well. There is no use of alarming him before we are ready for
work. I will give the signal, and let my warriors file in."

The outlaw waved a blanket in the air, and the Indians silently filed
into the valley. At another signal they turned their horses loose to
graze, and then gathered in groups out on the plain to take food and
rest themselves while their leader conversed with the Texan, whom having
seen before, they knew as his friend.

Meantime, the Texan motioning Addie Neidic and her lover to take seats
on his blanket, conversed with the latter in a low tone on the plan of
attack.

"I shall not make it until just as day dawns--for two reasons," said the
outlaw. "First, then they will keep the most careless guard; second,
when light is coming, we can see how to kill, and how to save the two
whose lives are to be spared. We will do the work in a hurry when it is
done. I have given my warriors their orders; most of them know Wild Bill
and Captain Jack, for both have been on the reservations often when they
have been in. For these reds can go where I cannot, and get arms and
ammunition where I would not dare apply for them."

"Shall I not make you and Addie some coffee?" asked the Texan. "I can do
it without danger, for I have a small alcohol lamp in my pack, which I
had to keep for use when I could not get fuel.

"It will be refreshing, indeed, if there is no risk in making it," said
Addie Neidic.

"There is none, and I will soon have it made," was the reply. Shaded
from even Indian observation by the blanket he raised on some bushes,
the young Texan speedily made a quart cupful of strong coffee, and
shared it between the lady and her outlaw lover. It and some cooked meat
he had gave them strength, and then all three lay down like the others
to rest for an hour or two, the outlaw bidding one of his warriors keep
watch, and to wake him when the morning star was seen over the trees in
the east.

And little dreaming that their intended victims were far away from their
camp, the Indians and their leader took rest preparation to their deadly
work.

When his warrior sentinel awoke him, Persimmon Bill found that the
morning star was well up, and it was full time to be moving toward the
scene of action.

"You will stay here in the valley, dear Addie, till we come back," he
said. "We will steal away quietly, and not wake that sleeping stranger
if it can be helped, for he might, in his terror, fire his gun, or in
some way give an alarm. Should he wake, hearing firing over there, keep
him quiet with persuasion or your revolver until we return, and then if
he is obstreperous, I will quiet him."

"Let me go with you, Bill," she said. "I am not afraid."

"It must not be, dear Addie, There is no need of your being exposed
_there,_ and it is well to have _him_ watched here. Our main certainty
of complete success is in a surprise. The least alarm may prevent it."

"I will remain then," she said. "And you need not fear for any alarm
from him--for I know I can keep him quiet should he wake. I have a keen
persuader here, if I have to use it."

And she touched a poniard in her belt, which also contained two good
revolvers.

"An outlaw's bride," she added, smiling, "must be prepared to take care
of herself."

The Indians now began silently to form their march, as they saw their
white leader mount, and the young Texan also get his horse. The Black
Hawk seemed uneasy that his master was not at hand, and the Texan was
obliged to tie him by the side of the horse ridden by Addie Neidic
before he would be quiet.

"It is strange that Mr. Pond does not wake with all this noise," said
the Texan, as he rode off with Persimmon Bill. "But as I told you, he is
the soundest sleeper I ever traveled with."

The Indians now filed away out of the valley as silently as they entered
it, for, knowing the close vicinity of the other camp, they were aware
how necessary it was to be cautious.

And now Addie Neidic stood alone, while the morning star rose higher and
higher, gazing at what she supposed was the sleeping man on the knoll.

The moon had got so far around that she could see his hat, the rifle
against the tree, and the outlines of his form, as she believed.

"I will move up and secure his rifle," she thought, after the band had
been gone some time. "He might wake; and in his first alarm use it
foolishly."

So she moved with a noiseless step within reach of the gun, and the next
moment it was in her possession. Then she looked down, to see if he
showed signs of waking. To her surprise, she saw no motions of a
breathing form under the blanket. A closer look told her that if a form
had been beneath the blanket, or a head under that hat, it was gone.
And, feeling with her hand under the blanket, she, found it cold; no
warm living form had been there for hours.

"He has been alarmed, seen us, and crept away--perhaps is hiding in
terror in the brush," she muttered.

She did not even then realize that he might have fled away to alarm the
other camp. She did not even understand several shrill yells, which
reached her ear from over the hill. She had not been with the Sioux long
enough to know their cries. These yells were the signal cries of scouts
sent in, who had found a deserted camp. She only wondered, after hearing
the yells, that she did not hear firing--the sounds of battle raging.

While she yet wondered, day dawned, finding her standing there by the
empty blanket of Willie Pond, holding his rifle, and looking up the hill
to see if he would not creep out, now that light had come and the
Indians had gone.

A shrill neigh from the black horse called her attention toward the
animal, and she saw the Texan riding into the valley on a keen run.

"Where is Bill?" she asked, as she ran to meet the rider, with Pond's
blanket, hat, and rifle in her hand.

"Gone at full speed with his warriors on the trail of the Black Hillers,
who have been alarmed in some way, and, have got at least two hours
start. He sent me back to bring you and Pond along."

"Here is all of Mr. Pond that can be found," said Addie, holding up what
she had found. "I went to the nest, the bird had flown, and the nest was
cold."

The Texan rode quickly to the spot, and in a moment saw the trail over
the ridge made by Pond when he had escaped.

"It was he who gave the alarm--him whom I believed so sleepy!" he
muttered. "He must have seen Bill and the Indians when they first came,
arranged his blanket and hat as you found it, and crept over the hill.
When I cautioned him to keep quiet, I told him how near and in what
direction they were. I see it all. Green as I took him to be, he has
outwitted us all!"

"It is so. This is his horse--a noble animal, too. We will take that
with us."

"Of course; and we must hurry on, for Bill is miles on the trail
already. He will be even more surprised than we when he knows how the
Black Hillers got warning. I'll not give much for Mr. Pond's hair," said
the Texan.

In a few seconds the horse which Addie had ridden was saddled and ready,
and, leaving his pack-horse behind, but leading the Black Hawk, the
young Texan, with Addie Neidic by his side, dashed at full speed over
the valley, and out of the ravine.

Once out on the open plain, they could see far away to the west a cloud
of dust. It was made by the Sioux under the White Elk, who were pushing
the horses to their wildest speed on the trail of the fugitives. This
trail the Texan and Addie Neidic followed at their utmost speed.

The double trail made by the Black Hillers and the pursuing Indians
would have been plain indeed to follow had not the column of dust served
as a guide.

With their horses at full speed, and better than the general run of
Indian ponies, the Texan and his fair companion gained slowly but surely
on the Indians, and within an hour had passed the rear of their column,
and were pressing well to the front.

Yet it was noon when they ranged alongside of Persimmon Bill himself,
and reported the discovery Addie Neidic had made.

"One more scalp ahead of us," was all he said, when he heard the report.

And he pressed on still faster.


CHAPTER XVII.
UNLOOKED-FOR AID.

With their heavily-laden pack-horses, lengthy as their start was, the
party under Chichester saw their pursuers plainly in their rear before
the day was two-thirds passed, and Captain Jack, hurrying up the rear
all he could, sent word to Chichester that the reds were gaining
rapidly.

Chichester sent word back to press the rear forward at its utmost speed.
He could see timber ahead, and if they could only reach it, they might
be able to make a stand. Satisfied, from the report of Willie Pond, that
over one hundred well-armed and well-mounted Indians were on his trail,
fearful that many of his men would flinch in battle, he dared not, with
the few that were true, make a stand on the open plain.

Had all been like Wild Bill, California Joe, and Captain Jack, he would
have halted, rested his horses, and given the reds battle rather than
fly from even treble his number. But he knew well that a few cowards
would weaken the rest, and he wanted to get some shelter before he met
such odds.

The timber was yet fully two hours' ride distant, half of the
pack-horses had given out and been left, and many of the mounted men
complained that they could not keep their horses much longer in the
column.

Sam Chichester had been obliged to slacken the pace in front, and the
enemy were gaining so fast that the glitter of their arms, could be seen
even and the dust-cloud that rose above them.

Suddenly another column of dust was seen, and this appeared to come from
the direction of the timber, though south of the route the Black Hillers
were taking.

"Men!" muttered Sam Chichester, "there's no use in our running much
farther. If that new cloud of dust is made by Indian's, all that we can
do is to sell our lives as dearly as we can. We will soon know one thing
or the other."

"They're not on the line we're taking. They can't be coming for us,"
said Captain Jack, who had ridden to the front. "They're coming in our
flank."

"And night is coming, too," growled California Joe. "If we can keep on
for two hours more, we'll have darkness to shield us, for no red will
fight in the dark without he attacks, and has camp-fires to light up
with."

"We'll keep them, on while an animal will move, and when we must, turn
and fight for life or vengeance, if we must go under," said Chichester.
"Forward, men--forward once more!"

Again Captain Jack took the post of honor, for such indeed was the rear
guard in this case. Suddenly, on looking back, he saw that the Indians,
instead of gaining, had come to a halt.

"They've given it up! they've given it up!" he cried, sending a
messenger forward to Captain Chichester to slacken the speed of the
column.

It was now almost sundown, and the men in the column, choked and
thirsty, weary beyond expression, could hardly believe the news was
true. They were soon satisfied, though, that it was; but it was not for
an hour yet, when twilight was beginning to gather, that they learned
the real cause of their present safety.

The Indians would have been upon them before night set in, had they not
first discovered the nature of the dust cloud to the south-west, or
rather who it was raised by. The field-glass of the Texan, even miles
and miles away, had detected the flutter of cavalry guidons amid the
dust, and showed that mounted troops were near enough to come to the aid
of the Black Hill men before they could be crushed and their scalps
taken.

So, much against his will, Persimmon Bill was obliged to slacken his
pace, and soon to turn his course, so, as by a night march, to put his
warriors beyond the reach of those who might turn on them.

When night fell, Chichester, joined by two companies of cavalry, bound
for the Hills, under orders to join forces already on the way by another
route, moved slowly to a camping-ground in the timber, for which he had
been heading hours back.

The horses of the troops were weak from scant forage, and the commanding
officer did not feel it his duty to wear them out chasing Indians,
though he held himself ready to protect the mining party as long as they
remained with him.

And they were just too willing to go on with such an escort, even with
the loss of all the pack animals left on their trail; and had Persimmon
Bill only halted, instead of falling back, he would have found that
there was no danger of pursuit.

Chichester and Crawford, when they compared notes, and found not a man
of their party lost, though half its property was gone, felt satisfied
that it was no worse, for at one time it seemed to both that nothing was
left to them but to sell their lives as dearly as they could.

In a well-guarded camp all were settled before the moon rose, and never
was rest more needed by animals and men.


CHAPTER XVIII.
ON THE DEATH-TRAIL.

Bivouacked on the treeless plain, so far from the old trail and from the
timber ahead that they could see no sign of the Black Hillers or the
troops, the next morning's sun rose on the band of Sioux led by
Persimmon Bill. Used to all kinds of exigencies, the red men did not
mind either a lack of food or of water for so short a time. They were
only angered with the thought that those whom they had deemed an easy
prey had escaped them.

As soon as it was light, Persimmon Bill had the captured pack-horses
examined, and it was found that several of them were laden with
provisions. Others had ammunition and stores, and on some of them were
found kegs of liquor.

These the wary leader at once destroyed, telling his followers that
there was no foe so deadly to the red man as this fire-water and not one
drop should pass his lips or theirs. The provisions were at once
distributed among them, as also the stores, but the liquor was given to
the thirsty sands, where at least it could do no harm.

Then a council was held by the leader with the chiefs and head warriors
of the band, and it was decided that it would be foolish to pursue the
Black Hill people farther, now that troops were with them, unless a
large band of Sioux could be found. For it is not Indian policy to risk
battle against odds, or where there is danger of great loss and little
gain. To reach water and good hunting-grounds was their first necessity;
after that they could consider where next to go. Sitting Bull was
rallying all the tribes for war, and the "White Elk" had promised to
join him.

Gloomily the young Texan heard all this talk, and at its close, when a
decision had been arrived at, he said:

"Here we must part. I follow the trail of Wild Bill, if I follow it
alone. I had hoped to see him die a slow and cruel death, where I could
have heard him plead, and plead in vain for mercy. But that hope is
gone, if he reaches the Hills in safety. But he cannot live--he shall
not! I have sworn to kill him, and I will! The spirit of him who fell at
Abilene cries up from a bloody grave for vengeance, and the cry shall be
answered. You have been kind to me Addie Neidic, and so has he to whom
your heart is given. I shall never forget it. But our courses now lie
apart--I follow yonder trail, while you go I know not where. We may not
meet again--if we do, I shall tell you Wild Bill is dead!"

"Stay with us. I will yet help you to your vengeance," said Persimmon
Bill.

"No; it will be too long delayed. I am hot on the death-trail now, and I
will not leave it. Fear not for me. I shall hover near them till they
reach the Hills, and then I will not wait long to fulfill my work. When
the deed is done, if I still think life is precious, and his friends
press me too hard, I may look for safety, as you have done, with the
Sioux."

"Come and you shall find in me a sister, and in him a brother," cried
Addie Neidic.

"_A brother?_ I had one once," came in a low, sobbing cry from the young
Texan's lips; then, with his head bowed, and scalding tears rolling down
his cheeks, he drove the spurs into his horse, and sped away swiftly in
the direction of the old trail.

The Black Hawk horse, saddled and bridled, but riderless, galloped on by
the side of the Texan's fleet mustang, with no wish to part from his
company.

"He had death in his eye! He will kill Wild Bill, and we shall never see
him again," said Persimmon Bill. "The miners are rough, and condemn
before they try, and hang as soon as condemnation is spoken. I pity the
boy--for he is but a boy."

Addie Neidic smiled.

"We shall see your boy again," she said, "Something seems to whisper to
me that his fate is in some way linked with ours. I, too, feel sure that
he will kill Wild Bill, and then escape to join us. And you, my hero,
will rise till all these Indian nations call you king. How these who
follow you look up to you now, obeying every word or sign. And think, on
these vast plains, and in the endless range of hills, valleys, and
mountains, there must be countless thousands, who want but a daring,
skillful leader to make them the best light troops in the world."

"You are ambitions for me, dearest," said Bill, with a strange, sad
smile. "I hope to prove worthy of your aspirations. But we must move. I
head now for the Big Horn Valley, to meet Sitting Bull."


CHAPTER XIX.
"SAVE, OH, SAVE MY HUSBAND!"

"Safe and in port at last, as old Cale Durg used to say, when a scout
was over and he was back in garrison."

This was the joyous exclamation of Captain Jack Crawford, as he turned
to Sam Chichester when their party rode into the settlement at the
Deadwood Mines in the Black Hills. Escorted nearly all the way by the
cavalry they had so providentially met, they had been troubled no more
by the Indians, and excepting the loss of some horses, and part of their
"fit-out" and stores, had suffered nothing. Not a man had been hurt, and
best of all, they came in sober, for the benzine had all gone with the
lost packs, for it was heaviest on the mules, as it would have been on
the men, had it not been host.

"I'm glad the trip is over. My temper never has been more tried," said
Chichester. "The most of the men have had their own way, though when we
started they promised on honor to obey me as captain. But honor is a
scarce article with the majority of them. Now they're here, they'll go
it with a looseness."

"You bet," was Crawford's sententious remark. "Wild Bill will be in his
element. Look at the signs. Rum, faro, monte, all have a swing here, you
can swear."

"Men, into line one minute, and then we part!" shouted Captain
Chichester to his party.

For a wonder, with temptation on every side, the weary riders obeyed,
and drew up in a straggling line to hear their leader's parting speech.

"Men, I promised to bring you here safely if I could, but to get all of
you here that I could, any way. I've kept my promise we're here."

"Ay! Three cheers for Sam Chichester!" shouted Wild Bill.

The cheers were given, and Chichester said:

"Thank you, boys. Now do me one favor. You are here in a busy place, and
I see by the sign that benzine is about as plenty as water. Touch it
light, and do behave, yourselves, that my name will not be disgraced by
any of Sam Chichester's crowd. Every man is his own master now, and must
look out for himself. I wish you all good luck, and shall work hard for
it myself."

The speech was over, and in a second the line melted away and every man
was seeking quarters or pitching into the benzine shops.

Wild Bill would have been the first to go there, had not his companion,
Willie Pond, said, in a low tone:

"Bill, please get quarters for you and me before you do anything else.
You know what you have promised. Remember, if it had not been for me,
neither you nor one of this party would ever have got here."

"You're right. But I'm so cussed dry!" muttered Bill. "You're right,
I'll find housing for us two before a drop passes my lips."

And Bill rode on to the upper part of the town, as it might be called,
where some men were putting up a new shanty, in fact, just putting the
finishing touch on it by hanging a door.

"Will you sell that shebang?" asked Bill, of the man who seemed to be
the head workman.

"Yes, if we get enough. We can build another. What will you give?"

"These two horses, and a century," said Bill, pointing to the animals
ridden by himself and companion, and holding up a hundred-dollar bill
which Pond had furnished him.

"O. K. The house is yours!" said the man. "Boys, put for timber, and
we'll have another up by sunset."

Bill and his companion dismounted, removed their blankets, arms, and
saddle-bags into the house, gave up the horses and were at home. It did
not take long to settle there.

* * * * * * * *

Night had fallen on the town of Deadwood, but not the calm which
generally comes with night where the laborer is but too glad to greet
the hour of rest. Lights flashing through chinks in rude cabins, lights
shimmering through canvas walls, songs, shouts, laughter, curses, and
drunken yells made the place seem like a pandemonium on earth.

Almost every other structure, either tent, cabin, or more pretentious
framed house, was either a saloon or gambling-hell, or both combined.
And all these seemed full. The gulches, sinks, and claims that had been
the scene of busy labor all the day were now deserted, and the gold just
wrenched from the bowels of the earth was scattered on the gambling
table, or poured into the drawer of the busy rumseller.

At this same hour, a man rode into the edge of the town on a noble black
horse, leading a tired mustang. Both of these animals he staked out in a
patch of grass, leaving the saddles on, and the bridles hanging to the
saddle-bow of each. Then he placed his rifle against a tree near by,
took the old cartridges out of a six-shooter and put in fresh ones. This
done with the greatest deliberation, he pulled his slouch hat well over
his face, entered the nearest saloon, threw down a silver dollar, and
called for brandy.

A bottle and glass were set before him. He filled the glass to the brim,
drank it off, and walked out.

"Here, you red-haired cuss, here!" cried the bar-keeper. "Here's a half
comin' to you; we only charge half-price when it goes by wholesale!"

The joke fell useless, for the red-haired man had not remained to hear
it.

In the largest hall in the place, a heavy gambling game was going on.
There was roulette, faro, and monte, all at different points.

Before the faro-table there was the greatest gathering.

Wild Bill, furnished with money by the person known to us so far as
Willie Pond, was "bucking against the bank" with, his usual wonderful
luck, and the crowd centered around him as a character more noted and
better known than any other who had yet come to Deadwood.

"I'll bet my whole pile on the jack!" shouted Wild Bill, who had taken
enough strong drink to fit him for anything.

"Do be careful, Bill--do be careful!" said a low, kind voice just behind
him.

It was that of Willie Pond.

"Oh, go home and mind your business. I'll break this bank to-night, or
die in the trial!" cried Bill, defiantly.

"You'll die before you break it!" shrieked out a shrill, sharp voice,
and the red-haired Texan sprang forward with an uplifted bowie-knife,
and lunged with deadly aim at Bill's heart, even as the person we have
so long known as Willie Pond shrieked out:

"Save, oh, save my husband!"

But another hand clutched the hilt of the descending knife and the hand
of a short, thickset, beetle-browed desperado, was shouted, as he drew a
pistol with his other hand:

"Wild Bill is my game. No one living shall cheat me of my revenge! Look
at this scar, Bill--you marked me for _life_ and now I mark you for
_death!_"

And even as he spoke, the man fired, and a death-shot pierced Wild
Bill's heart.

The latter, who had risen to his feet, staggered toward the Texan, who
struggled to free his knife-hand from the clutch of the real assassin,
and with a wild laugh, tore the false hair from the Texan's head. As a
roll of woman's hair came down in a flood of beauty over her shoulders,
Bill gasped out:

"Jack McCall, I'm thankful to you, even though you've killed me. Wild
Bill does not die by the hand of a _woman!"_

A shudder, and all was over, so far as Wild Bill's life went.

His real and true wife wept in silence over his body, while sullen, and
for a time silent, the supposed Texan stood and gazed at the dead body.

Then she spoke, addressing McCall:

"Villain, you have robbed me of my revenge! for by my hand should that
man have fallen. No wrong he could have done you can be more bitter than
that which put me on his death-trail, and made me swear to take his
life.

"Two years ago a young man left a ranch close to the Rio Grande border
with a thousand head of cattle, which had been bought from him, to be
paid for when delivered in Abilene, Kansas. He was noble, brave,
handsome. He was good and true in all things. He was the only hope of a
widowed mother, the very idol of a loving sister, whose life seemed
linked with his. He promised when he left those he loved and who so
loved him that he would hasten back with the proceeds of the sale, and
then, with his mother and sister, he would return to the birthplace of
the three, to the old Northern homestead, where his father's remains
were buried, buy the old estate, and settle down to a quiet and a happy
life. Long, anxiously, and prayerfully did that mother and sister wait
for his return. Did he come? No; but the soul-blighting news came,
which, like a thunderbolt, struck that mother--my mother--dead! Wild and
despairing, I heard it--heard _this._

"The son, the brother, who never used a drop of strong drink in all his
life; who never uttered an oath, or raised a hand in unkindness to man
or woman, had been murdered--killed without provocation--no chance to
defend his life, no warning to prepare for another world--shot down in
mere wantonness. There lies the body of him who did it. Do you wonder
that, over my dead mother's body, girl though I was, I swore to follow
to the death him who killed my brother? It is not my fault that I have
not kept my oath. I would have done it had I known that you, his
friends, would have torn me limb from limb before his body was cold."

"And served him right!" said an old miner, whose eyes were dimmed with
moisture while the Texan girl told her story.

"Where is McCall? His act was murder," cried Sam Chichester.

"He has sloped, but I'll take his trail, and if there is law in Montana
he shall hang," said California Joe, who bounded from the house, when it
was discovered that the murderer had slipped away in the moment of
excitement.

How well California Joe kept his promise, history has already recorded.
Followed over many a weary mile of hill and prairie, McCall was finally
arrested, tried and convicted, as well by his own boast as the evidence
of others, and he was hanged.

But one glance at our heroine, for such the red-haired Texan is.

With a look of haughty defiance, she asked:

"Have I done aught that requires my detention here?"

"No," said Captain Jack; "thank Heaven you have not. We'd make a poor
fist at trying a woman by Lynch law, if you had done what you meant to."

"Then I go, and few will be the white faces I ever see again!" she
cried.

The next moment she passed out, and as the crowd followed to see whither
she went, she was seen to spring on a coal-black horse which stood
unhitched before the door, and on it she rode at wild speed away toward
the north-west, while a saddled but unridden mustang followed close
behind her.

The course she took led toward the regions where Sitting Bull, in force,
awaited the attack of the soldiers then on his trail.

[THE END.]


"DIAMOND DICK, JR'S TRUNK CHECK; or, THE MAN IN THE SILVER MASK," by W.
B, Lawson will be published in the next number (193) of the DIAMOND DICK
LIBRARY.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Wild Bill's Last Trail, by Ned Buntline

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD BILL'S LAST TRAIL ***

***** This file should be named 21113.txt or 21113.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/1/1/21113/

Produced by Richard Halsey

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
