Project Gutenberg's The Seven Champions of Christendom, by W. H. G. Kingston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Seven Champions of Christendom

Author: W. H. G. Kingston

Release Date: May 15, 2007 [EBook #21454]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVEN CHAMPIONS OF CHRISTENDOM ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




The Seven Champions of Christendom, by W H G Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________

A most unusual book, especially from this author, erudite though he is.

The seven champions are the Patron Saints of England, Scotland, Ireland,
Wales, France, Italy and Spain.  These rove about Europe and beyond,
slaying Enchanters, Dragons, and other nuisances, accompanied by their
Squires, who, although they put on weight and become obese, help as best
they can, and carry their masters' trophies for them.

That they all knew one another and were living at the same time is a
novel idea, but it all adds to quite a good story, however whimsical.

It is alleged that the book is no more than an edited transcription of a
book written at the end of the fifteen hundreds.  It may well be, but it
stands quite well on its own for what it is--an amusement for the
children: that, and no more.

________________________________________________________________________

THE SEVEN CHAMPIONS OF CHRISTENDOM, BY W H G KINGSTON.

The following pages should not go forth into the world without due
acknowledgment being made to that worthy old Dominie, Richard Johnson,
to whose erudite but somewhat unreadable work the author is so largely
indebted.  As he flourished at the end of the sixteenth century, and the
commencement of the seventeenth, great allowances should be made for his
style, which is certainly not suited to the taste of this generation.
It is to be hoped that the present version, while much of his vivid
imagery is retained, may be free from his more glaring errors.  And,
thus quoting the Dominie's dedication:--

"To all courteous readers The Author wisheth encrease of vertuous
knowledge.

"Gentle readers, in kindness accept my labours, and be not like the
chattering cranes, nor Momus' mates, that carp at everything.  What the
simple say I care not; what the spightful speak I pass not; only the
censure of the conceited I stand unto; that is the mark I aym at; whose
good likings if I obtain, I have won my race; if not, I faint in the
first attempt, and so lose the quiet of my happy goal.

"Yours in kindness and command,--

"R.J."



CHAPTER ONE.

THE BIRTH OF SAINT GEORGE.

Who has not heard of the Seven Champions of Christendom--of the
wonderful adventures they went through--of the dangers they encountered,
and the heroic deeds they performed?  Should any persons exist ignorant
of the history of those noble knights, let them with attentive ears now
listen to my veracious chronicle.

Gallant and dauntless as were all those seven heroes, yet not one
equalled in valour "Saint George of Merrie England."  Many countries
have in consequence claimed him as their own especial Champion.
Portugal, Germany, Greece, and Russia, for what is known to the
contrary, would be glad to have him; but we have proof undoubted that to
England he alone belongs, even if we did not see him, on many a golden
guinea, engaged in his desperate encounter with the most terribly
terrific and greenest of green dragons.  Not only are his orders worn by
nobles, but by British monarchs themselves, while, in memory of his
heroic deeds, they lead forth their armies under his banner.  However,
many long years have passed away since he astonished the world by his
prowess.  Of royal birth was his mother, the daughter of one of
England's early kings; a Duke and High Steward of the realm was his
father.  Of the name of the king history is most mysteriously silent, or
of the extent of his dominions; but there can be no doubt that the
ancient city of Coventry was situated within them, and that, if not the
principal, it was one of the principal cities of the realm, and,
moreover, that a prison existed there on the silent system.  Thus, when
people are unfit to be spoken to, it is said, by a figure of speech,
that they are sent to Coventry.

In Coventry the Lord High Steward and his royal bride resided.  Now,
some time before the Princess was about to present her husband with a
babe, she dreamed a dream; it was enough to terrify her, for she dreamed
that, instead of a smiling infant, she should have to nurse a little
green dragon.  To nurse a small crocodile or alligator, or even a young
hippopotamus, would have been bad enough, but a green dragon, with claws
and a long wriggling fork-pointed tail, was out of the question; the
very idea was enough to drive her distracted.  The Lord High Steward was
a man who always took the bull by the horns in a dilemma, and so he
resolved forthwith to take steps to solve the mystery.  He had heard
that in the Black Forest in Germany there lived a powerful enchantress,
Kalyb by name, who would, without doubt, be able at once to give him all
the information he required.  Sir Albert, for that was the High
Steward's name, instantly set off across the seas, accompanied only by
his faithful Squire, De Fistycuff.  They bore offerings of gold and
silver and precious stones with which to propitiate her.

For many days they voyaged, tossed by the stormy billows, and for many
days they travelled on till they arrived at the dreary precincts of the
Black Forest.  Boldly plunging into it, they reached a dense part of the
wood, composed of withered, hollow, and distorted trees, whence
proceeded sounds the most unearthly and terrific.  The dismal croaking
of the night raven, the hissing of serpents, the hoarse bellowing of
wild bulls, the roaring of lions, the laughing of hyenas, and other
hideous cries of all sorts of savage beasts.  Some men would have stood
astounded.  Not so Sir Albert and his faithful Squire.  On they went
till they found themselves in front of a dark and lofty rock, within
which was seen a vast and gloomy cavern.  The entrance was secured by a
massive iron gate studded over with huge knots and bars of steel.  Near
it hung a brazen trumpet, the use of which the Knight full readily
guessed.  He blew a blast which rung through the vaulted cave, echoing
away till the sounds were lost in the distance, while it made the very
earth rock and tremble.  Scarcely had the echoes of the magic horn died
away than a terrifically loud, discordant, hollow voice, proceeding out
of the very depths of the cavern, inquired:--"Mortal, what want you
here?"  Sir Albert briefly told his errand, and said that he had brought
gifts which he desired to offer to the famous Enchantress Kalyb, the
lady of the Black Forest.

As he was a courteous knight, and had spoken the Enchantress fair, so he
expected a courteous and satisfactory reply.  What, then, was his
amazement when he heard these words proceeding from the cavern:--

  "Whatever must be--must be there's no doubt;
  You've got an answer, and so turn about!"

In vain he protested that such a reply was far from satisfactory; that
he should go back as wise as he came; that it would have been better had
he stayed at home; that he should have had all his pains for nothing.
No other answer could he get.  Though a courteous knight, he was yet
somewhat irascible; and this was an occasion to try the temper of a
milder man than a knight of those days.  He seized the trumpet, and blew
till it refused to give forth any further sound.  He handed it to De
Fistycuff, and told him to blow till he cracked his own cheeks or the
trumpet.  In vain the Squire puffed and puffed, not a sound could he
produce.  He holloed and shouted, and so did De Fistycuff; but to their
united voices no answer was returned.  Then Sir Albert began to shower
abuse on the Enchantress; he told her some awkward truths, and called
her some names which were far from complimentary; but the only answer he
received was in shouts of hollow and mocking laughter which proceeded
out of the recesses of the cavern.

At length Sir Albert turned his horse's head, and in high dudgeon rode
off, followed by De Fistycuff, who first pocketed the gifts they had
brought to propitiate the Enchantress.  Dull and dreary was their
homeward journey; and, if truth must be told, the Lord High Steward
could not help feeling remarkably small at the result of their
expedition.  After having been tossed about for many days by a storm,
and made very sick in the German Ocean, they at length reached Coventry.
The master of his household, his family physician, and a numerous
assemblage of knights and ladies, rushed out of his castle to tell Sir
Albert the news.  Neither an hippopotamus nor an alligator had been born
to him, but a right merry, rosy, bouncing infant.  Alas! however, there
was grief in store for the gallant knight, the partner of his joys and
cares, his beautiful princess, was dead!  Deeply he mourned his loss,
and then he inquired if any one could solve the mystery of the dream
which had caused him so long a journey.  He found that had he waited
patiently at home, like a wise man, all would have been known.  The
smiling infant was brought to him; and then, wonderful to relate, he
discovered on its breast the portrait of a green dragon, just as his
wife had described it to him; and, moreover, a blood-red cross marked on
the boy's right hand, and a golden garter below his knee on the left.

"He'll do something wonderful!" exclaimed the proud father; and he was
not mistaken.

The name of George was given to the boy; and forthwith the Lord High
Steward, retiring from the cares of state, bestowed on him all his
thoughts and attention.  He selected three nurses to watch over him,
called Prudence, Firmness, and Gentleness.  One to prepare his
nourishment, another to feed him, and the last to lull him to sleep.
All would have gone well, but unhappily the boy's grandfather suggested
that another nurse was necessary, and Carelessness was introduced into
the household.

It should be known that all this time the wicked Enchantress Kalyb had
been well aware who it was who had come to her cavern and blown so
furiously on her magic horn.  Every word the Knight had uttered, and
every opprobrious epithet which he had so lavishly bestowed, had been
heard by her.  She nourished, in consequence, in her evil heart, a
spirit of revenge, which she waited a convenient opportunity to gratify.
Oh, anger! oh, loss of temper! how blind art thou!  How dost thou make
wise men become like the most foolish!  Revenge, too, how dost thou,
malignant spirit, fall into the trap thou hast thyself laid, as will be
soon seen!

Wicked Kalyb waited her time.  She knew of the young Prince's birth,
she knew how his father doated on him, and she resolved to carry him
off; but when she heard of the three nurses appointed to guard over him
she despaired of succeeding in her object.  The boy grew and flourished.
Every day he became more beautiful, every day he gave proofs of a noble
and gallant spirit.  Truly was he his father's pride; worthy was he of
the admiration of all the people of Coventry.  When, however, Kalyb
found out that Carelessness had become his nurse, instantly she hurried
to the sea-shore; when, embarking in an egg-shell,--the shell, be it
known, of a huge roc's egg--she set sail for the shores of England.
Quickly she spun over the ocean, round and round, faster than any
ordinary ship could sail, till she reached the land; and, arriving in
the neighbourhood of Coventry, she hid herself in a thick wood, till she
could pounce out on the young Prince and carry him off.

However, she had long to wait.  Sometimes Prudence walked out with him,
sometimes Gentleness, and sometimes Firmness; and all kept so careful a
watch over him that she had no opportunity of effecting her purpose.  At
length, Carelessness one fatal day had charge of him.  Kalyb immediately
changed herself into a lovely butterfly.  Off ran the boy with his
velvet cap to catch the fluttering insect.  Carelessness sat down on a
bank and fell asleep.  Soon Kalyb led the boy into the recesses of the
forest; then seizing him, in spite of his cries, she placed him in a
chariot with ten fiery steeds which she had conjured up, and darting off
like a flash of lightning, reached the coast, embarked in her egg-shell,
which whirled round and round as before, and then she travelled on till
she arrived once more, with her captive, at the magic cavern in the
Black Forest.  The massive gates flew asunder at a touch of her silver
wand, and the Prince found himself among wonders which his imagination
had never before conceived, which far surpassed anything he had ever
beheld even in the beautiful city of Coventry.  He soon, however, grew
weary of them, and longed to return to his fond father and careful
nurses; but he found himself a prisoner, and no outlet could he discover
by which he could make his escape from the cavern--the massive gates
prevented all egress to any who had once entered within them.

The wicked Kalyb watched the sorrow of the boy, and knowing that his
father was still more sorrowful, rejoiced in her revenge.  She had
numerous attendants to do her will.  Among them was a dwarf, a
misshapen, ill-favoured creature.  To his care the boy was confided,
with directions to beat and teaze him whenever he had nothing else to
do.  The noble child bore every indignity with equanimity and good
humour, and, instead of harbouring revenge, took every opportunity of
doing a kindness to the poor dwarf, who was himself the peculiar object
of the wicked Kalyb's ill-treatment.  Crumpleback was the dwarf's name.
Often poor Crumpleback's body was black and blue with the pommelling he
received from the furious Kalyb, while his cheeks were thin and haggard
from want of food and rest.  One day Kalyb was absent when Crumpleback
addressed the Prince:--"Know," said he, "kind boy, that I am a fairy in
disguise, and though less powerful than the fell Enchantress Kalyb, I
may yet circumvent her acts.  Your kindness and gentleness, and
forgiveness of the injuries I was forced to do you, have won my heart.
I have vowed to serve you to the best of my power.  Let not Kalyb know
what has passed between us, but wait patiently, and see what will
happen."  The young Prince thanked the fairy, and his hopes of escaping
once more revived.  He had long to wait.  In the mean time, whenever
Kalyb was absent, the seeming dwarf gave him instructions in all the
arts which would fit him to become an accomplished knight.  Book
learning, though not much in vogue in those days, was not neglected.
Sometimes the fairy put a shining sword into his grasp, and showed him
how to wield it with a force no one could withstand; sometimes he was
mounted on a fiery steed which few mortals could have bestrode, and with
lance in hand he was taught to tilt against phantom knights, which, in
the most desperate encounters, he invariably overthrew.  Thus, by the
time he had attained to man's estate, no knight in Europe was so
accomplished, while none surpassed him in virtue or valour.

Meantime the Lord High Steward bitterly mourned the loss of his
promising son.  In vain he sent messengers throughout the world to find
him, and at last, remembering the ancient proverb, "Who wants goes, who
does not want sends," he resolved to go in search of the boy himself.
Storing himself with gold and precious jewels, he set off, attended only
by his faithful De Fistycuff.  From place to place he wandered, year
after year, till his locks were turned to silvery grey, and his beard
became like the down of a thistle.  One evening his heart fainting, and
his once firm knees trembling, he reached the gate of a monastery in
Bohemia.  Then he sunk down before even his Squire could ring the bell
to summon the monks to his assistance.  When the porter opened the door,
the Lord High Steward of England had breathed his last, and poor De
Fistycuff was bewailing his loved master's death, and his own hard fate,
in being thus left alone in a foreign land.  The monks buried Sir Albert
hard by, and raised a monument, covered with some of his own jewels,
over his grave, reserving the remainder to pay the expenses of his
funeral.  The worthy De Fistycuff they recommended to return to his
native land, unless he wished to become a monk; an honour he declined,
having his faithful Grumculda waiting for him at home.  So, paying a
farewell visit to his master's tomb, the jewels on which he found had by
enchantment been changed to glass, he set off on his journey.  Happily
he had, however, some of the presents intended for the wicked Kalyb in
his pockets; so, like an honest Briton, he was able to pay his way, and
be no discredit to his country.  Leaving him to pursue his toilsome
peregrination, we return once more to the cavern of Kalyb.



CHAPTER TWO.

SAINT GEORGE RELEASES THE SIX CHAMPIONS.

Even the Enchantress wondered at the progress in the arts and sciences
her captive was making; but, as she knew that he was destined to become
a great man, she was aware that she could not hope to stop his progress.
All she could do was to keep him shut up till fate set him free.  One
day the friendly fairy addressed the Prince:--"Know," she said, "the
Enchantress sleeps once, and once only, for one week every hundred
years.  Her magic art depends on her silver wand, which on that occasion
she hides away so carefully that it is scarcely possible to discover it.
Still, we will search.  For that opportunity I have long been waiting.
If we can possess ourselves of it, she will be completely in our power,
and we can work our will within the magic cavern.  Know also that I am
an English fairy, Sabrina by name.  I love you because you are kind to
me, and because you come of an honest English stock.  If we can overcome
the Enchantress, I will enable you to commence that career of glory for
which I know that your heart is even now thirsting."  The young Prince's
heart beat high with joy and hope on hearing these words.

Anxiously they watched the Enchantress, to try and discover where she
would place her silver wand.  Day after day they followed her through
all the vast interminable recesses of her magic cavern.  Every day she
grew more drowsy and less inclined to speak; which is not surprising,
considering how long she had been awake, and how sleepy she must have
become.

In spite of all this vigilance, however, at last she appeared without
her silver wand; and soon after they saw her sink down on a couch of
rose-leaves she had prepared for herself in a sumptuous apartment,
where, had it not been for her hideous countenance, where all the
malignant passions were portrayed, she would have looked like a
sovereign resting on her bed of state.  The Prince was eager instantly
to set off to look for the silver wand.

"Stay," whispered the Fairy Sabrina, "she yet deeps with one eye open,
like a weasel; wait till she closes both, and snores."  Accordingly they
waited till both Kalyb's eyes were closed, and loud snores echoed along
the vaulted roof.  Then off they set.

"Nothing worth having can be gained without toil and trouble," observed
the Dwarf, as he parted from the Prince.  All the other attendants of
the Enchantress had taken the opportunity to go to sleep likewise; so
silence profound reigned throughout the cavern, broken only by her
snores.  The Prince searched and searched in every direction, under
heaps of costly jewels and glittering robes, piles of gold and silver,
and rich armour; but they had now no charms for him: the silver wand
which was to set him free to commence his noble career was all he sought
for--that wand, the type of knowledge, which can only be obtained by
study and perseverance.  Day after day he sought for it; but at the end
of each day all he could say was that he believed he could tell where it
was not.  The Dwarf came back equally unsuccessful; but still numberless
heaps had been turned over, intricate passages explored, profound depths
dived into, and unthought of recesses in the cavern discovered.

Five days had thus passed away; the Prince knew more about the cavern
than he had ever known before; the sixth day came, and that, too, ended.
He had added to his knowledge, but the silver wand had not been found.
He became anxious, as well he might.  On the seventh the Enchantress
would awake and resume her power.

More diligently than ever he searched about; the Dwarf seconded his
efforts.  Before him appeared, as he wandered on, a golden door.  After
many a hearty shove he forced it open.  A steep flight of rugged stone
steps led winding upwards he knew not where.  Boldly he entered, and
climbed on, on, on.  Though rough and steep were the steps he did not
weary or hesitate.  Sometimes the stair was spiral, and he went round
and round, and sometimes it led him directly upwards.  Scarcely a
glimmer of light enabled him to find his way; but the Dwarf was at his
heels, encouraging him, and he recollected the silver wand of which he
was in search, and persevered.  Strong and healthy as he was he began to
draw his breath quickly, when the full light of the glorious sun burst
on him, and he found himself in a magnificent temple of alabaster, on
the summit of a lofty mountain.

From the windows of the temple he could behold the whole surrounding
country to a vast distance, far, far beyond the forest which grew round
the base of the mountain.  There were cities and palaces, and silvery
streams, and rich fields, and glowing orchards, and meadows full of
cattle, and grassy downs covered with sheep--such a scene as he had not
beheld since his boyhood, when Kalyb first got possession of him.  He
stood contemplating it with delight.  How long he might have stood it is
impossible to say, when the sound of a distant church-bell was wafted up
to his ears.  It reminded him that the hour was approaching when the
dreadful Kalyb would awake.

He thought to make his escape out of the temple, but that he found was
impossible; the walls of the tower in which he stood were a hundred feet
high, with pointed iron spikes below, to catch any who might fall on
them.  Again must he sink into the power of the cruel Kalyb?  His brave
heart rebelled at the thought; he would dare and do anything to avoid
it.

He spoke aloud.  "You are right," said the Dwarf; "but look! what is
that?"  He turned his head, and beheld before him, on a velvet cushion,
which covered a marble table, the silver wand of which he had been so
long in search.  He grasped it eagerly.

"Follow me," said the Dwarf, hastening onward, "no time is to be lost."
Down the steps they sped.  "No time is to be lost," cried the Dwarf
again.  Faster, faster went the Prince's feet.  On he rattled--on--on--
often several steps at a time.  Nothing stopped him.  The bottom was
reached; the massive door was closed; in vain he pushed against it.  He
touched it with his silver wand; open it flew.  Along the vaulted
passages of the cavern he sped.  Many a hideous monster started up, but
a wave of the silver wand put them to flight.

The Prince and his attendant reached the chamber of the Enchantress.
Her snoring had ceased.  She had begun to rub her eyes and move
uneasily, with many a grunt and snort.  She was about to awake.  Who
could have told what mischief one glance of her evil eye would have
effected.  "Strike! strike!" said the Fairy.  The Prince struck the bed.
Instantly loud shrieks and groans, and cries most terrific, were heard
filling the air, and shouts most horrible of mocking laughter, and
bellowings, and roarings, and hissings, and the walls of the chamber
began to rock, and the bed began to sink, and flames burst forth, and
stenches most overwhelming arose.  The horrible noises increased till
dense lurid vapours concealed the spot where the Enchantress's chamber
had been, though her helpless cries were heard far, far down in the
depths of the earth; and the Prince found himself standing in the wild
cavern, but, in the place of the Dwarf, there stood a beautiful Fairy by
his side.  "I prepared you for a change," said the Fairy, with a smile;
"but come, we are not the only ones to be set free.  Let us not forget
our companions in misfortune any more than those in our prosperity."

The Prince made the politest of bows, and said he was completely under
the Lady Sabrina's directions.  "Then come with me," she said, and led
the way till they reached a vast castle of brass, with battlements and
towers glittering in the sun.  "Within this castle lie imprisoned six
valiant knights, worthy champions of Christendom, bemoaning their hard
fate, and longing to be free.  Had the vile Kalyb retained her power,
you would have been shut up there likewise.  But know, brave Prince, as
by your perseverance, valour, and judgment you have overcome her and her
enchantments, it is destined that you shall become the seventh and most
renowned of all, and so I hail you as `Saint George of Merrie England.'
Thus you shall be called for ages yet to come, wherever England's might
and England's deeds throughout the world are known."  The roseate hue of
modesty suffused the cheek of the young knight as he heard these words,
and he vowed that he would ever strive to prove worthy of the honourable
title he had received.

Then thrice he struck the gates of the brazen castle.  The portals flew
open, and he and the Fairy entering, found the six knights sitting
lonely and sad in separate chambers, not knowing what had happened.
They started as they heard the voice of Sabrina mentioning their names.

"The first is Saint Denis of France," said she.  With many a bow he
rapidly sprang forward and saluted Saint George.  The second, Saint
James of Spain, slowly stalked on, and lifting his casque bowed
haughtily.  The third, Saint Anthony of Italy, advanced more rapidly,
and, with a flourish of his helmet, gave him an embrace.  Saint Andrew
of Scotland, the fourth, rising from his couch, inquired whence he had
come, and whither he was going, and thanked him for the valour he had
displayed; while Saint Patrick, the fifth, almost wrung off his hand, as
he expressed his delight in meeting so gallant a knight; and the sixth,
Saint David of Wales, vowed that no pleasure could surpass what he felt
at being thus set free by a knight second only to himself in all
knightly accomplishments.

Besides the knights, six faithful squires, who had followed their
fortunes for many years, lay imprisoned in a separate dungeon.  These
also Saint George had the great satisfaction of setting free; when once
more they rejoined their beloved masters, and assisted, as was their
wont, in preparing them for their journey.

Then Saint George and all the knights, following Sabrina, led the way to
the stables of the castle, where stood, ready caparisoned, seven of the
most superb steeds mortal eye ever beheld.  "Six of them are for those
brave knights," she said; "the seventh, Bayard by name, is reserved for
you; while six other most excellent horses are for their six faithful
squires."

The knights, eager to be gone, mounted their steeds, as did their
squires theirs, while Sabrina conducted Saint George back to the castle,
where, in a chamber, hung numberless suits of the most magnificent
armour.  Choosing out the strongest corselet, Sabrina buckled it on his
breast; she laced on his helmet, and completely clothed him in
glittering steel.  Then bringing forth a mighty falchion, she placed it
in his hand, and said:--"No monarch was ever clothed in richer armour.
Of such strength and invincible power is your steed, that while you are
on his back no knight shall be able to conquer you.  Your armour is of
steel so pure that no battle-axe can bruise, no weapon pierce it.  Your
sword, which is called Ascalon, was made by the Cyclops.  It will hew
asunder the hardest flint, or cut the strongest steel, and in its pummel
such magic virtue lies, that neither treason nor witchcraft can prevail
against you, or any violence be offered as long as you wear it."

The good fairy thus having spoken, Saint George, fully caparisoned, went
forth from the castle, and mounting Bayard, prepared with the other
champions to leave the Black Forest--Sabrina, in her own chariot, drawn
by ten peacocks, leading the way.  Just then a stranger appeared in
sight, sad and sorrowful, travelling on.

"De Fistycuff!" exclaimed Saint George, in a cheerful voice, "my honest
parent's faithful squire."  De Fistycuff started, as well he might, and
rushed forward.  He knew the voice, but whence it had come he could not
tell.  Saint George tore off his corselet, and exposed to view the green
dragon on his bosom.  Thus De Fistycuff knew who it was, and, embracing
him, burst into tears.  Having recovered himself, and once more buckled
on his young master's armour, De Fistycuff mounted his steed.

Then the whole party set forward, and travelled on till they reached the
coast.  Then they took shipping, and, at Saint George's particular
request, proceeded to his paternal castle, near the beautiful city of
Coventry.  There having dwelt for the space of nine months, and erected
a sumptuous monument over the grave of the hapless princess, Saint
George's mother, they expressed their desire to set forth once more in
search of those noble adventures to which they had devoted their lives.
Saint George, nothing loath, promised to accompany them, and the
faithful De Fistycuff entreated that he might not be left behind; so,
all accoutred, and lavishly supplied with everything they required, they
set forth with their faithful squires, and travelled on till the time
arrived for their separating in different directions.  What then befell
them, and what wondrous deeds they performed, shall in course of time be
told.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE ADVENTURES OF SAINT GEORGE OF ENGLAND.

The Seven Champions having crossed the British Channel to France, and
traversed that lovely country, where they banqueted, to their heart's
content, on fricassees and ragouts, washed down by huge draughts of
Burgundy and claret, reached at length a broad plain where stood a
brazen pillar.  Here seven ways met, and here the noble knights, with
many a flourish of their spears and not a few in their speeches, though
history does not record them, parted with expressions of mutual esteem,
to follow out with their faithful squires their separate adventures.

Saint George, accompanied only by the faithful De Fistycuff, at once
passed over to the coast of Africa, knowing full well that in that
unknown land of wonders he was more likely to meet with adventures
worthy of his prowess than in any other part of the world.  He journeyed
on for many a mile over burning sands, his polished steel armour
glittering in the sun, striking terror into all beholders, and almost
blinding his poor squire, who, hot and panting, followed him wearily.

Far across the plains of Africa he travelled till he reached the very
ancient, though little known kingdom of Timbuctoo.  King Bobadildo, the
sable monarch of that empire, so wonderfully renowned in its own annals,
if not in those of other countries, received him with all the courtesy
due to his rank as a British knight, and the renown which the faithful
De Fistycuff, who never lost an opportunity of putting in a good word
for his master, stated that he intended to acquire.

The Knight was feasted sumptuously, and magnificent shows were got up
for his entertainment, while the King, who had taken a great fancy to
him, from believing that he would be of great use in leading his
warriors to the fight against the enemies of his realm, pressed him to
remain, hoping that by his falling in love with his lovely daughter he
might be induced to become his son-in-law.  The colour of the young
princess's complexion, which was of the most sable hue, shining
lustrously with palm oil, although much admired in her native country,
was to the British knight an insuperable objection to a closer alliance
than that of the friendship he enjoyed, though he did not say so; but
stated that he was anxious to go where glory awaited him, and that all
matrimonial arrangements he must defer till he had won that fame for
which his heart panted.

Accordingly, the next morning, followed by De Fistycuff, who had some
difficulty in buckling his belt after the good fare he had enjoyed, he
set forth from the southern gate of the capital towards the unknown
regions which lay beyond.  The sweet Princess looked out of a turret
window, and waved her coal-black hand, while tears coursed each other
down her sable cheeks as she saw the Knight going away and leaving her
all forlorn; for in her bright eyes not one of the neighbouring princes,
nor any of her father's courtiers, could in any way be compared to the
gallant Saint George.  Many other sweet princesses, at the various
courts he visited in his travels, held the same opinion--a circumstance
which caused a considerable amount of perplexity to the gentle-hearted
and gallant Knight.  As she gazed she sighed, and then she sang words to
the following effect:--

"Go away, go away, oh, hard-hearted knight, Go away to glory and fame;
If you ever come back You'll not find me slack To change my state and
name!"

Much relieved by the impromptu expressions of her feelings, she turned
from the window, Saint George having disappeared among the distant
sand-heaps, and went to attend her honoured sire at his matutinal meal.

Saint George and his Squire travelled on day after day, mounting higher
and higher till they reached a region where the heat was no longer so
oppressive as in the plains, and where scenes new and beautiful opened
on their enravished sight.

There were beautiful lakes of the clearest water, full of fish of
strange shapes and gorgeous hues, which swam up to the surface, and
gazed with curious eyes at the strangers.  The trees and shrubs were of
the most gigantic proportions, the former towering high into the sky,
and a single leaf affording ample shade to the Knight and Squire and
their horses.  So luscious and luxuriant, too, was the grass that a few
tufts were sufficient for a meal for the noble steeds, and put such
strength and spirit into them, that, in spite of the fatigues they
underwent, they were ever ready for any task they might be called on to
perform.  Even the shrubs were so high that they could ride beneath some
of them.  Others were covered with leaves of such thickness that a spear
could scarcely pierce them, while they were armed with spikes of length
so formidable that it was dangerous to approach the branches, and
impossible to force a passage through them.  Strange, too, were the
plants.  Some were like a mass of twisting serpents which wriggled about
and hissed as the travellers passed, and though Saint George cut off
their heads with his sword, they so quickly again grew up that he
perceived that the attempt to destroy them was labour lost.

"So is it," he moralised, "with vicious propensities; the nature of the
plant must be changed, or the branches will spring forth, and evil fruit
will continually be produced."  Other plants of the most fantastic
shapes and most lovely hues seemed endued with life.  One covering a
wide circle of ground, and tinted with every colour of the rainbow, they
stopped to admire.  Suddenly it darted forth feelers of great length
high into the air, and drew back hundreds of gay-coloured butterflies,
and moths, and beetles, which were flying near.

Numerous birds also of the most gorgeous plumage, which darted down,
attracted by the flies, were seized hold of and dragged within the
capacious mouth of the plant.

"On, on," cried Saint George, pricking forward his steed.  "If we stop
to admire all these separate wonders we shall never attain the great
objects of our expedition."  The Squire if he heard did not heed his
master, for he kept gazing at the proceedings of the strange plant, and
trying to count the number of insects it gobbled up in a minute.
Thoughtlessly he drew closer and closer, till suddenly the monster plant
darted forth all its feelers and grasped him round the body.  He felt
himself dragged helplessly towards the capacious maw where he had
already seen so many creatures conveyed.  "Oh, master, master! help,
help!" he shouted at the top of his voice, though a feeler getting round
his neck almost stopped his breath.

Saint George, seeing what had occurred, spurred back in hot haste, and,
slashing away with his trusty falchion, severed the feelers after vast
exertions and rescued his frightened squire.

"If you had done as I told you this would not have happened," he
observed, as he freed him from the thick masses of sinew which
surrounded his body.  "Oh, De Fistycuff, remember to do right and what
you are bid by those who know best what is for your good, and then don't
fear the consequences; but never stand gazing at what is bad or
dangerous, and fancy that you run no risk of being drawn into the snare
laid for you!"

The Squire listened respectfully to his master's lecture, and then
followed him at a humble distance, resolving to profit by his advice.

Night with her sable wings was about to overspread the earth, and the
tall woods resounded with strangest cries, and shrieks, and hisses of
the wonderful wild animals which roamed through them, when the Knight
thought it high time to look about for some place of shelter, where,
free from their attacks, he and his squire might repose till the return
of the rosy dawn would enable them to discern their foes, and face them
bravely.

A large rock appeared before them.  Within it was a cave with a rude
porch in front.  In this rough habitation dwelt a hermit, whose voice
they heard bewailing the sad fate to which his country was doomed.  The
Knight entered; a lamp stood on a table in the centre of the cave.  The
hermit rose from his couch and welcomed Saint George and De Fistycuff.
He was a venerable man, with a long beard of silvery whiteness; and as
he tottered forward he seemed bowed almost to the ground with the weight
of years.

"Gladly will I afford you shelter and such food as my cell can furnish,
most gallant Knight," he said; and, suiting the action to the word, he
placed a variety of provisions on the table.  "I need not inquire to
what country you belong, for I see by the arms of England engraven on
your burgonet whence you come.  I know the knights of that land are
brave and gallant, and ready to do battle in aid of the distressed.
Here, then, you will find an opportunity for distinguishing yourself by
a deed which will make your name renowned throughout the world."

Saint George pricked up his ears at this, and eagerly inquired what it
was.  "This, you must understand, most noble Knight, is the renowned
territory of Bagabornabou, second to none in the world in importance in
the opinion of its inhabitants.  None was so prosperous, none so
flourishing, when a most horrible misfortune befell the land, in the
appearance of a terrific green dragon, of huge proportions, who ranges
up and down the country, creating devastation and dismay in every
direction.  No corner of the land is safe from his ravages; no one can
hope to escape the consequences of his appearance.  Every day his
insatiable maw must be fed with the body of a young maiden, while so
pestiferous is the breath which exhales from his throat that it causes a
plague of a character so violent that whole districts have been
depopulated by it.  He commences his career of destruction at dawn every
morning, and till his victim is ready he continues to ravage the land.
When he has swallowed his lamentable repast he remains asleep till next
morning, and then he proceeds as before.

"Many attempts have been made to capture him during the night, but they
have proved as fruitless as trying to catch a weasel (if you happen to
have heard of such an animal, Saint George, in your travels) asleep.
Fruitless I will not say to him, for he has invariably destroyed the
brave men who have gone out to attack him, and has swallowed them for
his supper.  For no less than twenty-four long years has this dreadful
infliction been suffered by our beloved country, till scarcely a maiden
remains alive, nor does a brave man continue in it.  The most lovely and
perfect of her sex, the King's only daughter, the charming Sabra, is to
be made an offering to the fell dragon to-morrow, unless a knight can be
found gallant and brave enough to risk his life in mortal combat with
the monster, and with skill and strength sufficient to destroy him.

"The King has promised, in his royal word, that, should such a knight
appear and come off victorious, he will give him his daughter in
marriage and the crown of Bagabornabou at his decease."

"Ah!" exclaimed the English Knight, his whole countenance beaming with
satisfaction, "here is a deed to be done truly worthy of my prowess!
What think you of that, reverend hermit?"  And he bared his breast,
exhibiting the portrait of the green dragon which had been marked there
at his birth.

"A circumstance ominous of deep import," observed the Hermit, nodding
his head; "either the green dragon will kill you, or you will kill the
green dragon."

"Now, by my halidom, but I fully purpose to kill the dragon and rescue
the Princess," cried the Knight, in a cheerful voice.  "Won't we, my
brave De Fistycuff?"

"What men dare they can do," answered the Squire, nodding his head, for
he was very sleepy.

Accordingly, the hermit having prepared couches of leaves, the Knight
and his attendant rested till the cheerful cock, true messenger of day,
gave notice that the sun was about to uprise from his sandy bed.  Then,
springing to his feet after a hurried meal, aided by his squire and the
trembling fingers of the hermit, he carefully buckled on his armour, and
mounting his richly caparisoned steed, he declared himself ready for the
combat.  Followed by De Fistycuff, and preceded by the hermit on a mule,
who went to show the way, he proceeded to the valley where the dragon
was asleep, and where the King's daughter was to be offered up as a
sacrifice.

As he came in sight of it his eyes rested on one of the sweetest and
most lovely maidens he had ever beheld, arrayed in pure white Arabian
silk, and led to the place of death by a numerous band of sage and
modest matrons, who mourned with bitter tears her hard fate.

This melancholy spectacle still further stimulated the overflowing
courage of the English Knight, so spurring on towards the mourning
group, he assured the lovely maiden that he was prepared to battle
bravely in her cause, and entreated her to return to her father's court
till the result of the coming contest became known.

"He'll do it if it is to be done," observed De Fistycuff, wishing to add
his mite of consolation to the ladies' hearts, and pointing to his
master, who had ridden slowly on; and having thus delivered himself he
spurred after him.

The daring Knight and his faithful squire now entered the valley where
the terrific green dragon had his abode.  No sooner did the fiery eyes
of the hideous monster fall on the steel-clad warrior, instead of the
fair maiden he expected to see, than from his leathern throat he sent
forth a cry of rage louder and more tremendous than thunder, and
arousing himself he prepared for the contest about to occur.  As he
reared up on his hind legs, with his wings outspread, and his long scaly
tail, with a huge red fork, extending far away behind him, his sharp
claws wide open, each of the size of a large ship's anchor, his gaping
mouth armed with double rows of huge teeth, between which appeared a
fiery red tongue, and vast eyes blazing like burning coals, while his
nostrils spouted forth fire, and the upper part of his body was covered
with glittering green scales brighter than polished silver, and harder
than brass, the under part being of a deep golden hue, his appearance
might well have made even one of the bravest of men unwilling to attack
him.

Saint George trembled not, but thought of the lovely Sabra, and nerved
himself for the encounter.  De Fistycuff did not like his looks, and had
he been alone would have been tempted to beat a retreat, but his love
for his master kept him by his side.

"See," said the Hermit, who had come thus far, "there is the dragon!  He
is a monster huge and horrible; but I believe that, like other monsters,
by bravery and skill he can be overcome.  See, the valley is full of
fruit-trees!  Should he wound you, and should you faint, you will find
one bearing oranges of qualities so beneficial, that, should you be able
to procure one plucked fresh from the tree, it will instantly revive
you.  Now, farewell!  See, the brute is approaching!"

"Remember," cried Saint George, turning to De Fistycuff, "this fight is
to be all my own.  You stand by and see fair play.  Only, if I am down,
and the brute dares to hit me, then rush in to my rescue."  The faithful
squire nodded his assent.

On came the monster dragon, flapping his wings, spouting fire from his
nostrils, and roaring loudly with his mouth.  Saint George couched his
sharp spear, and spurring his steed, dashed onward to the combat.  So
terrific was the shock that the Knight was almost hurled from his
saddle, while his horse, driven back on his haunches, lay, almost
crushed, beneath the monster's superincumbent weight; but both man and
steed extricating themselves with marvellous agility, Saint George made
another thrust of his spear, with all his might, against the scaly
breast of the dragon.  He might as well have struck against a gate of
brass.

In a moment the stout spear was shivered into a thousand fragments, and
the dragon uttered a loud roar of derision.  At the same time, to show
what he could do, he whisked round his venomous pointed tail with so
rapid a movement that he brought both man and horse sorely bruised to
the ground.

There they lay, almost senseless from the blow, while the dragon
retreated backward some hundred paces or more, with the intention of
coming back with greater force than before, and completing the victory
he had almost won.  Happily De Fistycuff divined the monster's purpose,
and seeing one of the orange-trees of which the hermit had spoken, he
picked an orange and hurried with it to his master.

Scarcely had the Knight tasted it than he felt his strength revive, and
leaping to his feet, he gave the remainder of it to his trusty steed, on
whose back instantly mounting, he stood prepared, with his famous sword
Ascalon in his hand, to receive the furious charge which the dragon was
about to make.

Though his spear had failed him at a pinch, his trusty falchion was true
as ever; and making his horse spring forward, he struck the monster such
a blow on his golden-coloured breast that the point entered between the
scales, inflicting a wound which made it roar with pain and rage.

Slight, however, was the advantage which the Knight thereby gained, for
there issued forth from the wound so copious a stream of black gore,
with an odour so terrible, that it drove him back, almost drowning him
and his brave steed, while the noxious fumes, entering their nostrils,
brought them both fainting and helpless to the ground.

De Fistycuff, mindful of his master's commands, narrowly eyed the
dragon, to see what he was about to do.  Staunching his wound with a
touch of his fiery tail, he flapped his green wings, roaring hoarsely,
and shook his vast body, preparatory to another attack on the Knight.

"Is that it?" cried the Squire; and running to the orange-tree, whence
he plucked a couple of the golden fruit, he poured the juice of one down
the throat of his master, and of the other down that of Bayard.  Both
revived in an instant, and Saint George, springing on Bayard's back,
felt as fresh and ready for the fight as ever.  Both had learned the
importance of avoiding the dragon's tail, and when he whisked it on one
side Bayard sprang to the other, and so on backwards and forwards,
nimbly avoiding the blows aimed by the venomous instrument at him or his
rider.

Again and again the dragon reared itself up, attempting to drop down and
crush his gallant assailant; but Bayard, with wonderful sagacity
comprehending exactly what was to be done, sprung backwards or aside
each time the monster descended, and thus avoided the threatened
catastrophe.  Still the dragon appeared as able as ever to endure the
combat.  Saint George saw that a strenuous effort must be made, and
taking a fresh grasp of Ascalon, he spurred onward to meet the monster,
who once more advanced, with outstretched wings, with the full purpose
of destroying him.  This time Saint George kept his spurs in the horse's
flanks.  "Death or victory must be the result of this charge," he
shouted to De Fistycuff.

With Ascalon's bright point kept well before him, he drove directly at
the breast of the monster.  The sword struck him under the wing; through
the thick flesh it went, and nothing stopped it till it pierced the
monster's heart.  Uttering a loud groan, which resounded through the
neighbouring woods and mountains, and made even the wild beasts tremble
with consternation, the furious green dragon fell over on its side, when
Saint George, drawing his falchion from the wound, dashed on over the
prostrate form of the monster, and, ere it could rise to revenge itself
on its destroyer, with many a blow he severed the head from the body.
So vast was the stream which flowed forth from the wound that the whole
valley speedily became a lake of blood, and the river which ran down
from it first gave notice, by its sanguineous hue, to the inhabitants of
the neighbouring districts that the noble Champion of England had slain
their long tormenting enemy.

The victorious Knight now refreshed himself and his steed with a couple
of the oranges which De Fistycuff brought him, and which completely
restored them to the vigour with which they began the combat.  He then
stuck the huge head of the once terrific dragon on a truncheon, which
was formed by his faithful Squire out of the handle of the spear, the
head of which had been shivered against the scaly sides of the monster
at the commencement of the combat.

Having delivered the trophy of his prowess to De Fistycuff, to be borne
before him, he rode on towards the capital of the kingdom, where he
expected to be welcomed by the lovely Sabra, to be received by the
sovereign and his people as a conqueror, to have heard all the bells in
the empire ringing, and to have seen every house illuminated, and
bonfires blazing in every street.  He had to learn the bitter lesson
that success frequently only creates enemies and detractors.

Now, there was residing at the court of King Battabolo, the sovereign of
Bagabornabou, Almidor, the black King of Morocco, who had long in vain
sought the hand of the Princess Sabra.  For many reasons she could not
abide him; and now, when he heard of the successful combat of Saint
George with the dragon, he knew that he should have less chance than
ever of winning her love.  With baseness unparalleled he resolved to
make one desperate effort to gain her.  Accordingly, he, by the most
extensive promises, engaged the services of twelve warriors of renown to
waylay the British Champion, in order to deprive him of his trophy and
of his life, intending to present himself before the fair Sabra, and to
boast that he had himself destroyed the dragon.

Passing through a narrow defile, Saint George beheld the twelve African
knights flourishing their swords, and prepared to intercept his
progress.

"Take charge of Bayard," quoth he to De Fistycuff; "I'll meet these
recreants sword in hand on foot."  Thus speaking, he drew Ascalon from
the scabbard, and advanced towards his foes.  From the narrowness of the
defile only three could engage in the fight at once.  Sharply clashed
the steel.  Loud rang their swords upon his polished armour; but Ascalon
soon found an entrance through their coats of mail, and one after the
other fell breathless to the ground.  Three more then came on; but
standing on the bodies of the prostrate steeds, he with one stroke of
his falchion severed their heads from their bodies, which rolled over in
the ensanguined dust.  With three equal downward strokes he cut in two,
from the crown to the saddle, the next three which advanced, while the
remainder turning to fly, he pierced them with Ascalon ignominiously
through the back.

Almidor had all the time stood on the summit of a mountain hard by to
witness the defeat of the British Champion; but when he saw that instead
he remained victor of the field, he hastened back to the city to
announce the death of the dragon by the sword of the strange Knight.
Pen might fail to do justice to the magnificent preparations made to do
honour to the brave Champion who had conquered the Green Dragon.  As he
approached the city he was met by a sumptuous chariot of massive gold,
drawn by fifty milk-white steeds; the wheels were of the purest ebony,
and the covering was of silk embossed with gold.  On either side rode a
hundred of the noblest peers of Bagabornabou, attired in crimson velvet,
and mounted on chargers of the same pure colour as those which drew the
chariot.  Stepping into the chariot, while De Fistycuff led Bayard with
one hand, and carried aloft the dragon's head with the other, he entered
the city amid strains of delicious and martial music, and beneath
banners and embroidered tapestry and rich arras waving from every
window, from which looked down thousands of bright eyes to admire him.
But none were so bright as those of the beauteous Sabra, who welcomed
him in a rich pavilion prepared for his reception, where he laid at her
feet the trophies of his prowess; and as she gazed at the dragon's
monstrous jaws she shuddered to think that she might have had to go down
them, and felt her gratitude and eke a warmer feeling increase for the
gallant stranger who had preserved her from a fate so terrible.

Here all the first physicians in the land stood around with precious
salves to dress his wounds, and administer specifics against the effects
of the dragon's poisonous breath and venom.  The Knight, having
requested that they might all be left by his bed-side, and that he might
be left alone, aided by De Fistycuff, emptied them all out of the
window, and having declared himself next morning infinitely better,
thereby gained immense popularity among the disciples of Aesculapius,
who each rested under the pleasing belief that his own nostrum had
worked the cure.



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE FURTHER ADVENTURES OF SAINT GEORGE.

No sooner had the blushing morn displayed her beauties in the east, and
gilded with her radiant beams the mountain tops, than Sabra repaired to
the Champion's pavilion, and presented him with a diamond ring of
inestimable value, which she prayed him to wear on his finger, not only
as an ornament, but because it was endued with many excellent and occult
virtues.

That day the British Champion was entertained with one of the most
magnificent banquets that had ever taken place in Africa.  Ample justice
was done to it by all present, especially by De Fistycuff, who eat away
most heartily, and quaffed down huge beakers of rosy wine--all, as he
declared, for the honour of Old England.  Ere the feast was ended,
Almidor, the black King of Morocco, under pretence of doing honour to
the Christian Knight, rose from his seat, and presented him with a bowl
of Samian wine.  The noble Champion took it, thoughtless of treachery;
but as he lifted it to his lips the magic ring touched the rim, when, to
the astonishment of all present, it shivered into a thousand fragments.
The Princess Sabra shrieked out that some vile treachery was intended;
but so firm was the confidence of the King, her father, in the honour of
Almidor, that he refused to credit the accusation.

Thus a second time was Saint George saved from the machinations of his
enemy.  Like a lynx, however, Almidor watched for another opportunity of
gratifying his hatred.

In tournaments, dances, and other heroic exercises, the Champion passed
his time, until the faithful De Fistycuff reminded him that he was sadly
wasting it, if he wished to gain a name to be handed down to posterity.
"You are right, my faithful monitor," he answered, "I'll bid farewell to
the Princess, and be gone."

The Knight found out Sabra seated in a bower of jessamine.  He told her
his errand.  "Refuse not," she replied, "my dear, loved lord of England,
her who, for thy sake, would leave parents, country, and the inheritance
of the crown of Bagabornabou, and would follow thee as a pilgrim through
the wide world.  The sun shall sooner lose his splendour, the pale moon
drop from her orb, the sea forget to ebb and flow, and all things change
their course, than Sabra prove inconstant to Saint George of England.
Let, then, the priest of Hymen knit that gordian knot, the knot of
wedlock, which death alone has power to untie."

The Champion, suddenly recollecting that it was leap year, and delighted
with the maiden who had so ably put in a word in her own favour, allowed
his heart, which had never before beat with any other passion but that
of arms, to yield to the tender one of love.  Yet, willing to try her
longer, he replied--"Sweet Princess, not content that I have risked my
life to preserve yours, would you have me sacrifice my honour, give over
the chase of dazzling glory, lay all my warlike trophies in a woman's
lap, and change my truncheon for a distaff?  No, Sabra, George of
England was born in a country where true chivalry is nourished, and hath
sworn to see the world, as far as the lamp of heaven can lend him light,
before he is fettered in the golden chains of wedlock.  Why decline the
suit of King Almidor, fit consort for one of your high rank?"

"Because," she replied, with a curl of her lip, "the fell King of
Morocco is more bloody-minded than a crocodile, but thou gentle as a
lamb; his tongue more ominous of ill than that of a screeching
night-owl, but thine sweeter than the morning lark; his touch more
odious than that of a venomous serpent, but thine more pleasant than
that of the curling vine."

"But stay, Princess," put in Saint George; "I am a Christian--you a
Pagan."

"I've thought of that," she replied.  "I will forsake my country's gods,
and, like you, become a Christian."  Saying this she broke a golden
ring, giving, as a pledge of her love, one-half to the Knight, and
keeping the other herself.

Thereon Saint George, resisting no longer, owned his love, and promised,
on his knightly word, to come back when he had achieved a few more
heroic deeds and wed her.

The treacherous Almidor, hiding behind the jessamine bower, had
overheard all the uncomplimentary references to himself, and, burning
with a desire of vengeance, hastened to the King, and told him that his
daughter intended quitting the faith of her ancestors and flying with
the Christian Knight.  This so enraged the King that, yielding to the
suggestions of the wicked Almidor, he agreed to send him, with
treacherous intent, to the court of Egypt, as bearer of a sealed letter,
in which document he entreated King Ptolemy to take an early opportunity
of destroying one who was a despiser and uprooter of their ancient
belief.  Summoning Saint George, with expressions of great esteem, while
Almidor stood at his right hand, glancing unutterable hatred from his
large eyes, the King informed him that to do him honour he would send
him as an ambassador to the court of the magnificent Sovereign of Egypt,
a country in which he was sure to meet with adventures worthy of his
arms.

The true-hearted Knight fell into the trap, and, dazzled with the
thought of fresh adventures, agreed to set forth.  Summoning De
Fistycuff, he buckled on his armour, and set out towards the rising of
the sun.  Many adventures he met with; many monsters he slew.  On
approaching the famed river Nile, De Fistycuff, weary with the heat, sat
himself down on what he took to be the trunk of a large tree, fastening
the bridle of his steed to, as he believed, one of the branches, while
his master was scouring over the plain after a troop of tawny lions,
which had been committing great depredations in the neighbouring lands.
Sleep overtook the Squire.  He slept he knew not how long, when he was
awoke by the loud snorts and cries of his steed, and by finding himself
borne along in a most uneasy manner.  What was his horror, on opening
his eyes, to discover a huge head, with terrific jaws, projecting from
the seeming log before him, snapping at everything as it moved swiftly
towards the broad stream of the Nile, while his horse, frantic with
terror, was tugging at the bridle behind, in vain attempting to get
loose, or stop the progress of the monster, which was one of the largest
of the crocodiles of that famed stream, and held in especial reverence
by the heathen priests of that district!  The Squire dared not jump off,
for fear of being trampled on by the hind feet of the brute, nor could
he, for reasons into which most stout squires will enter, leap on to his
horse's back and cut the bridle, so he sat still, waving and shouting to
Saint George to come to his assistance.  At last, Saint George, having
killed a dozen of the lions, beheld the peril of his faithful follower,
and spurred onward to his aid.  Charging with a new spear, which had
been presented to him by the matrons of Bagabornabou, as a mark of their
admiration of his prowess in having slain the dragon, he bore down upon
the crocodile.  He charged directly at its mouth, and inflicted a deep
wound in its throat.  The monster snapped its jaws, hoping to bite off
the spear-head; but the Knight was too quick for him, and again had his
spear ready for another thrust.  Again he charged, putting out the
brute's right eye; and the third time he charged the left was driven in.
All the time the crocodile was wriggling his tail, greatly to the
terror of the horse and the discomfort of De Fistycuff, who found
himself every moment borne nearer and nearer to the Nile.  "One charge
more, and you shall be safe," cried the Knight; and, true to his word,
his spear entered the monster's heart, and it rolled over, very nearly,
however, crushing the faithful Squire by its weight.  Scarcely had De
Fistycuff been liberated by his kind master's aid, and set on his steed,
than there sallied forth from a heathen temple hard by a procession of
priests, some walking under silk or velvet canopies of crimson or
yellow, or blue and gold; others swinging censers of incense; and others
bearing aloft on platforms large images of white bulls and apes, and
snakes and crocodiles, while gay banners floated in the air.  When they
beheld the huge monster just slain they all set up loud lamentations,
bitterly cursing whoever had destroyed this their god.

"Now, by my halidom, this is more than I can bear!" cried Saint George.
"On, De Fistycuff, on!  Down with the infidels!"

With this shout he and his Squire rode in among them, overthrowing their
canopies and images, tearing down their banner, and putting the priests
and their followers to flight.

King Ptolemy, having heard of this deed, sent forth a hundred of his
best warriors, to bring before him in chains the audacious strangers;
but Saint George treated them much the same as he did the knights of
Bagabornabou, and not one returned alive to tell of their defeat.

Then he rode on to the city of Memphis, to deliver his letter.  Weary
and faint from his fatigues, instead of meeting with the reception he
had a right to expect, he and his Squire found themselves surrounded by
the whole populace of the city, set on by the King and his ministers.
The gates were shut.  Brickbats and tiles came showering down on their
heads.  In vain they charged right and left.

Aided by a thousand warriors, clad in chain armour, the infuriated
populace, threatening vengeance on the despisers of their religion,
hemmed them in.  De Fistycuff was torn from his horse.  Saint George,
after performing feats of unheard-of valour, was ignominiously dragged
from his, and borne, faint and bleeding, into the presence of the King.

"Is this the way you treat strangers?" exclaimed he, indignantly.  "I
came to your country as an ambassador.  Here are my credentials;" and,
drawing the letter from the lining of his helmet, he presented it in due
form.

"Ah! ah! what you are your deeds and this letter show," cried King
Ptolemy, stamping with rage.  "You despise our ancient religion, and
would make converts of our people.  Bear him and his attendant off to
prison."

The King pondered all night how he should destroy the strangers, and he
resolved to make them join in combat with a hundred of the fiercest
lions ever collected, to make sport for his subjects.  The day arrived
when the dreadful combat was to take place, and thousands of people
assembled in the vast amphitheatre built for the purpose, to which even
the huge pyramids seemed as pismires' nests.

Saint George claimed the right of having his sword and steed; and the
King, little dreaming of the courage and sagacity of Bayard, and the
virtues which existed in Ascalon, and believing that, although a few
lions might be killed thereby, greater sport would be afforded to his
people, as he had no doubt the rest would easily tear him from his
horse, and crush him in his armour, granted his request.

With a flourish of trumpets the Knight and his Squire entered the arena.
De Fistycuff kept carefully behind his master.  With terrific roars the
hundred lions rushed in at once, amidst the loud plaudits of the
spectators.  On they bounded towards the Knight.  Ascalon was in his
hand.  One after the other their heads fell, severed from their tawny
bodies by the trusty steel.  The Squire's chief labour was to keep them
off Bayard's tail, lest, when he flung his heels out behind, the
Champion's aim might be less certain.  The plaudits of the spectators
were changed to groans of rage when they saw the carcasses of their
favourite lions, who had already swallowed so many thousand slaves,
strewing the wide arena.  They shouted loudly to have an end put to the
pleasant pastime.

"Fair play!" cried De Fistycuff, in return brandishing his sword.  "In
the name of my noble master, I demand fair play!"

And Saint George went on riding round and round, and slashing away with
Ascalon, till he had slain every one of the hundred lions.

The treacherous King, fearing what might occur should so brave a
champion wander freely through his dominions, had, in the meantime,
summoned five thousand chosen warriors, and charged them to bring the
Knight, dead or alive, bound before him.  Scarcely was the last lion
killed than they rushed into the arena, and before he and his squire had
time to offer any effectual resistance, they had borne him to the
ground.  Then, throwing chains of steel around him, they carried him,
helpless as an infant, before the King.  Thence, without form of trial,
he was cast into a dungeon, so massive that no strength could break
through it.  There, guarded night and day by lynx-eyed warders, he
languished for many long years, his only companion being the faithful De
Fistycuff; their chief subject of conversation being the deeds that they
had done, and the wonders they had seen, and the deeds they would do,
and the wonders they hoped to see.

There we must leave them, to tell what became of the Princess Sabra.  In
vain she waited and pined for the return of her gallant and true knight,
Saint George.  He came not, because, as has been seen, he could not,
while the black King of Morocco, with every art he could devise,
prosecuted his hateful suit.  Whether or not he might have succeeded is
doubtful, when one night, as the Princess slept on her couch she dreamed
that Saint George appeared, not, as she had seen him, in shining armour,
with his burgonet of glittering steel, and crimson plume of spangled
feathers, but in overworn and simple attire, with pale countenance and
emaciated form; and thus he spoke:--

  "Sabra, I am betray'd for love of thee,
  And lodged in cave as dark as night,
  From whence in vain I seek--ah! woe is me!
  To fly and revel in thy beauteous sight.
  Remain thou true and constant for my sake,
  That of my absence none may vantage take.

  "Let tyrants know, if ever I obtain
  The freedom lost by treason's wicked guile,
  False Afric's scourge I ever will remain,
  And turn to streaming blood Morocco's soil;
  That hateful Prince of Barbary shall rue
  The just reward which is his treason's due."

These words so encouraged the Princess that when she awoke she went to
her sire, and entreated him, with scalding tears, to dismiss Almidor
from his court, and to allow her to enjoy that single blessedness for
which she professed to have for the present so ardent an admiration.
The King at length, softened by her grief, consented to her request,
and, with many courteous expressions, informed the black Monarch that
his daughter had finally resolved to decline his proposals.  This
announcement created the greatest fury in the breast of Almidor.

Calling around him all the knights and the numerous other attendants who
had followed him to the court of Bagabornabou, he told them that, as he
had been insulted and deceived, he was determined to be revenged.

With loud cries and burning brands the treacherous Moors that night
attacked the palace where they had been long hospitably entertained,
and, amid the confusion, Almidor, seizing the Princess, bore her off on
his coal-black charger.  In vain her father with his warriors pursued.
The fierce Almidor galloped with his captive across the burning sands,
which none but Moorish steed could traverse at the speed he went.
Hatred, not love, animated his bosom, and thus, instead of wedding her
as he had purposed, he cast her into a dark dungeon, where, her
beauteous charms concealed from the light of day, she for many a long
and anxious year bewailed her pitiable and cruel fate.  Happily, ere she
left her father's home, a kind fairy, knowing full well what was to be
her fate, had presented her with a golden chain of most rare
workmanship.  Seven days had it been steeped in tiger's blood, and seven
nights in dragon's milk, by which it had attained such excellent virtue,
that, as the fairy told her, if she wore it wrapped seven times round
her alabaster neck, it would preserve her from all violence, and enable
her to retain that enchanting beauty which had won the noble Champion's
heart, and brought so many suitors to her feet.  Thus armed, she feared
not even the fierce Almidor's cruelty.



CHAPTER FIVE.

THE ADVENTURES OF SAINT DENIS OF FRANCE.

On parting from his comrades, the gallant Champion of France, the famed
Saint Denis, attended by his squire, Le Crapeau, wandered away through
many lands, slaying many hideous monsters, terrible wild beasts, and
frightful giants, combating in many tournaments, and paying his devoirs
to many fair princesses, as well as other maidens of high and low
degree, in which latter employment he was closely imitated by his
admiring Squire, who jocosely spoke of his master as "that gay young
Knight who laughs and rides away."  At length he reached a magnificent
castle in Asia, surrounded by a forest of trees of every conceivable
hue, and bearing fruits tempting to the eye and luscious to the taste.

"If the outside is so attractive, what must the inside be!" quoth he to
Le Crapeau.  "Marbleu! but we'll knock and see."

Thereupon the Squire blew the horn which hung at the iron gate; but
instead of its being opened by a burly porter, or by a steel-clad
warrior, a troop of fair damsels appeared, who, with sweet smiles,
invited the Knight to enter, and told him that they would conduct him to
their mistress.  Joyfully he followed them, when, in a superb hall, he
beheld, seated on an ivory throne, glittering with diamonds of the
purest water, a lady of beauty more radiant than possessed by any of the
many he counted among his acquaintance.  With agile steps, and many a
bow and flourish of his helmet, followed nimbly by Le Crapeau, he
approached the lady, and knelt at her feet.

"Rise, rise, brave Knight!  I have heard of your fame and the gallant
deeds you have done, and gladly I welcome you to my humble castle," said
the lady, with a smile so sweet that it went right through the tender
heart of Saint Denis.  He bowed, as did his Squire, and assured the lady
that she was in no way deceived by the reports which had reached her
ears, but that what they had done was as nothing compared with what they
purposed to do, and would do most assuredly.

A magnificent banquet then suddenly appeared, spread out in the hall
across which they had lately passed, and strains of softest music broke
forth to give notice that the feast was ready.  The lady, led by the
Knight, approached the table, and he took his seat by her side, while Le
Crapeau stood behind his chair, as in duty bound, to serve him.

"We should have guests to meet you," said the lady, "but I live alone,
and your arrival was somewhat sudden, though not unexpected.  I have
sent forth to summon some to appear at a ball by-and-bye, as I fancy it
is an entertainment in which your countrymen delight."

"Oui, Madam," cried Le Crapeau, making a pirouette expressive of his
delight; "you will see what my master and I can do when the time comes."

Thus, with agreeable and lively conversation, ample justice was done to
the feast, which was composed of the lightest and most delicate viands,
such as the Knight vowed he had not tasted since he had left his native
land.

While the Knight lay back in his chair, to luxuriate on the thought of
the pleasure his palate had enjoyed, the banqueting-table disappeared,
and when he looked up, troops of gallant knights, in silk attire, and
fair dames, clad in the most dazzling garments, were entering the hall.
Up sprang the Knight, and, offering his hand to the lady, he led her
forth to the centre of the hall, where, to the admiration of all
beholders, and very much to his own satisfaction, he performed a
minuette never surpassed in all Asia.  Le Crapeau, meantime, seeing
another damsel of radiant beauty, inferior only to that of the lady of
the castle, led her forth, and bounded away, round and round the hall,
to strains of the most inspiriting and lively music.  His only
perplexity was discovering that his fair partner did not speak; indeed,
although all the knights and ladies danced in the most lively way,
closely imitating the two Frenchmen, not a sound escaped their lips.  A
variety of dances succeeded, in all of which the Knight and his Squire
excelled all competitors; nor did the festivities cease till the rosy
dawn appearing in the eastern sky, the guests disappeared as silently as
they had entered from the hall, and the lady and the Knight and his
Squire remained its sole occupants.  Le Crapeau's partner was the last
to quit it, and as he rushed after her to utter a tender adieu, instead
of the lady, his nose came with such force in contact with a pillar that
he was sent sprawling backwards into the hall.

"Never mind," said the lady, as he picked himself up, "you will see her
to-morrow, and then remember the lesson you have just received, and
don't talk nonsense to her."

A dozen very ugly little black dwarfs, bearing torches in their hands,
now made their appearance, and conducted the Knight to a magnificent
couch prepared for him, while another stood in an adjoining room, ready
for Le Crapeau, after he had performed the duty of disrobing his master.
The dwarfs meantime placed themselves at the door, and intimated that
they would remain there to watch over the strangers while they
slumbered.

After a matutinal meal of delicacies, of which even the Knight had never
heard, the lady conducted him through the castle, and exhibited to him
statues, and pictures, and gems most rare and beautiful, and then she
led him through gardens full of flowers, shrubs, and trees, of forms and
hues and scents most strange and lovely and sweet.  Thus occupied, the
banqueting time arrived, followed by a ball as on the previous evening.

Unhappily, Le Crapeau, forgetting the warning he had received, followed
his partner as before, when a hand, coming suddenly out of the wall,
gave him so severe a cuff upon the cheek that for many minutes he lay
unable to move, when at length, much crest-fallen, he slowly crept back
to his post behind his master.

Thus the days passed away.  Sometimes the lady led the Knight forth,
mounted on cream-coloured steeds; at others, in a chariot drawn by
twenty beautiful peacocks; at others, they glided over the surface of a
lake in a barge, towed by thirty milk-white swans, and visited scenes of
the most enchanting beauty.

At length, however, the Knight began to weary of the monotony of his
existence, and to sigh for fresh adventures and more excitement.  The
Squire, too, wished for change, and was not altogether pleased with the
buffet he regularly got every evening at the termination of the ball.

"A parting scene is always painful," exclaimed the Knight.

"It is," answered the Squire.  "I understand your wishes.  I will have
the steeds ready, and at early dawn we will ride forth, and leave a
sweet-scented billet to thank the lady for her courtesy, and to inform
her of our departure."

Less difficulty occurred in the execution of the design than might have
been expected, and, rejoicing in their liberty, the Knight and his
Squire rode gaily forth towards the confines of Armenia.

"But we have got well out of that," quoth the Squire to his master.  "By
my faith, I like more animation, less formality, and greater variety
than we enjoyed down there."

"You speak the truth, my Le Crapeau; yet she was a sweet creature, that
lady of the castle."

Now, the lady of the castle was no other than a powerful fairy, very
kind and very woman-like, who had conceived an affection for the French
Champion, when she chanced to see him as he journeyed through her realm.
Even good fairies will inflict a punishment.

By means for which they could not account, the Knight and his Squire
lost their way.  Round and round they wandered among hills and forests,
till hunger almost drove them to despair, when they were compelled to
sustain nature on the berries and wild fruits which they could pluck
from the trees and shrubs, and on the roots which they dug up with the
points of their swords.  After living many months on this hard fare a
mulberry-tree, loaded with luscious fruit, appeared before them.

"Ah!" exclaimed Saint Denis, "on this at least we may banquet with some
pleasure;" and filling his casque with the fruit, his example being
imitated by Le Crapeau, they sat themselves down, with their head-pieces
between their legs, to indulge, to their heart's content, in the
unexpected treat.

The Knight, who eat more leisurely than his Squire, had scarcely
finished his portion when he heard a loud bray close to him, and looking
round, instead of his Squire, to his amazement he beheld a
starved-looking donkey standing near him, and poking his nose into Le
Crapeau's now empty casque.

While yet wondering and mechanically finishing his mulberries, he felt a
very uncomfortable sensation coming over his own head and legs.  He rose
from the ground and shook himself, but instead of the accustomed rattle
of his steel armour no sound was produced.  He wished to scratch his
nose, but his arms appeared kept down before him.  He tried to call Le
Crapeau, but instead of his manly voice, which had so often shouted
loudly in the battle, a timid cry alone proceeded from his throat.  He
looked at the donkey, and the donkey looked at him, and shook its head
with an expression truly mournful.  Something strange must have occurred
he feared.

Wherever he went the donkey followed.  He wandered away from the
mulberry-tree till he reached a lake of crystal water; he approached it,
when, on its mirror-like surface, instead of a steel-clad warrior, he
beheld a deer with long antlers and shaggy hide, he started back with
dismay.  When hunger pressed him he found himself cropping the grass or
thrusting his nose into the purling brook, with his attendant donkey
ever by his side.  Pitiable as was Saint George's condition that of
Saint Denis was infinitely worse.

Thus for many years he continued unable to recover his natural form.
Often he returned to the mulberry-tree, the cause, as he believed, of
his misfortune.  It did not occur to him that the fairy, whose
hospitality he had enjoyed, had anything to do with it.  Once, as he
came to the tree, so enraged was he that he ran his horns against it and
nearly broke them.  His attendant donkey did the same, and not having
the same protection to his scull, he received a blow so severe that he
was sent reeling backwards till he sunk exhausted on the ground.  Saint
Denis was a second time going to butt, when he heard a hollow voice
breathe forth from the trunk the following words:--

  "Cease to lament, thou famous man of France,
  With gentle ears, oh, listen to my moan!
  Once on a time it was my fatal chance
  To be the proudest maid that ere was known.
  By birth I am the daughter of a king,
  Though now a breathless tree and senseless thing.

  "My pride was such that Heaven confounded me--
  A goddess in my own conceit I was:
  What nature lent too base I thought to be,
  But deem'd myself all others to surpass.
  And therefore nectar and ambrosia sweet,
  The food of demigods, for me I counted meet.

  "My pride despised the finest bread of wheat,
  And richer food I daily sought to find;
  Refined gold was boil'd up with my meat,
  Such self-conceit my senses all did blind.
  For which the cruel fates transformed me,
  From human substance to this senseless tree.

  "Seven years in shape of stag thou must remain,
  And then a purple rose, by magic's firm decree,
  Shall bring thee to thy former shape again,
  And end at last thy woeful misery:
  When this is done, be sure you cut in twain
  This fatal tree, wherein I do remain."

The Knight almost fainted when he heard these strange words, and
understood the length of time he was to remain in his transformed
condition.  His attendant donkey had also heard the words, and treasured
them up in his memory.  Every day, while his master slept, he ranged the
country round, searching for the purple rose, but every evening returned
as wise as he set out.  Thus the seven years passed mournfully away.

One day, unmindful how the time had sped, as he trotted on, every now
and then stopping and uttering a melancholy bray, his nostrils scented
the fragrance of some roses; and though his first impulse was to eat
them, on examining them more closely, he observed that they were of
lustrous beauty and of a purple hue.  Plucking a number of them, he
trotted back to Saint Denis.  He would have brayed with delight, but,
had he done so, he would have dropped the roses, so he restrained
himself till he had laid them before his master's nose.  Instantly the
Knight began to devour them, as did the faithful donkey, when, a stupor
coming over them, they couched down on the green-sward.

Presently extraordinary sensations came over them both, and the horns
and hoofs began to loosen, and the skin to roll up in folds, and a
refreshing shower falling, both Knight and Squire, on opening their
eyes, discovered, to their infinite satisfaction, that they were no
longer brute beasts, but that they had recovered their former comely
shapes, and that their hairy hides lay vacant on the ground.  Near them
were their arms, now sadly in want of polishing, while their trusty
steeds, long roaming the rich pastures around, no sooner beheld than
recognising them, trotted up to bear them once more to the field of
battle or of fame.

Their first care was to burnish up their armour and their weapons.  For
many a weary hour they rubbed.

"We might have saved ourselves all this trouble, and spent the last
seven years more pleasantly and profitably, had we not idled away our
time in the magnificent castle of that beautiful lady down there,"
observed Saint Denis, as he scrubbed away.

"Certes, Master dear, it's a failing I for one have when I get into the
society of the fair sex, I feel little inclination to leave them; but we
have had a pretty sharp lesson, and I hope to amend for the future."

The task was performed at last.  Then the Champion, recollecting what
the mulberry-tree had said, drew his sword, and with one blow cut the
stout trunk quite asunder.

Instantly there issued forth a bright flame, from the midst of which
appeared a lovely damsel, clothed in a robe of yellow silk, made from
the cocoons of the innumerable silk-worms, which fed on the tree.

"Oh, most sweet and singular ornament of nature!" exclaimed the Knight,
bowing low before her, as did his Squire; "fairer than the feathers of
the graceful swan, and far more beautiful than Aurora's morning
countenance, to thee, the fairest of all fair ones, most humbly and only
to thy beauty do I here submit my affections.  Tell me, therefore, to
whom my heart must pay its true devotions, thy birth, parentage, and
name."

The maiden, to whom it was long since such words had been addressed, was
highly delighted with them, and informed the Knight that her name was
Eglantine, that she was the daughter of the King of the neighbouring
country, Armenia, and assured him that he would be welcomed at her
father's court.

It is not recounted how many ferocious giants and furious lions he and
Le Crapeau slew on the road while escorting the princess, though they
were very numerous.  They put to flight also a whole army of Pagans, who
came to carry off their precious charge.  Le Crapeau himself, however,
took care not to omit the details, nor did Saint Denis pass them by in
silence.  The King of Armenia, who had long mourned his daughter as lost
to him for ever, was so grateful to the French Knight that he at once
promised her to him in marriage, and entertained him with the most
sumptuous banquets and balls, and other pleasant divertisements which
his court could produce.



CHAPTER SIX.

THE ADVENTURES OF SAINT JAMES OF SPAIN.

Saint James, the Champion of Spain, on parting from his comrades at the
brazen pillar, took ship, and was wrecked on the coast of Sicily.

Travelling through the island, followed by his Squire, Pedrillo, he
reached the foot of Etna, then terrifically spouting forth vast masses
of flame and boiling metal, and ashes, and smoke.  Unappalled by the
sight, he climbed the mountain's height, where, perched on a pinnacle of
rock, appeared a mighty bird, with fiery pinions--a winged phoenix.  No
sooner did the monster see him than, darting down, it attacked him with
its red-hot beak, for having dared thus to enter its dominions.

Saint James drew his trusty falchion, and, whirling it round his head,
kept the fearful beak from approaching his helmet, for well he knew that
one thrust from its deadly point would pierce through steel and skull as
easily as a lady's bodkin through her kerchief.

The fearful combat lasted for many hours, till the monster, hopeless of
triumph, flew back to its nest within the crater's fiery bosom.

The following day the fight was renewed, while the faithful Pedrillo
stood at a distance, counting his rosaries, and called loudly on all the
saints to aid his master.  At length the Knight and the monster, seeing
that no profit or glory was to be acquired, retired, by mutual consent,
from the combat.

Saint James then passed into Africa, where, passing through a region
infested by monsters, he slew so many that the inhabitants wished to
adopt him as their Sovereign.

Crossing the Red Sea, he was once more shipwrecked, when, had not a
troop of mermaids carried him and his Squire, with their horses and
furniture to the shore, they would all have been drowned.

At length he reached the beautiful city of Ispahan, the capital of
Persia.  As he stood gazing on her fortified walls, built of pure
silver; on her towers of jasper and ebony; on her glittering spires of
gold and precious stones; on her houses of marble and alabaster, the
streets between which were paved with tin--he heard the cheerful echoes
of a thousand brazen trumpets, and saw issuing from the brazen gates a
hundred armed knights, bearing blood-red streamers in their hands, and
riding on as many coal-black coursers; then came the Shah, guarded by a
hundred tawny Moors, with bows, and darts feathered with ravens' wings;
and after them rode Celestine, the Shah's fair daughter, mounted on an
unicorn, and guarded by a hundred Amazonian dames, clad in green silk.
In her hand was a javelin of silver, while her fair bosom was shielded
by a breastplate of gold, artificially wrought with the scales of a
crocodile.  A vast concourse of gentlemen and squires followed, some on
horse-back and some on foot.

Thus Nebazaradan, the Shah of Persia, rode forth with his daughter to
the chase.

The country had been terribly overrun with wild beasts, and the Knight
heard it proclaimed that the Shah would give a corselet of finest steel,
inlaid with gold, to whomsoever killed the first wild beast that day.

"Come," cried Saint James, "let us after the savage beasts, and win the
corselet!"

Away scoured the Knight and his Squire over the plain till they reached
a forest, in the confines of which they beheld a monstrous wild boar,
devouring the remains of some passengers he had slain.  The eyes of the
brute sparkled like a furnace; his tusks were sharper than spikes of
steel; and the breath, as it issued from his nostrils, seemed like a
whirlwind; his bristles looked like so many spear-heads, and his tail
was like a wreath of serpents.

Saint James blew his silver horn, which hung by a green silk scarf to
the pommel of his saddle.  The blast aroused the boar, who made at him
furiously.  His spear shivered against its bristly hide into a hundred
fragments, when, leaping from his steed, which he directed Pedrillo to
hold, he drew his falchion of Toledo steel, and valiantly on foot
assailed the monster.  From side to side he sprung to avoid its fearful
tusks; but in vain did the point of his weapon seek an entrance to its
case-hardened flesh.  At last, unslinging his battle-axe, he clove the
head of the monster down to the mouth, and with a second blow cut it
completely off; then placing it on the staff of his spear, he ordered
Pedrillo to bear it behind him.

Thus, riding on, he met the Shah and his daughter.  The Shah at first
was highly pleased with his prowess; but when he heard that he was a
Christian Knight, his admiration was turned to rage, and he informed him
that he must either become a Pagan worshipper of the sun or quit the
country.

The Knight proudly answered that no one should make him quit the country
unless of his own free will.

On this the Shah's army surrounded him and Pedrillo, and, after a
desperate resistance on their parts, bore them to the ground.

"Now, Sir Knight, what will you do?" sneered the Shah.  "However, you
have killed the greatest boar in the country, and, as your reward, you
shall choose the manner in which you and your Squire will be put to
death."

The Champion, who was gallant on all occasions, replied that he would be
shot to death by the fair damsels he had seen going forth to the chase.
But when they were informed of this, none were found willing to
undertake the cruel office.

This so enraged the Shah, that he ordained that they should cast lots to
decide who should perform the task.  The lot fell on Celestine and one
of her maidens.  She was to kill the Knight, and her maiden Pedrillo.
Instead, however, of death's fatal instrument, a steel-tipped arrow, she
shot a sigh--true messenger of love--as did her maiden; and then she
hastened to her father to entreat him, with bitter, scalding tears, to
liberate the strangers.  At last he yielded, on condition that they
should forthwith quit the country.

Already had Saint James commenced his homeward journey, when, looking
back on the towers of Ispahan, so inflamed was his heart with the love
of Celestine, that he resolved to return and win her.  He and Pedrillo,
therefore, staining their skins with the juice of some blackberries, and
at the same time habiting themselves in the costume of Moors, pretending
to be dumb, returned to the city.

Then Saint James presented himself as an Indian knight, and, entering
the army of the Shah, won such renown by his heroic deeds, that he was
soon raised to the highest posts of honour.

Now, there came from the far east two sovereigns, claiming the hand of
the fair Celestine; but she, thinking only of Saint James, refused to
entertain their proposals.

At a great tournament given in their honour, they both, clothed in
glittering armour, entered the lists; so did the seeming Moorish knight.
What was the surprise of the King and all his courtiers to behold him
overthrow them both!  Then he rode up beneath the pavilion of the
Princess Celestine, and exhibited to her a ring which she had long
before given him.  By this she knew that he was her own true knight.  He
soon found means to tell her of his love, and all that had happened,
while Pedrillo did not forget to put in a word in his own favour with
her maiden.

They agreed that very night to fly to Spain.  Pedrillo, who was cunning
in devices, turned their horses' shoes backwards, and thus, when they
were seeking safety in the west, it appeared as if they were flying
towards the east.  Thus evading pursuit, they galloped on, crossed the
Red Sea, and, travelling through Africa, the whole party arrived safely
in that wondrous town of Seville, in Spain, where Saint James was born,
and which justly holds itself, in consequence, in the very highest
estimation.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE ADVENTURES OF SAINT ANTHONY OF ITALY.

The adventures of the great Saint Anthony of Italy, after he parted from
his friends at the brazen pillar, are now to be described.  Taking ship,
like Father Aeneas of old, he and his attendant Squire traversed the
Mediterranean Sea, only he sailed eastward, while the pious Aeneas
sailed westward, over it.  Numberless were the adventures he
encountered.

Now his ship was tossed by storms, now pursued by a huge sea monster,
with jaws so wide that the affrighted mariners believed that it was
about to swallow up bodily both them and their ship; but Saint Anthony,
putting on his armour, and standing on the poop, brandished his spear so
manfully in the monster's face that he effectually kept him at bay.  His
faithful Squire shouted also with such good effect, that the monster was
fain to turn tail and to leave the ship and its honoured freight to
proceed unmolested.

At length Asia's ancient shores were reached, and travelling on,
performing every day unheard-of wonders, combating with terrible
monsters, and destroying wild beasts innumerable, he and Niccolo arrived
at the far-famed kingdom of Georgia.

They wandered on till they began to ascend, amid narrow defiles and dark
gorges, the rugged ranges of the mighty Caucasus, high above which
Elborus towers with gigantic splendour.  As they climbed upwards, higher
and higher, there appeared before them a marble castle with gates of
brass, which they guessed, from inquiries they had made, belonged to the
giant Blanderon.  Over the principal gate were these verses:--

  "Within this castle lives the scourge of kings;
  A furious giant, whose unconquer'd power
  The Georgian monarch in subjection brings,
  And keeps his daughters prisoners in his tower:
  Seven damsels fair this monstrous giant keeps,
  That sing him music while he nightly sleeps.

  "His sword of steel a thousand knights have felt,
  Who for these maidens' sakes have lost their lives;
  Yet, though on many knights he hath death dealt,
  This most inhuman giant still survives.
  Let simple passengers take heed in time,
  When up this mountain height they thoughtless climb.

  "But knights of worth, and men of noble mind,
  If any chance to travel by this tower,
  That for these maidens' sake will be so kind
  To try their strength against the giant's power,
  Shall have a maiden's prayer, both day and night,
  To prosper them with good successful fight."

These lines were placed there by the power of the good fairy of Asia,
and were unseen by the Giant, or he would not, it is presumed, have
allowed them to remain.  They so encouraged the valiant Knight, that,
resolving to liberate the ladies, he struck so mighty a blow on the gate
of the castle, with the pommel of his sword, that it sounded like a clap
of the loudest thunder.

On hearing it, Blanderon, who had been asleep, started up, and came
forth to the gate with a huge oak-tree in his hand, which he flourished
about his head as if it had been a light battle-axe, in a loud voice
comparing the Knight's spear to a bulrush, and threatening to hurl him
and his Squire down the side of the mountain.

"Words without deeds are mere empty things," retorted the Knight.  "Try
what you can do."

And giving his steed to his Squire to hold, he drew his trusty falchion,
and stood ready to receive the onslaught of his huge antagonist.
Blanderon, however, flourished his oak so furiously that Saint Anthony
had to jump here and there with the greatest activity to avoid his
strokes.

Now the very earth seemed to shake; now the castle-walls resounded with
the blows.  The Knight relaxed not a moment in his efforts, for he saw
that the Giant was stout; and as the sun's heat was very great, he
panted more and more till the moisture from his brows ran down into his
eyes, and almost blinded him.  Observing this, the Knight plied him with
his battle-axe more vigorously than before, till he was compelled to
seek for safety within his castle-walls; but ere he reached them he let
fall from his grasp his huge oak-tree; on which Saint Anthony,
redoubling his efforts, smote him so fiercely, that he sunk down on his
knees, unable to fly further.  Still undaunted, the Giant drew a dagger
twice the size of any ordinary two-handed sword.  With this he struck
right and left so rapidly that the Knight had hard work indeed to escape
its blows, and still greater to discover a spot in his huge body in
which he might plant a deadly one in return.

At length, however, the Giant grew weary, and Saint Anthony, springing
forward, with one stroke clove his hideous head almost in twain.  Then,
with another blow he cut it off, and handed it to Niccolo, to be carried
before him as a trophy of his prowess.  So violent, however, had been
the efforts of the Knight that he also sank fainting on the ground, when
his faithful Squire, believing him to be dead, knelt by his side, and,
weeping, mourned bitterly his loss.

Now, it happened that the lovely Rosalinde, one of the daughters of the
King of Georgia, who had been taken captive by the Giant, looked over
the battlements, and seeing his headless trunk guessed that he had been
slain by some gallant knight, and that the end of her servitude had
arrived.

Descending to the gate, she beheld the seeming lifeless body of the
Champion, and, kneeling opposite to Niccolo, joined her salt tears with
his in mourning the fate of so brave a Knight.  Then, remembering that
there were some precious balms within the castle, she went and fetched
them; and having applied them to the limbs of the Champion, their effect
was so great that he instantly revived, and sitting up gazed at her with
admiration, and inquired who she was.  They entreated him to wait till
he had been fed and rested within the castle.

While the faithful Niccolo watched by his master's couch, as he slept,
the lady Rosalinde was preparing delicates for his repast.

He at length awoke, restored to health and strength; and then, by the
lady's advice, he ordered Niccolo to drag the Giant's carcass down upon
a craggy rock, to be devoured by hungry ravens; which being done, the
Georgian maiden exhibited to him the wonders of the castle.  First she
conducted him to a brazen tower where were a hundred corselets and other
martial furniture of the knights slain by the Giant.  Then she conducted
him to the stables, where were a hundred steeds, thin and jaded, which
they had once bestrode.  There was also the Giant's bed of iron, with a
covering of carved brass, and with curtains of leaves of gold.  After
this she pointed out to him a pond of crystal water, on which swam six
milk-white swans, with crowns of gold upon their heads.

"Know, brave Champion, that these six swans are my sisters," she
observed.  "We all seven are the daughters of the King of Georgia.  As
we were out hunting one day the Giant from the battlements of his castle
espied us, and, rushing down, bore us off under his arms before anyone
could come to our rescue.  My sisters, by the power of a kind fairy who
had attended at their birth, were transformed into swans, that they
might escape the tyranny of the Giant, though she was unable to release
them altogether.  I, the eldest, retained my natural form; for, from my
skill in music, I could always quell his anger and tame him into
subjection.  Though I might perchance have escaped, I remained, in hope
some day of liberating my sisters.  Now, if the good fairy can be found,
we may tell her of the Giant's death, and bring her hither to restore
them to their natural shapes."

"Most lovely lady, we will fly at once to your father's capital, and
send the fairy hither to perform her grateful task," exclaimed the
Knight, placing the hand of the Princess in his own.  So, taking the
keys of the castle, which were of wonderous weight, they locked up the
gates, and mounting their steeds, followed by Niccolo with the Giant's
gory head, they proceeded to the Georgian Court.

On reaching the gate of the city they heard a peal of bells solemnly
tolling forth a funeral knell.  On inquiring the cause of this, the aged
porter replied:--

"The bells toll for the King's seven daughters.  There are seven bells,
each one called after the name of a Princess, which never have ceased
this doleful melody since the loss of the unhappy ladies, nor ever will
till they return."

"Then their tasks are finished," answered the noble-minded Rosalinde.
"We bring you tidings of the Princesses."

Whereat the aged porter, ravished with joy, ran to the steeple and
stopped the bells.  Hearing the bells cease their wonted mournful
melody, up started the King of Georgia, and hastened to the gate to
inquire the cause.  There, to his joy, he beheld his long-lost daughter
in company with a strange knight and attendant squire.  Hearing the
wonderful tale, he commanded all his courtiers to put on the lugubrious
weeds of mourning, and to accompany him to the castle of the Giant, that
there perchance he might discover some means of releasing his six other
daughters, while the noble-minded Rosalinde and Saint Anthony were left
to take care of the city till his return.

When the King of Georgia, after long delay, did not return, the Italian
Knight declared, in impassioned words, that he must proceed in search of
those adventures for the sake of which he had left his native land.  To
this the noble-minded Rosalinde replied:--

"Oh! most princely-minded Champion of Italy!  It is not Georgia can
harbour me when thou art absent.  The sky shall be no sky, the sea no
sea, the earth no earth, if thou do prove inconstant; but if you will
not take me with you, these tender hands of mine shall hang upon your
horse's bridle, till my body, like Theseus's son, be dashed against the
hard flint stones; yet, hard as they are, not harder than I shall deem
your heart."

One only reply to this appeal could the princely-minded Champion make.
It was to tell her that he would bear her away forthwith as his own true
bride.  And they thus both being agreed, habited as a page in green
sarcenet, her buskins of the smoothest kid-skin, and her rapier of
Lydian steel, secured over her shoulder by an orange-coloured scarf, and
mounted on a gentle palfrey, she quitted the land of Georgia; one of her
maidens, habited also in page's guise, attending, whom Niccolo took
under his especial care.  Thus they travelled; he the bravest, boldest
knight that ever wandered by the way, and she the loveliest lady that
ever mortal eye beheld.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE ADVENTURES OF SAINT ANDREW OF SCOTLAND.

And now the adventures of the far-famed Saint Andrew of Scotland claim
our attention, after he quitted the brazen pillar, followed by his
faithful Squire, Murdoch McAlpine of that ilk.  On he travelled
eastward, in the face of the rays of the glittering sun, which sparkled
on his shield and casque with dazzling brightness, and so astonished all
beholders that they fled dismayed before him, till he crossed the wild
territories of Russia, and entered the wilder deserts of Siberia.  Then,
turning north, he found himself in a region where, for many weary
months, the sun never rose, and he and the faithful Murdoch had to
discover their way by poking before them with their spears, every moment
expecting to meet with some huge monster with whom they might be called
to combat.  Nor did they expect in vain, for suddenly a loud growl
assailed their ears, and the moon, just then rising, exhibited to them a
whole army of bears, prepared to dispute their onward progress.

"Draw your broad-sword, mon, and follow me," cried Saint Andrew, shaking
his spear.

The Squire, tucking up his plaid carefully, that it might not be torn or
soiled, with loud shouts obeyed, and soon both were dashing and slashing
away among the infuriated brutes.  The heads of numbers rolled upon the
snow, which for miles round was ensanguined with their blood.

"Few creatures are more difficult to get rid of than bears," observed
the Knight, charging again.  "On, Murdoch, on, we'll do it if it is to
be done, for what men dare they can do!"

Thus shouting and slaying, the Knight and his Squire fought on for many
hours, till the survivors of the bears, discovering that they were
likely to get the worst of it in the end, took to flight, and stopped
not till they reached the North Pole, where they stopped only because
they could go no further, and where Saint Andrew agreed that it was not
worth while following them.

His next encounter was with a nation of people with heads like foxes,
from whose cunning arts and guiles he had the greatest difficulty in
escaping.  Although conquered by the power of his arms, they still
appeared with fresh tricks to entrap him.  When, at length, he had
fought his way out from among them, he found himself in a dismal vale,
the air still dark as Erebus, where he heard the blowing of unseen
furnaces, the boiling of cauldrons, the rattling or armour, the
trampling of horses, the jingling of chains, the roaring of wild beasts,
the hissing of serpents, and the cries of unearthly spirits, and such
like dreadful sounds, which would have made any other hearts than those
of Saint Andrew of Scotland, and of his faithful squire, Murdoch
McAlpine of that ilk, quake and tremble with fear; but passing calmly
amid them, and undergoing hardships incredible, under which knights and
squires, born in more southern climes, would have sunk exhausted, they
arrived in the kingdom of Georgia, nor rested till they reached the foot
of the mountain on which stood the castle within whose iron walls the
six fair daughters of the King were still held in durance, in the shape
of swans, with golden crowns upon their heads.

When the valiant Champion of Scotland beheld the lofty situation of the
castle, and the invincible strength it seemed to be of, he suspected
some strange adventure to befall him; so, buckling close his armour,
which, on account of the heat he had loosened, and drawing his sword, he
climbed the mountain, when he espied, on a craggy rock, the headless
body of the Giant, on which the ravens and other birds of prey were
feeding.  Then he approached the castle gate, when, what was his
astonishment to see a long procession of mourners come forth, with the
King of Georgia at their head; and, on inquiry, was told that the old
man mourned for his six daughters, whom he could by no means get changed
back into their natural shapes.

Saint Andrew, on hearing this strange tale, expressed his firm belief,
in language somewhat strong, that such things could not be.

Whereon the King and all his courtiers were highly indignant, and
numberless knights stepped forth, and challenged the stranger to mortal
combat.  The lists were quickly prepared.  Then the valiant Champion of
Christendom entered the arena, when the King, in company with many
Georgian lords, was present to behold the contest.  Thrice had Saint
Andrew traced his war-steed up and down the lists, flourishing his
lance, at the top whereof hung a pendant of gold, on which, in silver
letters, was traced, "This day a martyr or a conqueror!"  Whereon there
entered a knight in exceeding bright armour, mounted on a courser as
white as snow, whose caparison was the colour of the elements.

A fierce encounter followed; but the Georgian was defeated, and retired
in disgrace from the lists.

Then entered a knight in green armour, his steed an iron grey.  Loud
rang their spears against their shields, fierce clashed their swords,
and clanged their battle-axes, till the Georgian warrior fairly took to
flight.

The third knight who entered wore a black corselet, and his huge
war-horse was covered with a veil of sable silk.  In his hand he bore a
baton of mighty weight, and bound round with iron; but no sooner did the
champions meet than their lances shivered in pieces from the furious
shock, and flew high up into the air, when, alighting from their steeds,
they resumed the combat with their keen-edged falchions, the sparks
flying from their helmets as from a blacksmith's anvil.

The faithful Murdoch meantime looked on with anxious gaze, when he was
accosted by a little old woman of mean aspect, who had in vain tried to
obtain information from the other bystanders.

"Why is it you want to know, Mother?" he asked, careful not to give a
hurried answer, though he bowed politely.

The old woman, who was in reality a good fairy, replied, "Because I have
come here to do some good; but while a scene of mortal strife is taking
place I cannot employ my power."

Then Murdoch told her all he knew about the matter; whereon she advised
him to hurry to his master when the present combat should be over, and
to bid him declare his belief that the account was true, and to offer to
bring the Princesses forth in their proper shapes.

Meantime the combat between the Scottish Champion and the Black Knight
continued with unabated fury.  Any advantage gained by one was foiled by
the other, till at length Saint Andrew, uttering his battle-cry, struck
so mighty a blow with his battle-axe, that he clave the Georgian's
burgonet, and his head beneath, from his crown to his shoulders, and his
body fell lifeless on the ground.

This so enraged the King that he would have ordered the Scottish Knight
to have been slain, when Murdoch rushed forward and gave the fairy's
message.

The Champion spoke as she had directed, when the King, who was of a
placable disposition, though somewhat hasty, consented to his request.

"Swear, most noble King, upon my sword, that you will not attempt any
foul treachery to me or my follower, on account of the Champion I have
slain, until I have accomplished the task I have now undertaken."

On this the old King, descending from his throne, bent over the gallant
Saint Andrew's sword, and swore as he desired.

The Knight entered the castle, and repaired to the garden, when, instead
of finding an ugly old woman, he beheld a lady of radiant beauty, for
such was indeed the Fairy.

"You see yonder six swans," said she; "as they approach strike boldly
with your sword six strokes, nor fear the consequences."

The Knight stood by the side of the crystal lake, and as he stood, his
glittering falchion in his hand, the six swans swam gracefully up.  Six
times he struck, and each time the head of one of the swans flew up; but
in its stead appeared, wonderful to relate, a beautiful maiden, whom the
Knight handed with true courtesy off her liquid pedestal on to dry land.
Thus, in a few minutes, the Champion was surrounded by six of the most
lovely damsels the world ever saw, habited in green hunting-suits, each
almost equal to Diana herself, going forth armed for the chase.

"You have done well, noble Champion," said the Fairy.  "You did not
despise me, or my words, when I appeared old and ugly, and from
henceforth you will find me ever ready to aid and protect you, as you
travel on in search of those heroic adventures after which your heart
pants.  I bid you farewell; though, remember, that I will come when you
summon me;" saying this the Fairy mounted a golden chariot drawn by
peacocks, and, rapidly gliding through the air, disappeared amid the
clouds which floated round the sides of that lofty mountain.  Scarcely
had she gone, and the six ladies were pouring forth their thanks to the
noble Knight who had delivered them from their cruel bondage, when the
King of Georgia, followed by all his knights and courtiers, entered the
garden of the castle to ascertain what had become of the strange Knight.

Nothing could exceed his astonishment, and delight, and gratitude, when
Saint Andrew presented to him his six daughters in their proper forms.

"You deserve them all," exclaimed the Monarch, in the warmth of his
emotion.  To which the Scottish Knight, with true modesty, replied, that
he considered one far more than he deserved, and that as yet he felt
inclined to remain a bachelor.

The next day, after a sumptuous banquet which the King's cooks prepared
in the Giant's castle, the whole party marched back to the palace of the
Georgian Monarch with banners streaming, cymbals clashing, and drums and
trumpets sounding joyful melody.  When, however, sad to relate, the King
inquired for his eldest daughter, he found that she had fled away with
the Champion of Italy.

This event, so grievous to the heart of the King, made him defer all the
triumphant arrangements which were forming to do honour to the Scottish
Knight and to his six fair daughters.

When, also, Saint Andrew heard that one of his noble comrades was so
near at hand, calling Murdoch to his side, he bade him prepare for their
departure.  Wishing to avoid the pain of parting with the six
Princesses, and, lest their honoured sire might renew his generous
offer, Saint Andrew, without bidding farewell to the King of Georgia, or
to his chief councillors and ministers of state, and other great lords
of the realm, set off from the capital in pursuit of Saint Anthony of
Italy and the fair Rosalinde.

The next day, when the six Princesses heard of the departure of the
Knight they so much admired, providing themselves with sufficient
treasure and habiliments suited for travelling, they left by stealth
their father's palace, mounted on six white palfreys, and attended by
six maidens on asses, intending to find out the victorious and renowned
Champion of Scotland, or to end their lives in single blessedness in
some pious retirement in a foreign land.

No sooner did the news of his daughters' flight reach the King of
Georgia, than attiring himself in homely russet, like a pilgrim, with an
ebony staff in his hand, tipped with silver, he took his departure, all
alone, from his palace, resolved to recover his beloved children, or to
lay his bones to rest in some unknown spot, where, forgotten, he might
rest at peace.

When his councillors, ministers of state, and other great lords heard of
his sudden and secret departure, grief intolerable struck their hearts,
the palace gates were covered with sable cloth, all pleasures were at an
end, and ladies and courtly dames sat sighing in their chambers; where,
for the present, we will leave them to speak of other themes.



CHAPTER NINE.

THE ADVENTURES OF SAINT PATRICK OF IRELAND.

The noble, illustrious, and wonderful deeds of Saint Patrick, the
far-famed and renowned Champion of Old Ireland, that gem of the ocean,
are now to be recounted--not forgetting those of his faithful and
attached squire, Terence O'Grady; though of the latter many less partial
histories are somewhat unaccountably silent.

After they quitted the brazen pillar, they, too, traversed that sea so
famed in ancient story.  But their ship being wrecked as they were
approaching the land, and sinking beneath their feet, they mounted on
the backs of two huge dolphins, which were swimming by at the time, and
which Saint Patrick caught with cunningly-devised hooks; and thus towing
their steeds, they reached in safety the sandy shores of Africa.  There
landing, while they sat by the sea-side burnishing their arms, which
were slightly rusty from the salt air, the sweetest strains of music
struck upon their ears.  The Squire listened, and rising from the rock
on which he sat, he wandered on to discover whence they proceeded.

What was his astonishment, as he looked into a cavern half filled with
water, to behold a dozen lovely nymphs, almost immersed in the crystal
sea, combing their golden locks, while from their throats came forth
those warbling sounds.

The Squire gazed enravished.  "Och, but you are beautiful creatures!" he
exclaimed, forgetting that his voice might be heard.  The maidens
started, like frightened deer, at the sound; and then, seeing the
faithful Terence as he looked over the rock, they swam towards him,
putting out their arms, and endeavouring to grasp his hands.  A more
prudent person would have withdrawn, and suspected treachery; but such
an idea never occurred to the mind of the warm-hearted Irishman.

"A pleasant morning to ye, my pretty damsels!" quoth he, offering his
hand to the first who came up, expecting to assist her to land; for, as
they were dressed in sea-green garments, and had wreaths of red and
white coral on their heads, he thought that they would have no objection
to come out of the water.  Instead, however, of coming out themselves,
the first held him tight, and others arriving caught hold of him
likewise, and began to pull and pull away till the faithful Terence
discovered, without a doubt, that it was their purpose to pull him in.

"But I can't swim, Ladies!" he exclaimed.  "I shall spoil my armour and
wet my clothes--let me go, if you please, now."  He wished to speak them
fair, though doubts as to what they were began to rise up in his mind.
"Och, now, let me go, I say!  A joke's a joke all the world over; but if
you souse me head over ears in that pool, and drown me entirely, it will
be a very bad one to my taste now."  The more, however, he shouted and
struggled the harder the damsels pulled.

Though Terence was a stout fellow, and had been in many a hot fight in
foreign lands, and not a few scrimmages in Old Ireland, he never had had
such a struggle in his life.  At last his cries brought Saint Patrick to
his aid, (for who would the Champion of Ireland have helped more
willingly than Terence O'Grady?) and seizing the other arm, he hauled
away lustily against the twelve sea-nymphs, whom he at once discovered
to be mermaids, who had set their hearts on carrying off his faithful
Squire to their coral homes beneath the waves.

Between the mermaids on one side, and his master on the other, hauling
away with all their might, poor Terence was very nearly torn in pieces.
Still he struggled and strove, entreating his master not to let him go.

Shouts of merry laughter issued from the throats of the mermaids; but
though they diverted themselves with the terror of the faithful Terence,
they did not cease to pull at him the less hard, till he began to fear
that, if they could not have the whole, they would have a bit of him to
a certainty.

Saint Patrick himself saw full well that the matter was no joke; but how
to rescue his Squire without using his sword, and against that all his
knightly feelings revolted, even he was sorely puzzled to discover.

As it happened, there dwelt not far off, in a lofty castle of iron walls
and golden battlements, a monstrous giant, who had long sought one of
these mermaids in marriage; but she fearing his temper, and not wishing
to leave her watery home had ever disdainfully refused to listen to his
proposals.  He now was wandering along the shore in search of her to
prosecute his suit.

As he looked down into the cave and saw the mermaids, one of whom was
his beloved, pulling away on one side at the faithful Terence, while
Saint Patrick pulled on the other, he uttered a loud roar of rage and
fury.  The sound so alarmed the mermaids that they let go their hold,
and fled away in terror, to hide themselves in their coral homes, while
Saint Patrick, looking up, beheld the Giant frowning down defiance at
him.

The Irish Champion, nothing daunted, drew his falchion.  "Ah, my trusty
weapon, thou hast at length found a worthy enemy!" he exclaimed,
climbing up the cliff towards the Giant, closely followed by the
faithful Terence.  Black as jet was the Giant, but blacker were his
looks, yet blackest of all were his intentions.  Behind him stood a huge
crocodile, opening wide its immense jaws, and threatening to devour
anyone who came within their compass.  Many a stout warrior would have
avoided the encounter; but Saint Patrick boldly advanced, trusting in a
good cause, his own arm, and his well-tempered sword, feeling assured,
also, that Terence would give a good account of the crocodile.

Quickly were heard to sound the ringing strokes of the Champion's trusty
falchion against the black shield of the Giant, whose huge battle-axe
dealt many a fearful blow in return.  Fiercely raged the combat.  Blow
after blow was given and taken with right good will, while the Giant
bellowed out so loudly his threats of vengeance against the valiant
Knight, that the rocks and distant mountains resounded with his cries
mingled with the clang of desperate strife.

Terence stood by to watch the contest, not to deprive his loved master
of a shred of glory, till he saw the crocodile opening his monstrous
jaws to snap at his legs.  Then he saw that the time for action had
arrived, and, rushing up, began to assail the brute with right good
will.

The crocodile snapped and snapped his huge jaws with a sound which made
the hills ring and ring again; but he failed to get the faithful Terence
within the power of his grinders; at the same time, in vain the Squire
sought a vulnerable point into which to thrust his trusty sword.  The
length of the monster's snout prevented him from reaching his eyes, and,
as to getting a fair thrust at his shoulders, that seemed utterly
impossible.

All this time Saint Patrick and the Giant, it must not be forgotten,
were fighting furiously.

"Let my tame crocodile alone, or I'll make mincemeat of you when I have
killed your master!" cried the Giant hoarsely, through his clinched
teeth.

"Faith, then, I hope that time will never arrive then, my beauty,"
answered the faithful Terence, making a spring, and leaping nimbly on
the crocodile's back.  "It's not exactly the sort of steed I'd choose,
except for the honour of riding, but I'll make him pay the piper, at all
events;" whereupon he began slashing away with his trusty sword most
furiously on the neck and shoulders of the crocodile.  A delicate maiden
might as well have tried to pierce the hide of an aged hippopotamus with
a bodkin.

At last, losing patience, he sprang to his feet on the back of the
monster, and plunged his sword into one of his eyes, just as he was
about to make a snap at Saint Patrick's thigh.  The crocodile, feeling
itself wounded, turned aside, when the Squire plunged his weapon into
the other eye.

Thus blinded, and furious with pain, the brute rushed forward, snapping
in every direction, and running against his master, caught hold of the
calf of his leg with a gripe so firm that the Giant, groaning with pain,
turned aside his proud looks to see what was the matter.

The opportunity was not lost on Saint Patrick, who, pressing forward,
plunged his falchion into the neck of his antagonist, who, bellowing
louder than ten thousand bulls, made a desperate cut with his battle-axe
at the helm of the Knight.  The Champion sprang aside, and the blow
descended on the neck of the tame crocodile, whereby its head was
severed from its body, Terence narrowly escaping from the effects of the
blow.

The death of his favourite brute enraged the Giant still further; but
rage invariably blinds judgment, and neglecting his proper guards, he
soon found himself treated as he had treated the crocodile, his head, by
a stroke of the Knight's battle-axe, falling on the sand, while his eyes
continued to roll most horribly, as if still animated with fury and
malicious hatred.

The faithful Terence having found a huge brazen key, and a purse of
gold, in the Giant's pocket, and transferred the latter to his own, to
be ready for future emergencies, Saint Patrick and he left the two
carcasses to be devoured by the birds of the air, and proceeded to the
Giant's castle.  The huge brazen key opened the castle gate; when
entering, they wandered amazed through the spacious halls, and courts,
and galleries, admiring the wonders there collected.  In the armoury
were numerous tall and straight trees of cocoa-nut and pine, with iron
or steel points, which served the Giant as spears; his sword even Saint
Patrick could scarcely lift, while near was another tree, taller than
all the rest, with a cable at one end, and a hook bigger than a huge
ship's anchor, with which in his hand the Giant sat on a rock and bobbed
for whales.

In the stables, instead of some vast horses, which they expected to
find, capable of carrying so monstrous a being, they beheld rows of
alligators and hippopotami, which the Giant was wont to harness to his
brazen chariots when he went to war, or out a pleasuring; while, as no
saddles or bridles were found, it was evident that he possessed no steed
capable of bearing his ponderous weight.

Saint Patrick and his Squire, making themselves at home in the Giant's
castle, passed several pleasant days, while they recovered from the
fatigues of their combat and refreshed themselves after their voyage.
Then, that they might keep their own steeds ready for any emergency,
they harnessed a dozen hippopotami, and as many tame crocodiles, to one
of the Giant's chariots, and so, with great comfort and convenience,
proceeded on their journey.  The canopy of the chariot was of azure silk
fringed with silver, which sheltered them from the warm rays of the sun.

"Faith, this is pleasanter far than riding along over a dusty road!"
quoth the Squire to the Knight, with that easy familiarity which the
superior delighted to encourage in his faithful attendant.  "What would
they say in Old Ireland if they saw us two now a travelling along, quite
at our ease, over the burning plains of Africa!"  Whereat Saint Patrick
made some suitable reply.  But their pleasant conversation was cut short
by the sounds of some terrible wails and laments, uttered by female
voices, and at the same time of loud harsh voices and rude laughter,
proceeding from out of a neighbouring wood, which they beheld before
them.  On this Terence whipped on the crocodiles and hippopotami with
right good will, their own trusty steeds trotting behind till they
arrived at the borders of the wood; when, securely fastening their
chariot to a stout tree, they mounted their chargers, and dashed
forward, in the direction from whence the cries proceeded.

Louder and louder grew the shrieks and lamentations, till the Knight and
his Squire arrived at a spot whence, looking down into a sylvan dell,
they beheld a sight which made their hearts melt with pity, and their
blood run cold with horror.  There, with the salt tears running down
their cheeks, and their eyes imploring mercy and pity, they saw six
lovely damsels, clad in green garments, bound to as many trees, while
round them danced a hundred fierce satyrs, terrible of aspect, and
hideous to behold.

Each satyr was armed with a huge club of the size of a tree, which he
flourished wildly, and on his other arm he bore a shield of vast
proportions, like the moon at the full, as she rises over the housetops;
while scabbardless two-handed swords hung with brazen chains by their
sides, and long-bows and quivers full of arrows were suspended at their
backs; their voices as they danced giving forth those hideous sounds
which had attracted the Knight and Squire.

Near the ladies stood six milk-white palfreys, and a little way behind,
who had not at first been seen, six other damsels, their dress and
bearing showing them to be the serving maidens of the lovely ladies in
green.  In an instant the heart of the Champion of Ireland, and of his
faithful Squire, were all in a flame, burning to rescue these six lovely
ladies and their six inestimable serving women from the power of those
hideous satyrs; so, drawing their falchions, and uttering the war-cry of
Old Ireland, they dashed with headlong speed in among them, cutting and
slashing and hewing away before any of those terrific beings had any
knowledge of their approach.

Soon recovering themselves, after a few of their number had bitten the
dust, the hideous satyrs, uniting in one body, and seeing that their
enemies consisted but of a single knight and his squire, flourished
their huge clubs, and with loud shouts, louder than the roaring of ten
thousand bulls, advanced towards them.

Heroically fought Saint Patrick, and manfully combated his Squire.  The
blows from the monstrous clubs of the hideous satyrs fell like hail
about their helmets; but their thirsty swords rapidly drank the
life-blood of their foes, and now one satyr, now another, was
overthrown.  Still more came on.  Some stood at a distance, shooting
their arrows from their long-bows; others came around, with their
two-handed swords, and struck and slashed so fiercely that it required
all the activity and courage of both Knight and Squire, of which they
fortunately possessed so large a portion, to keep their enemies at bay.
Still the sight of the lovely ladies tied to the trees, not forgetting
the six serving maidens, as well as their own honour, and desire for
glory and renown, induced them to persevere.

Full one-third of the hideous satyrs had sunk lifeless from their
stalwart blows, while many others limped off sorely wounded and maimed;
yet the remainder, with a perseverance worthy of a better cause,
fiercely continued the combat.

At length, Saint Patrick telling Terence to escape, wheeled his horse
round as if to fly, but it was only a cunning device, as his faithful
Squire well knew; for, instantly returning to the charge with redoubled
vigour among the scattered ranks of his foes, he dealt such slaughter
and destruction among them, that the survivors were fain to fly far
away, howling, into the distant woods, which resounded with their
mournful cries, leaving the six ladies and their six serving maidens to
the care and protection of the gallant Knight and his attendant.

While Saint Patrick cut loose the cords from the fair limbs of the six
ladies all clothed in green, Terence performed the same office for the
serving maidens.

After they had been refreshed by some pure draughts from the
neighbouring crystal brook, and partaken of such fare as the Champion
could offer them, he led them forth from the wood, and with courteous
attentions, and many polite expressions, placed them in his chariot
drawn by the crocodiles and hippopotami.  Then, and not till then, did
he inquire their names, and state, and nation.

The eldest replied:--"Know, most puissant and valiant Knight, that we
are the unfortunate daughters of the King of Georgia.  Our lives since
our births have been unhappy.  First, we were carried off by a monstrous
giant, and, being turned into swans for seven long years, lost sight of
the outer world, neither knowing what dresses were worn, how fashions
were changed, and many other important matters.

"At length, through the courage of a noble Knight, Saint Andrew of
Scotland, of whom you have doubtless heard, we were happily released
from our thraldom.  What, however, was our astonishment when we got back
to our father's court to find that our eldest sister had departed as the
bride of another famed Champion, Saint Anthony of Italy, by whose mighty
prowess the giant had been slain; and in a brief time Saint Andrew,
hearing or this, also set off in search of his former comrade and
brother knight.

"Now--why need we be ashamed to confess it?--we had allowed a feeling of
regard to spring up in our bosoms for that worthy Knight, and we all
agreed that we could no longer exist out of his society; and so we also
set off from our father's court, resolved to search for him the world
around, and bring him back to our native land, or lie down, and mournful
die beside his tomb."

"The noble Champion for whom you took in hand this weary travel is my
much approved good friend," exclaimed Saint Patrick.  "To get a sight of
him I would go more miles than there are trees throughout this mighty
continent; therefore, will my faithful squire, Terence O'Grady, whom I
now crave leave to make known unto you, and I travel in your company,
and in that of your six serving maidens, till we have found the right
noble Saint Andrew, or some other of those six brave Knights of
Christendom who for seven summers I have not seen."

Much pleased with the discourse and the polished courtesy of Saint
Patrick, the six princesses consented to his proposal; and thus we will,
for the present, leave them journeying in the giant's chariot, drawn by
the dozen crocodiles and hippopotami, and followed by the six maidens
and their six milk-white palfreys, and escorted on either side by Saint
Patrick and his faithful Squire, in the direction they believed Saint
Andrew had taken.



CHAPTER TEN.

THE ADVENTURES OF SAINT DAVID OF WALES.

The last but not the least of all the Seven Champions to be mentioned
famed for heroic courage and gallantry is that most noble and renowned
Knight, Saint David of Wales.  After he had quitted the brazen pillar,
followed by his faithful attendant, Owen ap Rice, he proceeded towards
the up-rising of the sun, visiting many of the courts of the first
monarchs of Europe, attending many tournaments, engaging in many
desperate battles, and performing innumerable heroic deeds; which his
faithful Squire took very great care to recount, nor did he allow his
histories to lose anything in the telling.  Wonderful indeed were the
numbers of foes his master's sword had slain; huge were the giants he
had overthrown; savage were the wild beasts he had slaughtered; terrific
were the monsters he had put to flight; powerful were the magicians
whose guiles he had circumvented; and horrible were the spirits, and
ghosts, and goblins amid whom he had fought his onward way; indeed few
could hear the faithful Owen recount his master's deeds, and eke his
own, without being impressed with the belief that more heroic Knight did
not exist, nor more brave and trusty Squire.

Thus they journeyed on till Europe was left behind; and entering the
ancient continent of Asia, they arrived at the court of the far-famed
Emperor of Tartary.  Here Saint David's fame had preceded him, and they
were received with all that courtesy which to so valiant a Knight was
due.

On the day of their arrival a sumptuous entertainment was prepared, at
which all the chief lords and nobles of the realm were present, when
huge beakers of rosy wine were quaffed; nor could anyone compete with
Saint David in the quantity of the generous liquor he imbibed.  For the
following day a grand tournament was arranged, when it was expected that
the noblest feats of arms ever beheld in the empire would be performed.

From far and near came valiant knights from all the neighbouring
provinces, habited in every conceivable style of richest armour; yet
none surpassed Saint David in the sumptuousness of his plume and
burgonet, the trappings of his steed, the richness of his scarf, the
splendour of his shield and breastplate, or of his whole armour, which,
from his lofty helm to his knightly spurs, shone with resplendent
beauty.  Numerous champions entered the lists, and many desperate
encounters took place.  At length Saint David rode in, followed by the
faithful Owen carrying his spear.  The trumpets sounded, Saint David
took his spear, and shaking it aloft prepared for the encounter.  A
Knight, one of the chief nobles of Tartary, was his first opponent.  Of
blue steel was his casque, and armour, and mighty shield, while a blue
scarf floated from his shoulders.  Bravely the Tartar Knight bore
himself, and bravely he withstood the terrible shock of Saint David's
lance.  A second time the two Knights charged, when Saint David,
mustering all his powers, struck the Tartar a blow so terrible that he
sent him reeling from his saddle, and with a hollow groan he fell
senseless on the ground; but time will not permit an account of each
separate combat of that far-famed tournament.

Six valiant Knights did Saint David meet, each of whom was vanquished by
his arm.  At length, the only son and heir of the Emperor, seeing that
no more worthy antagonist could be found, and willing to retrieve the
disgrace he conceived his countrymen had received, entered the lists,
and bravely challenged the Champion of Wales.  The heart of the gallant
Saint David bounded at the thought of engaging in so noble a contest as
that with the Emperor's son, and he declared himself ready to commence
the course whenever it was the pleasure of the noble prince to meet his
lance.

"No time like the present, Sir Knight," replied the gallant Tartar, who
was arrayed in armour of rare and curious workmanship, studded all over
with gold and precious gems.

"It were a pity to slay so brave a prince," thought Saint David; "yet
for the honour of my country, than which no nobler exists, as also for
my own, than whom no..."  (what Saint David thought need not be
repeated).  "If he presses me it must be done."

The trumpets sounded, the steeds sprang forward, the ground trembled
beneath their feet, clouds of dust arose in the air; terrific was the
shock, but both Knights kept their seats, though both were sorely
pressed.  Again they charged, with a like result.  A third time they
met, and Saint David felt that he was reeling in his saddle; but
recovering himself by a mighty effort, he prepared for another and more
desperate encounter.  Little wotted the proud son of the great Emperor
of all the Tartars with what a doughty Champion he had to contend;
little thought he of the gallant heroes that far-distant land of Cambria
was able to produce.  Shaking his spear, he shouted loudly to Saint
David to prepare himself for an overthrow.  The Welsh Knight only
grasped his own spear the tighter in consequence, and pressed his knees
the firmer against his charger's sides.

"And the Prince expects that he is going to throw my master, does he?"
observed the faithful Owen.  "Let him beware of Saint David; I may tell
him he has borne down to the ground twelve as good men as he is, with
one thrust of his lance, before now."

The trumpets sounded, and the Tartar Prince and the Champion of Wales
met in the middle of the lists.  Terrific was the encounter; the spear
of the Tartar Prince was shivered into a thousand fragments; but the
Welsh Knight, with true gallantry, let his fall by his side, and grasped
his battle-axe, that they might light on equal terms.  Already, however,
had the spear inflicted a desperate wound on the Prince's side; but his
pride would not let him yield.  Now sparks of fire flew thickly around
them from the extraordinary rapidity of their strokes, so that they
appeared to be fighting in the midst of a furnace (so Owen the faithful
Squire ever afterwards averred), till at length Saint David's axe
descended with force so terrific on the helm of the Tartar Prince that
he clove it in two, nor did the cruel weapon stop till it had pierced
the brain of the hapless heir to the throne of the great Emperor of
Tartary.

When the spectators beheld what had occurred, loud cries of grief,
anger, and dismay rent the air; the great Emperor and all his courtiers,
from the highest to the lowest, crying louder than anyone else.  The
lists were immediately broken up, and the Emperor, ordering the Welsh
Knight to be brought before him, retired into his palace.  The obsequies
of that precious jewel of Tartary, now dimmed by death, being concluded,
the Emperor, having ceased his woeful lamentations and sad sighs, thus
addressed the Welsh Champion:--

"Know that there dwells on the borders of Tartary a mighty Magician,
Ormandine by name who holds an enchanted castle and garden, within the
magic walls of which whoever enters never again returns.  Now truly,
although thou deservest death for what thou hast done, yet if thou wilt
adventure into the Magician's domains, and bring hither his head, I
grant thee not only life, but therewithal the crown of Tartary after my
death."

This strange adventure highly pleased the noble Champion of Wales, and
he expressed himself ready forthwith to depart about it.  On which the
Emperor bound him by his oath of knighthood, and by the love he bore his
native country, never to follow any other adventure till he had
performed the promise he now had given.

In three days he and the faithful Owen, having made all preparation,
were ready to set out.

Travelling eastward for many a weary day, though conversing pleasantly
to beguile the way, they at length reached the confines of a dreadful
forest, the trees twisting and twining in every direction, and briars
and creepers of all sorts, with long thorns and hooks, hanging from all
the branches.  Mysterious flames seemed to be bursting forth, wavering
and flickering in the dark recesses of the forest, while amid the boughs
flew birds of evil omen, night-owls, and ravens, and bats, and other
winged things of hideous form, with harsh and croaking voices.  Within
this forest, so Saint David had learned, stood the castle of the
Magician Ormandine.

"My faithful Owen," he exclaimed, "by my honour and my oath of
knighthood, I am bound to enter and to traverse this strange and woeful
wood; but do you wait my return without, and if I never do return, go to
my kinsmen, in our native land, and tell them all about my sad and
melancholy end."

The faithful Owen, on hearing these words, burst into tears, and
replied: "My long-loved honoured Master, if there were ten thousand
forests, and if in each thrice ten thousand ill-doing necromancers
lived, and if through each you had to fight your way, I would remain
steadfast by your side, and fight as long as arm, and hand, and sword
could do their work."

"Then onward into this dreadful forest, my faithful Owen, let us go!"
exclaimed Saint David, drawing his sword, and beginning to hew away at
the creepers and briars which impeded their progress.  In this labour he
was ably seconded by the faithful Owen; and thus, by slow degrees, they
worked their onward way.  As they proceeded, the shouts and shrieks
increased, the sky overhead was filled with lurid meteors, and hideous
and ill-omened birds flew thickly around their heads, screeching their
terrific notes into the ears of the adventurous strangers.

"Few things worth having can be obtained without difficulty and
perseverance," exclaimed Saint David, as he went on cutting and cutting
away at the creepers.  "As to all the hooting, and the screeching, and
crying which assail our ears, it cannot hurt us if we take no heed to
it.  Few noble enterprises have ever been undertaken without numbers of
people, like those hideous night-owls, endeavouring to hoot them down."

Thus manfully cutting and hewing away, they at length came in sight of
the dark and frowning, damp, and moss-overgrown walls of an ancient
castle.  Near it was a huge rock, still more damp and moss-covered than
the castle-walls.  In this rock, by magic art, was enclosed a sword, the
hilt being the only part which could be seen.  It was of steel work,
engraven curiously, and set with jaspers, sapphires, and other precious
gems.  Around the pommel was engraven, in golden letters, the following
words:--

  "By magic spells remain most firmly bound,
  The world's strange wonder unknown by anyone,
  Till that a knight within the north be found
  To pull the sword from out this rock of stone:
  Then end my charms, my magic arts and all,
  By whose strong hand sage Ormandine must fall."

"A northern knight!--that must mean me," exclaimed Saint David.
"Undoubtedly, I am destined to pull the magic sword from out of that
rock.  See how I'll do it!"  On this, dismounting from his steed, he
grasped hold of the hilt, and began to pull and pull away right
manfully; but in vain he pulled, and tugged, and hauled; not a hundredth
part of an inch had he drawn forth of the sword, but, still persevering,
he would not let go.  At length, the faithful Owen entreated that he
might be allowed to come and help.  Then Knight and Squire tugged and
tugged away, but still the sword would not move.  Next, putting both
their hands to the huge hilt, and their feet against the rock, they
bethought them most surely that they would move it.  Scarcely, however,
had they in that guise begun to pull, than there arose around them
fearful shouts of mocking laughter, and, the gates of the castle opening
wide, twelve hideous dwarfs, with faces black as coal, and bodies
horribly deformed, issued forth, and bearing in their hands some iron
chains, which clanged as they moved, approached, with grinning mouths
and threatening gestures, the Knight and his Squire.

Saint David and the faithful Owen would fain have let go the richly
gemmed hilt of the magic sword, but when they strove to do so they found
their hands clinched firmly to it.  Now they struggled as much to free
their hands as before they had to draw out the sword.  But in vain was
all their tugging and struggling.

The dwarfs stood round awhile to enjoy their dismay, and then throwing
the iron chains around them, they bound them in fetters which no earthly
power could undo, and carried them away, helpless as infants in their
nurses' arms, to the magic castle.  There, in the centre of an iron hall
of vast dimensions and sombre hue--the only light emitted from a lurid
torch burning at the further end--on iron beds, of which a countless
number appeared ranged around, lay writhing the victims which the fell
Magician's cruelty had left bound.  There, for many years, till the full
term of seven was accomplished, we, too, will leave them, daily visited
by the Enchanter Ormandine, who came to mock at, and gloat over their
misery.

"Ah! ah!" he exclaimed, with a voice croaking like ten thousand frogs,
and loud as thunder, "you came to cut off my head, and carry the gory
trophy to the Emperor; but now you find, my friends, you've caught a
Tartar."

Notwithstanding, however, this conduct of the Enchanter, his chief
captive was not so miserable as he supposed.  A kind fairy all the time
watched over him; and as Saint David lay on his couch she sent four of
her attendant spirits, in the form of damsels, of no mean beauty, who
tended him with the gentlest care, and brought him fruits and other
luxuries, which they offered whenever he awoke, and then sang him to
sleep again with their sweet voices, so that his time passed far more
agreeably than would certainly otherwise have been the case, or the
Enchanter had any idea of.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE RELEASE OF SAINT GEORGE.

Seven times had frosty-bearded winter covered the ground with snow, and
behung the trees with crystal icicles, since the Champion Saint George,
and the faithful De Fistycuff, lay groaning in their far-off dungeon in
Egypt, for having ventured to assert that crocodiles, and apes, and
snakes, were not fit objects of reverence.

One day, as by chance the Knight was wringing his hands, in despair of
ever getting free, he chanced to rub in a peculiar manner the magic ring
which the Fairy Sabrina had given him.  A bright light was forthwith
emitted from it, which increased and increased till it filled the
chamber, and from the midst of it appeared the Fairy herself, in her
chariot drawn by ten peacocks.

"Gallant Knight, why did you not summon me before?" she asked, in her
sweet voice; and Saint George had to confess, with shame, that he had
forgotten all about the power of the magic ring.

"I cannot free you from this prison by magic power; but I will give you
tools with which you may free yourselves, and then you will set more
value on your liberty than if you had gained it without toil.  I never
afford aid to any who are not ready to labour for themselves."

The Fairy having thus spoken, supplied the Knight and his Squire with
hammers, chisels, spades, mattocks, and crowbars.

"Your steeds and weapons you will find ready outside the gates," added
the Fairy.  "When once more prepared for battle, go forth, and conquer."

The Knight and De Fistycuff felt their strength and spirits wonderfully
improved at these words, and already they fancied themselves scouring
over the plain in pursuit of a thousand flying foes.

"But is there no gallant achievement, no heroic deed, which you would
desire me to perform, as a mark of my gratitude?" asked Saint George,
after he had duly thanked the Fairy for the aid she had wrought him.

"Well spoken," answered the Fairy; "yes, there languishes, even now, a
brother knight, one for whose country I have a fond regard, Saint David,
of Wales, in the gloomy castle of the Magician Ormandine, on the borders
of Tartary.  Go and free him.  From trusting entirely to his own
strength, and not seeking rightly for all other aids, he failed in what
he undertook to accomplish.  A magic sword, by which alone the Magician
can be conquered, is held in a rock near his castle.  No human strength
can pull it out; but take this flask of oil, pour it into the rock, and,
waiting patiently, you will find the sword easily come forth."

The Knight promised to obey the Fairy's directions; and she having
disappeared, he and De Fistycuff set to work so manfully, although not
accustomed to handle such tools, that in a few days they hewed
themselves a subterranean passage beneath the walls of the city.
Through iron plates, and thick walls, and granite rocks, and mud, and
sand, they worked, the last, like slippery people, giving them the
greatest difficulty to deal with.  At length the sky appeared; and
there, at the mouth of the cave out of which they emerged, stood their
steeds, held by two dwarfs of ugly aspect, who presented them with their
spears, and swords, and other weapons.

No sooner were they mounted, and Saint George was about, to reward the
dwarfs, than he found that they had disappeared.

Accordingly, they set off, as fast as Bayard and the Squire's steed
could carry them, along the neck of land which joins Africa to Asia, and
then galloped rapidly northward.  In wonderful condition were the
horses, while the pure, fresh air their riders breathed, after their
long imprisonment, added fresh vigour to their limbs, and courage to
their hearts.

Many adventures, which cannot here be recorded, were met with; and at
length they reached the magic forest which surrounded the castle of the
fell Enchanter.  They witnessed the same terrific sights, and heard the
same sounds as did Saint David and the faithful Owen; but, equally
dauntless, they clove their onward way through brake and briar, in spite
of the hissing of serpents and hooting of owls, groans and shrieks, and
other similar sounds, to which they were pretty well accustomed by this
time, till they reached the Magician's castle.

There, in the rock, they beheld the hilt of the magic sword.  De
Fistycuff was about to seize hold of it at once; but Saint George warned
him to desist till he wisely had obeyed the Fairy's directions, and
poured the oil upon the rock.

Slowly it trickled down through many a crevice, when the Knight, waiting
patiently for the oil to take effect, grasped the sword with his left
hand, while he kept his own falchion ready to use in the right.

"Who knows but the Magician may come forth to attack me before I have
freed the sword?" he observed to his Squire.  Gradually, but surely, the
sword yielded to his unwearied and long-sustained efforts.  While still
drawing it forth, a terrific uproar was heard within the castle; the
ground shook, trembled violently, rocking to and fro, and flames darted
forth from the rock; but the Knight held fast the weapon.

Suddenly the brazen gates of the castle burst open, and there issued
forth the Necromancer Ormandine, arrayed in all the terrors with which
he could clothe himself.  His helmet had a fiery plume, hissing snakes
were writhing about his casque and shoulders, his armour seemed of
red-hot metal.  A hooting owl of hideous aspect sat on his shoulder,
while he brandished an iron club covered with spikes, like his armour,
red-hot.  He made directly at Saint George; but Ascalon was in the
Knight's grasp, and wielding it, as he well knew how, he kept the
Magician at bay, while he tugged more vehemently than ever at the magic
sword.

With a clap louder than that of any thunder, it came at length forth
from the rock, and taking it in his right hand he with it furiously
assailed the Magician, who no sooner felt its keen edge than his club
fell from his nerveless grasp, the owl flew hooting away, the serpents
crawled hissing off, and the once-powerful Magician fell humbly on his
knees and craved for mercy.

Saint George, telling De Fistycuff to guard him, entered the castle,
where, on iron beds, he found, bound with chains, his friend and comrade
Saint David, and the faithful Owen, groaning, and sighing, and mourning
their hard fate.  Cutting the chains, with as much ease as if they had
been cords of silk, with the magic sword, he set them, to their great
joy, on their legs, when, with a profusion of words, they poured out
their expressions of gratitude.

Saint David then told Saint George of his vow to the Emperor of Tartary;
when the English Knight informed him that the Enchanter was in his
power, but that he was unwilling to take his life.

"But, behold the signs of his cruelty!" said Saint David, pointing out
to Saint George the other nine hundred and ninety-eight iron beds in the
hall.  "There lie bound many other noble knights and squires who for
many long years have been prevented from engaging in any deeds of
heroism.  Think how many victories they might have won; how many captive
knights released; how many forlorn maidens rescued from durance vile;
how many other noble deeds they might have done!"

This speech so completely changed Saint George's view of things, that he
told Saint David he would hand over the Magician to him.  Then the
Champion of Wales went forth from the castle, and with one blow of his
sword cut off Ormandine's hideous head, and sticking it on a pole, which
he delivered to the faithful Owen to carry, informed his brother
Champion that he was ready forthwith to depart for the court of the
Emperor of Tartary.

The other nine hundred and ninety-eight gallant knights and squires,
released by the courage and wisdom of Saint George, having expressed a
strong desire to follow his fortunes, he undertook to lead them round
the world in search of adventures worthy of their prowess.  Saint David,
also, promised, when he had fulfilled his vow to the Emperor of Tartary,
to search him out and aid him.

Often had the noble Champion of England thought of the lovely Sabra, but
knew not where she was.  At length, with his army of valiant knights and
trusty squires, having reached the kingdom of Bagabornabou, he, on
inquiring for her, heard, with dismay, that she had been carried off a
prisoner by Almidor, the black King of Morocco, and had ever since been
pining in a dungeon.

Calling his knights around him, he told them of the occurrence, and with
loud shouts, waving on high their swords, they promised to accompany him
to rescue her, or to die in the attempt.  Setting off forthwith, they
reached the dominions of the black King; when Saint George, disguising
himself as a humble palmer, entered the city, followed by De Fistycuff,
in the same habit, to ascertain in what vile dungeon the lovely Sabra
was shut up.

In vain he wandered up and down, whispering her name, and inquiring of
all he met, till, at length, he saw a beautiful white dove fly upward
from a hole in the ground beneath the massive wall of a huge castle.
Catching the dove, he wrote on a slip of parchment, which he placed
under its wing, "Saint George of England has come to Sabra's rescue.
Tell me if you are here!"

Soon the dove, having entered the hole, returned to the Knight, when he
discovered, under its wing, on the same parchment: "I, the hapless
Sabra, am here; oh, free me, and receive a maiden's grateful love!"
Instantly returning to his knights, and throwing off his palmer
garments, Saint George led them to the assault.

On every side the castle-walls were stormed.  Some climbed up ladders,
some over each other's backs, with such desperate valour, that the
Moorish soldiers gave way on every side; till Almidor, hearing the
turmoil and loud shouts of war, rushed to the battlements.  Then ensued
a fight most desperate between the noble Champion of England and the
black King, in which the latter would most assuredly have been slain had
he not, like a recreant, turned his back and fled, among his followers,
through a postern gate, which, happily for him, stood open,--proudly
asserting that he would return and fight another day.

Having thus victoriously taken possession of the Moorish castle, Saint
George and all his knights and squires burst open all the doors and
gates, and explored all the passages they could find, till they arrived
at a gloomy vault.  Within it was a little door.  Saint George thundered
at it with his battle-axe.  It burst open; and there he beheld his
lovely and beloved Sabra, her beauty dimmed, but not extinguished, by
her long imprisonment.

Saint George and his knights having taken possession of the Moorish
capital, he held a grand banquet in honour of the occasion, when a
herald announced, in due form, that the British Champion was about to
wed the lovely African Princess.  Thrice was the announcement made; and
no one objecting, the fair Sabra, after all her misfortune, became, as
her reward, the bride of the noblest Knight Europe, or the world, has
ever known.

So enchanted were the Moors with the valour and courtesy of Saint
George, that their chiefs, lords, and nobles, and the councillors of
state, came in humble guise and proffered him the crown of their
country; but he declared, with many expressions suitable to the
occasion, that he had not yet won that renown for which his soul panted,
and must decline the honour.

Having dismissed the nine hundred and ninety-eight knights and squires,
whom he had rescued from the castle of Ormandine, with warm thanks for
the assistance they had rendered him, and sincere wishes for their
welfare, they all departed to their separate countries and homes, and
such as were married to their wives and children, who had long been
mourning their absence, and in most cases, though not in all, wishing
for their return; Saint George and his beautiful bride, the enchanting
Sabra, set out on their travels, through many unknown and strange lands,
attended by the faithful De Fistycuff, whose wife would much rather that
he had gone back to look after her and their children in England.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE TOURNAMENT AT CONSTANTINOPLE.

Now it happened that the great Emperor of the East held a grand
tournament at Constantinople, to which all the knights and nobles of
Christendom were invited, to do honour to his nuptials with a princess
he was about to wed.  Thither came the Seven Champions, not knowing each
other after their long separation, but each believing the others in some
distant quarter of the globe.  The Emperor had, however, pitched seven
tents of seven different colours, wherein the Seven Champions might
remain till the sound of the silver trumpets summoned them to appear.
Seven days the tournament was to last, and each day a different Knight
was to be Champion of the field.

The first day, Saint Denis of France, under the title of the Golden
Knight, was the Champion.  His tent was of the colour of the celandine,
and on the summit flamed a sun of wondrous brilliancy.

His horse, an iron grey, was graced with a plume of gold-bespangled
feathers.  Before him rode the faithful Le Crapeau, bearing his banner,
on which was designed the golden _fleur-de-lys_.  Numberless were the
foreign knights with whom he tilted, every one of whom he overthrew.

Next day, Saint James of Spain, habited in silver armour, rode forth as
the Champion; his Squire, the faithful Pedrillo, bearing aloft four
banners, on each of which were inscribed his names and titles, and those
of his ancestors, so that not a spot of silk remained uncovered.  Well
he behaved himself, to the admiration of all beholders.

Clad in blue steel, and called the Azure Knight, on the third day, Saint
Anthony of Italy rode forth as the chief Champion, attended by the
faithful Niccolo, bearing his standard, an eagle on a field of blue.
Above his tent was a smaller pavilion in the shape of a watch-tower, in
which was seated, as spectatress of the fights, the Georgian Princess,
the strong-minded Rosalinde, who had, by praiseworthy perseverance, and
allowing no trifles to stand in her way, completely won the heart of
Saint Anthony, and had become his bride.  Well, also, did he, the
Italian Champion, acquit himself, and many valiant knights were by his
spear unhorsed.

On the fourth day, Saint Andrew of Scotland was the chief Challenger for
the tournament.  His tent was framed in the manner of a ship swimming on
the waves of the sea, environed about with dolphins, tritons, and many
strangely-contrived mermaids; on the top stood a figure of Neptune, the
god of the sea, bearing in his hand a streamer, whereon, in one corner,
was wrought a cross in crimson silk.  He was called the Red Knight, for
a blood-red cloth completely covered his charger.  His worthy
achievements obtained such favour in the Emperor's eyes, that he threw
him his silver gauntlet, which was prized at a thousand portagues, and
the which Murdoch McAlpine, lifting it from the ground, bore with no
little satisfaction to his master's tent; where the Champion also
retired, and after his noble encounters enjoyed a sweet repose.

The fifth day, Saint Patrick of Ireland, as chief Champion, entered the
lists, mounted on an Irish hobby, covered with a green veil.  He was
attended by the faithful Terence O'Grady, in sylvan habit, bearing on
his shoulder a blooming tree, his motto, _virtus semper viret_.  His
tent resembled a summer bower, formed chiefly of the shamrock, and
beautified with wreaths of roses.  He was named the Green Knight; but he
was green only in name, for no Knight proved himself more accomplished,
or performed nobler deeds.

Upon the sixth day, the famed Champion of Wales entered the lists,
mounted on a Tartar steed, which was covered with a black cloth, to
signify, as Owen ap Rice made known, that a black and tragical day was
this for all Knights of every nation who durst approve his fortitude.
On his shield was portrayed a silver griffin rampant, and upon a golden
helmet, the ancient arms of Britain.  His tent was in the form of a
castle, the battlements guarded by numerous sturdy men-at-arms.  His
princely achievements not only obtained due commendations at the
Emperor's hands, but all the fair and high-born dames present (so the
faithful Owen ever afterwards averred) applauded him as the most noble
Knight that ever shivered lance, and the most fortunate Champion that
ever appeared at the Court of the Eastern Emperor.

Upon the seventh and last day, Saint George of England entered the lists
as chief Challenger, mounted on a sable-coloured steed, betrapped with
bars of burnished gold, and whose forehead was beautiful with a gorgeous
plume of purple feathers, from whence hung many pendants of gold.  The
Knight's armour was of the purest steel inlaid with silver; his helmet
was richly adorned with pearls and many precious stones; and on his
banner, borne before him by the faithful De Fistycuff, was pictured, on
a blood-red field, a lion rampant, bearing three crowns upon his head.
His tent, white as the feathers of the swan, was supported by figures of
four elephants of purest brass.  Before it stood an ivory chariot,
guarded by twelve coal-black negroes, and in it sat his lovely bride,
the Princess Sabra, spectatress of the tournament.  All eyes turned
towards the English Champion, to gaze and admire.  His steed bore him
right nobly, and never gave encounter to any knight but both man and
horse were speedily hurled helpless to the ground.  That day the
tournament lasted from the sun's up-rising till the evening star
appeared, during which time he conquered five hundred of the hardiest
knights of Asia, and shivered a thousand lances, to the admiration of
all beholders.

The tournament being over, the Emperor sent to Saint George's tent a
golden tree with seven branches, to be divided equally among the seven
foreign Champions.  There they all assembled; and what was their
astonishment, when they removed their casques, to discover that they
were the long parted and ancient comrades!  Warmly they grasped each
other's hands, and talked and laughed right pleasantly.  High revelry,
also, did they hold that evening in Saint George's tent, and told each
other of their adventures, exploits, and achievements.  Jovially they
quaffed full golden beakers of rosy in wine, and many a jovial song they
sang, and many a tale they told.  All inquired who the lady could be who
had been seen on the summit of Saint Anthony's tent; when he confessed
that the strong-minded Princess Rosalinde of Georgia had won his heart
and hand.

"She, then, is sister of the six lovely Princesses I had the happiness
of being instrumental in turning from swans into young ladies.  Your
bride will be glad to hear that they appeared none the worse for their
transformation!" exclaimed Saint Andrew.

"Ah! you do not know, then, what happened after you left the country, my
cousin of Scotland!" cried Saint Patrick.  "Ha! ha! ha!  They all set
off to follow you, unknown to their father.  I met them in a wood with
their six maidens, wandering alone, and had the satisfaction of rescuing
them from the power of some unpleasant enemies, among whom they had
fallen.  I thought they would have found you out before now."

"No, indeed, I have escaped them hitherto," answered Saint Andrew,
rubbing his hands.  "One of them might have persuaded me to marry her,
and that would not at all have suited me.  I intend to remain a bachelor
for many a year to come."

"I wonder you did not offer to marry one of them, at least, my brave
Irish friend," observed Saint Anthony; "it would have been but in
accordance with the acknowledged gallantry of your countrymen.  I, too,
should have been glad to have hailed you as a brother-in-law."

"Faith! so I would have married one or all of them, if it hadn't been
from the difficulty of making a selection, and hurting the feelings of
the rest; for a more amiable collection of young ladies I never set eyes
on; so I gave them a little chariot I had got, drawn by a few alligators
and hippopotami, and advised them to go quietly back to their father's
court, instead of gadding about the world as they were then doing.
Whether or not they took my advice I cannot say, for when they went
north I turned my horse's head, and, with my faithful Squire, rode away
south."

Many other similar adventures to these were told by the old comrades, of
which there is no space to tell.

But if the Knights were merry, much more so were their Squires.
Joyfully they discovered each other, and agreed to meet together in the
tent of the faithful De Fistycuff.  Right jovial was the meeting, and
huge the amount of the viands they consumed, and innumerable the beakers
of Samian and Falernian wine they quaffed.  Merry the stories they told
of their numberless adventures, and facetious the songs they sang.  Each
Squire boasted loudly of the deeds of his master, and of the country to
which he belonged; but no one boasted louder than did the faithful Owen
ap Rice, of Saint David especially, and of his own loved country, Wales.
Terence O'Grady was not much behind him in that respect; while Murdoch
McAlpine declared that Saint Andrew was one of the best of masters, and
that if Scotland was not the finest and the largest country in the
world, it was, at all events, the one he loved the best, just because it
was Scotland and his native land.

"Your hand, old comrade," exclaimed De Fistycuff, springing up, "that's
the very reason why I like Merrie England.  She has her faults, I'll
allow; but though I've wandered nearly all the world around, there's no
country in my mind to be compared to her, and with all her faults I love
her still."

"Bah!" exclaimed Le Crapeau, "she is not equal to _la belle_ France, at
all events."

"Inferior to Italy, without doubt.  Look, what noble people the ancient
Romans were!" observed Niccolo, swallowing a handful of macaroni.

"The idea of comparing a little island to a magnificent territory like
Spain!" cried Pedrillo.  "Why, we were civilised, and a province of
Rome, while the British were painted barbarians, unknown to all the rest
of the world."

Thus they disputed, but all in good humour, and many a joke was bartered
on the subject.  All things terrestrial must come to an end, and so did,
at length, the Knights' banquet and the Squires' jovial supper.

The next day, scarcely had the Champions arisen from their downy
couches, whereon they had rested their weary limbs, after the fatigues
of the numberless combats in which they had been engaged, when it was
announced that six foreign Princesses, of great beauty, had arrived in
the capital, and had been witnesses of the tournament, in disguise.
Some said they had come in one way, some in another; and among other
descriptions of the mode in which they travelled, it was asserted that
they came in a chariot, drawn by twelve tame alligators and as many
hippopotami.

"The Georgian Princesses, a crown against a baubee!" exclaimed Saint
Andrew, starting up from his couch.  "Murdoch, go and find out, with all
speed, and if it is the case, get ready our steeds and baggage without
delay, or one of these strong-minded young ladies will be insisting on
accompanying me to my ancestral halls in bonnie Scotland."

"They've run their game to earth; there's no doubt about it," cried
Saint Patrick, who had been fond of sporting in his youth, when he heard
the news.  "They deserve our brushes for their pains; and one thing must
be said in their favour, that they are very pretty young women, and not
at all afflicted with the ordinary prejudices and bashfulness which
stands in the way of so many young ladies in finding themselves
comfortable establishments.  What say you, Terence?  Don't you think
that I might go further and fare worse?"

"Ah! faith! noble Master, that you might, unless, mark me, you get back
to old Ireland; and there it isn't much difficulty I'd have in finding
many a score of sweet creatures, to whom, it's my belief, these Georgian
Princesses couldn't hold a candle."

The mention of his fair countrywomen (of whom Saint Patrick was a warm
admirer, and who is not who knows them?) artfully thrown in by his
Squire, turned the Knight from the intention he began to entertain of
making one of the Princesses his bride.

When the Seven Champions met at breakfast, they talked the matter over
with due gravity.  They recollected that there were six ladies and only
five bachelor knights, two only being benedicts.

"But suppose we five were to marry five of the Princesses, one still
would be like puss in the corner--she must be left out," observed Saint
Andrew, who was evidently the least inclined of any of the party to wed,
and had arranged to start away directly after breakfast.

"Oh! one must become a nun," observed Saint Patrick.  "It's a mighty
pleasant sort of life to those who don't like work, and are fond of
being utterly useless."

Scarcely was the breakfast over than the Champions were summoned into
the presence of the Emperor; and there, seated around him, were the six
Princesses of Georgia, radiant in beauty, and looking bewitching and
killing in the extreme.

"Fair ladies, and right noble strong-minded Princesses, here are the
Seven Champions of Christendom.  It has come to our imperial knowledge
that you have left the Court of my brother of Georgia, your royal
father, for the purpose of wedding one, if not more, of these right
valorous Champions, for in that matter there seems to be some little
difficulty.  Make your choice, therefore, most strong-minded Princesses;
whom will you wed?  For, from the observations I have made of these
Knights' gallantry, I can pledge my imperial word that they will not
refuse your moderate and modest requests."

Now, the six Princesses, on hearing these words, looked unutterable
things, and a roseate hue rushed into their lily-like cheeks; but their
eyes did not wander up and down the hall among the Knights, for, with a
constancy worthy of all admiration and imitation, they fixed them on
Saint Andrew.

"He is the Knight who changed us from swans into maidens, he is the
Knight, for love of whom we left our father's home, and in search of
whom we wandered, all forlorn, the world up and down, and with him alone
do any of us wish to wed."

"Well spoken, fair Princesses," observed the Emperor.  "That much
circumscribes the question, and decreases the difficulty.  Which of you
desires to wed with the gallant Christian Knight?  For, remember, that
only one wife can he have, whatever may be the custom in Asia."

Saint Andrew, who had never feared mortal foe or foes, giants, wild
beasts, or evil spirits, began at these words to tremble in his shoes,
and to regret that he had not recommenced his travels by daybreak.

The strong-minded Princesses all sat looking at him.

"I'm the one to marry him," cried the eldest.

The Champion's heart began to sink within him.

"I'm the one to marry him," cried the second.

"But I'm the one to marry him," cried the third.

"But I say that I'm the one to marry him," cried the fourth.

"But I declare that I'm the one to marry him," cried the fifth.

"You are all wrong!" exclaimed the sixth.  "From the very first I am
sure that it was understood clearly that I was to be his wife."

"Stay, sweet Princesses," observed the Emperor, calmly, "I see clearly
that there has been some slight misunderstanding among you about this
matter, and I am sure Saint Andrew is too gallant a Knight to desire to
make any five of you unhappy, or jealous of the sixth.  I, therefore,
purpose to send you all back, under a proper escort, to your father's
court, and I hope that you will there speedily find six noble knights to
lead you to the altar of Hymen."

The six strong-minded Princesses made very long faces at the decision of
the Emperor; but, as his decisions were always final, they could make no
reply; though, when they once more turned their eyes towards the
Scottish Knight, the spectators could not but remark that their
expression was very much changed, and Saint Andrew evidently thought it
wise to keep at a respectful distance from their fingers.

"Certes, Master," whispered Murdoch to Saint Andrew, "you are, to my
belief, very well out of it."

"It's a mighty easy way of settling the matter," said Terence O'Grady,
"but I wonder what the six serving maids are to do!"

History reports, however, that they went back to Georgia, married six
stalwart knights, and lived very happily afterwards, as did their six
fair attendants, who, in like manner, married six faithful squires, who
all in time became knights and great lords of the realm.

After the tournament and all the festivities were over, the Seven
Champions prepared to depart, each for his own country; but, ere they
commenced their journey, news arrived that all the great Pagan Powers
had banded together to overthrow the Christian Emperor of the East, who,
therefore, sent to entreat all the aid they and their followers could
afford.  With one accord they promised to raise an army, and to hurry
back to his assistance.

Saint George, leaving his youthful bride, the lovely Princess Sabra, in
his castle near Coventry, soon levied a powerful army; and, setting
sail, no longer as a knight-errant, but as a renowned general, he
arrived with his forces on the coast of Portugal, where he was joined by
the other six Champions, who each brought troops in proportion to the
size of his country.  So enchanted were the Portuguese with Saint
George, that, having no Champion of their own, they entreated him to
become theirs, and have ever since retained him among their most
honoured saints and heroes.  Here Saint George was chosen generalissimo
of all the Christian forces, and, once more setting sail, he entered the
Mediterranean.  Then, landing on the coast of Morocco, he bethought him
of punishing Almidor, the black King of that country, who was about to
join the Pagan armies.

The Moors in vain endeavoured to prevent the landing of the Christian
Champions.  The battle was hot and furious.  Almidor rushed to the van,
where quickly he was singled out by Saint George.  Terrific was the
combat, and never before was the Moorish Monarch so hotly pressed.

Now he had prepared, in full expectation of victory, a vast cauldron of
boiling metal, in which he purposed, with fell intent, to cast the
Christian Champions and their followers; but when at length, unable any
longer to withstand the far-famed sword of Saint George, he fled in
despair, to cast himself headlong in, and his example being followed by
his generals and chief officers, the furious battle was brought to a
speedy end, and the Princess Sabra was well avenged for the cruelties
the black Almidor had inflicted on her.

Scarcely had this satisfactory event been brought about than Saint
George received the unwelcome news that the Earl of Coventry was
besieging his castle in England, for the purpose of carrying off the
Lady Sabra, his bride, and now the mother of three blooming boys,--the
wicked Earl having spread a report that the great Champion of England,
whom no other foe could conquer, had yielded to the inevitable hand of
death.

The brave Knight hastened back with the speed of lightning, when sad was
the sight which met his eyes.  His castle was burnt to the ground, and
his lady had been carried off by the wicked Earl, and, as she had
refused all his offers of marriage, had been accused of witchcraft, and
lay in prison, condemned to be burned alive.  What had become of his
three blooming boys he could not tell.

Putting spurs to his horse, the Knight and De Fistycuff galloped into
Coventry.  There he met the Earl going out hunting; and there, in mortal
combat, he laid him low.

Scarcely had the Earl breathed his last, acknowledging with his dying
breath the lady's innocence, than the Princess Sabra was led forth to
execution.  Quickly her guards were put to flight, and mounting her on
his horse, he bore her off to a neighbouring forest, where he might defy
pursuit.

There, as they wandered up and down, one day they espied three beauteous
boys, sleeping on a bed of roses, beneath a shady bower.  The parents'
hearts told them that the children were their own.  They flew towards
them, when they saw, seated at the further end of the bower a beautiful
lady.  Instantly Saint George knew her as the kind Fairy who so often
before befriended him, and who had now saved his children from the
burning castle.  Again and again he thanked the Fairy, who, smiling
sweetly, vanished from his sight.

Leaving his children under the care of those wise tutors, named
Industry, Attention, and Teachableness, taking his wife, he once more
set out to rejoin the army engaged in the war with the Pagans.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

SAINT GEORGE KILLS THE ENCHANTER OSMOND.

Saint George and his virtuous Lady, having arrived in Africa, were
travelling to Egypt from the west, when they chanced to arrive at a
magnificent country, inhabited only by Amazonians.

Journeying along, great was their surprise to find every town and
village desolate of people; the fields untilled; and fields overgrown
with weeds: nor man, nor woman, nor child was to be seen.

Scarcely food even from the berries in the woods could they procure to
satisfy their hunger.

In this extremity, after many days, they arrived before a rich
pavilion--all of green and crimson, bordered with gold and azure--the
hooks of ivory, the cords of silk, while at the top stood a golden
eagle, and at each corner a green silver griffin shining in the sun.
Beautiful as was the tent, still more lovely was the lady who stood
before it--a maiden queen--crowned with an imperial diadem, and clothed
in a robe of green, with the body formed of lace of gold, and her
crimson kirtle bound with violet-coloured velvet, the wide sleeves being
embroidered with flowers of gold and rich pearls.  Around her stood her
maiden attendants in comely attire, with silver coronets on their heads,
and silver bows in their hands, while at their backs hung quivers full
of golden arrows.

With courteous words the Queen invited the Knight and his Lady to enter
her pavilion, when she told him that her country was sorely afflicted by
the arts of a wicked magician, named Osmond, who had sought her love,
and having been rejected had conceived the most deadly hatred against
her.

"He has built," she said, "a mighty tower on the borders of my realm,
from which issues so deadly and dark a smoke that my people are driven
from their homes, and the country remains desolate.  He has left the
guarding of the castle to a terrible giant, the ugliest monster eyes
ever beheld.  He is thirty feet in height, his head three times the size
of that of the largest ox, his eyes larger than two sunflowers, and his
teeth, with which he can break a bar of iron, standing out a foot from
his mouth; his arms long and bony, his skin black as coal and hard as
brass, and his strength so great that he can carry away three knights in
armour, and their steeds, with the greatest ease."

"Now, by my halidom, but I will fetter this monster and break the
enchantment, or never see this place again."  In vain the Princess Sabra
entreated him not to undertake the adventure.

Even the Amazonian Queen thought it beyond his power.

At daybreak, accompanied by De Fistycuff, he set forth, leaving the side
of his weeping wife, and assuring her that he would return in safety.
As he and his Squire advanced into the enchanted district the light of
day decreased; darker and darker it grew, till they could with
difficulty grope their way before them, while dense clouds of smoke
seemed to be rolling thicker and thicker over their heads.  Nothing
could surpass the melancholy and depressing gloom of the air.

At length, by a faint glimmer of lurid light, they beheld the gates of
the enchanted tower, at which sat, on a block of rock, a huge giant in
his iron coat, with a mace of steel in his hand.  At first sight of
Saint George and his Squire, he beat his teeth so mightily together that
they rang like the stroke of an anvil; and then he sprang up and rushed
forward, thinking to take the Champion, horse and all, within his mouth,
with the Squire under one arm, and to bear them into the tower.

When, however, the giant opened his mouth, showing his teeth sharp as
steel, Saint George thrust his trusty sword Ascalon so far down it, that
the monster cried out loud as thunder in his pain and terror; the very
earth trembled, his mouth smoked like a fiery furnace, and his eyes
rolled in his head like brands of flaming fire: but the Champion pressed
him harder and harder, the blood flowing in a great stream from his
mouth, till he was forced to cry out for mercy, and to beg for life.
This Saint George granted him, on condition that he would discover all
the secrets of the tower, and ever after be his true servant.  Then the
giant swore to speak the truth, and told him that the necromancer had
made a huge fire in a deep vault whence all the smoke came forth, but
that near the fire was a fair and pleasant fountain, the water of which,
if any knight could cast it on the fire, the smoke would cease and the
fire be put out.  This sufficed Saint George.

Ordering the giant to keep the door, and leaving De Fistycuff to watch
over him, he advanced into the tower, which was full of vast windows;
and then he entered a long dark passage with a door at one end, set as
thick with spikes of steel as are the prickles of a sea-urchin's skin;
yet, dashing open the door, in spite of the clouds of smoke which rushed
out, he descended in total darkness, thundering blows all the time
raining down on his burgonet, which he guarded off with his shield, and
voices from unseen spirits screeching in his ears, while the heat, great
at first, increased so fiercely that he was almost melted, his armour
becoming nearly red-hot.

Just as he was about to faint he espied the crystal fountain, and
quickly filling his shield from it, he cast the water on the fire.
Backwards and forwards he went, till, to his joy, he saw the smoke
ceasing and the blue sky appearing, when the light of the sun entering
the dark passage, he saw on the stairs many great images of brass, with
mighty maces of steel, which had struck him the heavy blows as he
descended.

The fire being quenched, and the enchantment being thus happily quashed,
the country was restored to its former prosperous condition, while Saint
George received warm thanks of the Amazonian Queen; and then, with the
Princess Sabra by his side, and followed by De Fistycuff, and the huge
Giant Orcus as he was called, he set off to join the Christian army in
the south.  On their way, however, finding that they were not far from
Bagabornabou, the native land of the lovely Sabra, they determined to
journey thither.

De Fistycuff, as a herald, went before to announce their arrival,
whereon they were received right royally.  Such joyful sounds of bells,
trumpets, cymbals, and drums, were scarce ever heard before in the
kingdom; nor had such stately pageants ever been seen as those which
welcomed them; the walls were hung with Indian coverlets and curious
tapestry, and the pavement was strewed with odoriferous flowers of every
lovely hue.

This being over, the Princess Sabra was crowned Queen of the country,
and for many days she and her noble lord reigned there in peace and
prosperity, till the desire of martial glory summoned Saint George once
more to buckle on his armour, and to join the Christian forces now
marching towards Egypt.

Time will not allow a full description of the bloody battle which took
place between the Christians and the Pagans, or of the magic arts
practised by the fell Enchanter Osmond, who strove with all his power to
overthrow or circumvent the former; or how he raised an army of evil
spirits from the earth, the air, and fire, and water; and besides a
mighty tempest by which huge oaks were torn up by the roots, houses and
temples were unroofed, and men and horses carried high up into the air,
and let down again with terrific crashes.

While the tempest was raging, they charged into the Christian host with
flaming falchions, firing their horses' manes, burning their trappings,
and consuming their banners; but undaunted they stood, headed by Saint
George and the six other Champions, till the Pagan forces were compelled
at length to give way, and to retire from the field.

The acts of the Enchanter were not yet concluded, for he erected a magic
tent, with arts so subtle, that the interior seemed like a large country
full of gardens, fields, and orchards, and palaces.  There he caused six
of his spirits to assume the guise of six lovely princesses, travelling
the country round in search of six gallant knights who would break some
lances in their services.  By artful guile the seeming royal ladies
persuaded the six Champions to accompany them to their pavilion, where
they announced that a right royal banquet was prepared to do them
honour.

The Champions departed, unsuspicious of ill; but day after day passed by
and they did not return.  The troops, by degrees, began to complain that
they were left without their leaders; when Saint George, inquiring into
the matter, right wisely supposed that it might be some cunning device
of the Enchanter Osmond.

On inquiring of his slave, the Giant Orcus, he found that this was
indeed too true, and that the Knights were kept in servile bonds in the
magic pavilion.  Addressing his warriors, he told them of the discovery
he had made, when, with loud shouts, they vowed to follow wherever he
might lead.

Thus trusting in the noble Champion, they neither feared the
necromancer's charms, the flaming dragons, the fierce drakes, the
flashing lurid lights, or the legions of hideous monsters armed with
burning falchions, which surrounded them as they marched towards the
enchanted pavilion.

Far more dangerous were the sounds of sweet music which struck upon
their ears, and the enchanting sights which their eyes beheld, as they
surrounded the magic tent; but Saint George, recollecting the honour of
his knighthood, let drive at the tent with his sword, so furiously, that
he cut it into a thousand pieces; when there was exposed to view the
fell Enchanter Osmond, sitting on a rock of iron, feeding hideous
spirits, who obeyed his will, with drops of blood.

The Champion and his soldiers rushed upon him so furiously that, seizing
him unawares, they carried him off, and bound him with chains to the
root of a blasted oak, whence neither his own art nor all the spirits he
once commanded could release him.

Saint George then set at liberty the six captive Knights, when the
lovely princesses, turning into their proper shapes of six hideous
spirits, flew off with loud shrieks and hisses through the air.

The necromancer then shrieking forth that all his magic arts and devices
had come to nought, tore out his eyes, bit his tongue in two, because
that it had so often uttered curses, cut off his hands, which had held
his silver wand, the cause of so much evil; and finally ended his
existence by devouring his own inside, dying thus a warning to all
magicians for future ages.

This adventure being happily terminated, the Christian army advanced
towards Egypt and Persia; nor did the Champions ever again sheathe their
swords, or unlock their armour, till the subversion of those ancient
Empires was accomplished.  This being done, they took truce of the
world, and triumphantly marched towards Christendom; in which journey
they erected many stately monuments in remembrance of their victories
and heroical achievements; and through every country that they marched
there flocked to them an innumerable company of Pagans, that desired to
follow Saint George into Christendom, protesting that they wished to
forsake their heathen gods, whose worshippers' chief delight is in the
shedding of human blood and every cruelty.  To their requests Saint
George at once condescended, not only in granting them their desires,
but also in honouring them with the favour of his princely countenance.

Once more did the gallant Champion return to England, with the faithful
De Fistycuff, and this time he invited the other six Champions to
accompany him.

Pen would fail properly to describe the magnificent entertainments with
which they were honoured, and the pleasant time they spent there, before
they again set forward on their adventures.

There, sad to relate, the Princess Sabra sickened and died, and with
grief and anguish Saint George raised a magnificent tomb to her memory,
and placed it above her grave.  Then, after embracing his three young
sons, he once more set out on his travels.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE ADVENTURE OF THE THREE SONS OF SAINT GEORGE.

Numberless were the strange adventures in which the gallant Champions of
Christendom were engaged, and numberless the noble deeds they performed;
of the greater number of which this history, by stern necessity, must be
silent, and many of which can be but briefly described.

For many years Saint George had travelled up and down the world, the
faithful De Fistycuff by his side, nor had news of them been received in
England.  His three noble sons had now grown to man's estate, and had
received the honour of knighthood from their Sovereign.  When, as they
were visiting one night their mother's tomb, her spirit, in the gentle
form she wore on earth, rose from out of it before their enravished
eyes, and counselled them, as they loved their honoured father's memory,
to go and search him out, and bring him back in safety to his native
land.  Thus having spoken, with a sweet smile, she vanished from their
sight.

Well furnished, they set off from England.  Scarcely had they travelled
far through Normandy, than, as they were passing through a wood, a loud
shriek assailed their ears.  Charging amid the trees, they beheld a
lovely damsel in the hands of a dozen armed men; fierce pirates, from
their dress and weapons, they appeared.  With the war-cry of their
father's name, they rushed on the marauders, and, as none would yield,
they slew them all, and then loosed the lady and her attendants, whom
the pirates had bound to the surrounding trees.

With grateful words and tears, which chased each other down her cheeks
of lily white, she told them that she was the daughter of a Duke, whose
castle was hard by.  Then the three young Knights were sumptuously
entertained and pressed by the Duke to stay; but mindful of their duty,
they speedily set forth again to search out their father.

They journeyed on for many days, through countries where no houses or
habitations were to be found; they rested, therefore, at night in the
woods or on the open downs, having only the starry firmament for their
canopy.  Thus sweetly reposing on their mother earth, they slept as
soundly as if they had rested on beds of feathers, and had been
surrounded with curtains of the purest Arabian silk.

One night they had been sleeping securely, until such time as Aurora
began to gild the firmament with her bright rays, and to usher in
Phoebus's golden light, when suddenly a terrific noise, which seemed to
arise from some deep abyss, and to be about to rend the rocks asunder,
assailed their ears.

Awaking, they leaped to their feet, and buckling on their armour, stood
on their guard.  High time it was for them so to do; had they slept but
another minute sad would have been their fate.  As they gazed around, to
discover whence the noise could have proceeded, they saw coming towards
them a most hideous monster, of excessive size and terrible shape.  His
eyes were like burning saucers, so round and large were they; his mouth
was like that of some huge bird of prey, and his front claws were like
those of eagles, but infinitely larger and sharper; he had ears like a
fox, with a scaly breast, and wings like a bird; but his body was
shaggy, and his hinder feet were like those of a lion.

Again and again he roared most terrifically, and as he moved along his
head reached high up among the boughs of the tallest trees.  Their three
horses, as he drew near, snorted and stamped on the earth, rearing up
with terror, and almost broke from the ropes which secured them, for the
young knights, disdaining to fly as they might have done, had kept on
foot.  They felt, also, how perfectly and completely they could trust
each other, and thus they stood, fearless of the coming danger.

The monster, with loud cries, spreading out his wings, and lifting up
his terrible talons, rushed towards them.  Side by side, at a little
distance apart, they stood ready to receive him.  He ran at the centre
one, who, stepping back a pace, made a furious cut at him with his
sword, while the other two assailed him on either side.  Quick as hail
fell their blows on his hard side, but, hard and tough as was his skin,
their sharp swords soon found entrance, and the blood of the monster
began to flow in torrents, rising quickly over their feet, for they
fought in a valley from whence there was no means for it to escape;
blood not being able of itself to run up hill in any way more easily
than water, which cannot do it at all.  The young Knights thus saw that
if they desired to escape drowning, they must finish the combat without
further delay; the odour of the monster was excessively disagreeable to
their olfactory nerves, being like the essence of ten thousand
pole-cats, weasels, skunks, ferrets, and similar vermin.

Now they plied their blows more furiously than ever, till at length Sir
Guy, the eldest, plunged his weapon into the monster's scaly breast, and
roars of pain and rage, louder than that which ten thousand elephants,
lions, and donkeys united could make, were sent forth by the terrific
brute, who threw himself headlong on the gallant knights; but they
nimbly skipped out of the way; and, as his face lay submerged in his own
blood, they again thrust their swords into his back and sides, while
thousands of bubbles, floating up from the surface of the pool of Wood,
showed that, at length, he had breathed out his hideous life.

The Knights, having ascertained that he was dead, retired from the
field; the neighbourhood of which soon became unbearable, from the
horrid odour which proceeded from it.  Having thus washed away all the
stains of the combat, in a neighbouring stream, for they were all three
very nice young men, and hated to be more dirty than was necessary, they
proceeded on their journey.

Time will not allow me to dwell long on their subsequent adventures.

As they journeyed on, faint and weary, and sadly wanting refreshment,
they met a herald loudly proclaiming, on his brazen horn, the greatest
rewards to whoever would slay the Monster Pongo, who was ravaging the
country.

They stopped him and told him that they had slain the monster.  On this,
after they had shown him where the brute lay, the herald conducted them
to the Court of the King, who received them with unbounded joy, and
loaded them with honours.

Now it had happened, that, while the Monster Pongo was ravaging the
country, and the King and all his Court, and ministers, and generals,
and his army were distracted and entirely beside themselves, a band of
pirates, led by a noted chief, had landed on their shores, and carried
off the fair and young daughter of the King, the Princess Urania.

No sooner did the young Knights hear the tale, than they offered to go
in search of her, as a work worthy of their arms.  In a stout vessel,
rowed by sturdy men, they set forth.  Many tempests they met with, and
much were they tossed about by the waves.  Little did they think at the
time that their honoured sire and his six friends, the other Champions
of Christendom, were likewise making a long voyage, and were the sport
of the winds and waves; the only powers, indeed, which could make sport
of such doughty Knights.  Weeks had passed away, and still they were
ploughing the waves, and wishing that Britannia, when she was about it,
had ruled them straighter, when they perceived, at a distance, several
vessels.

They made towards them.  A desperate combat was taking place, and fierce
pirates, with burning torches in their hands, were endeavouring to set
fire to the barks of their opponents.

On the deck of one of them, yet at a little distance, who should they
behold but two of the great Champions of Christendom, their honoured
father, Saint George, and his dear friend, Saint Andrew, standing calm
and undismayed, waiting the time for their vessel to approach near
enough to take part in the combat.  As they guessed, rightly, the rest
of the Champions lay on their couches below, overcome by the power of
the sea, wishing themselves safe on dry land again, and caring very
little whether they then and there went to the bottom.

Instantly the three young Knights, urging on their bark, threw
themselves on the pirates, whom, after a desperate combat, they
compelled to surrender; many having leaped overboard, and others having
been slain.  One of the pirate vessels was almost in a sinking state.  A
cry proceeded from her hold; it was that of a female in distress.

The young Knights rushed on board, when, ere the vessel sank, they drew
forth a young and lovely damsel, and carried her in safety to their own
bark.  A few words sufficed to tell them that she was no other than the
Princess Urania, of whom they were in search.

Saint George was highly delighted with the prowess of his sons, and he
and his friends accompanied them to the Court of Urania's father, where
they were all, as might have been expected, sumptuously entertained.

From thence they again set forth in search of fresh adventures, which
were no less wonderful than those I have already narrated, but which
require a longer pen than mine to tell.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE DEATH OF SAINT PATRICK.

Time, which spares not kings or princes, any more than other people, at
length laid his heavy hand on the Seven Great Champions of Christendom,
and eke on their once doughty Squires.  Hard knocks in battles and
tournaments, voyages by sea, and travels by land, hard fare as well as
gay revellings, fights with giants, monsters, wild beasts, and evil
spirits, had done their work, unnerved their once iron arms, and turned
their raven or auburn locks to grey; while from their chins, instead of
full bushy beards, hung down long silvery streamers of white; and those
lion voices, which once had been heard high above the din of battle, and
had braved kings on their thrones and giants in their dens, were now
changed to weak and trembling trebles, which could scarce be heard even
above the summer breeze.

First, of Saint Patrick I will tell.  Laying aside his lance, and trusty
sword, and armour, which he committed to the care of his ancient
follower and faithful squire, Terence O'Grady, (now the father of a fine
family, and settled on his own estate in Ireland, which has been handed
down to his descendants from generation to generation,) he assumed the
humble palmer's guise, and resolved to wander up and down the world,
not, as before, to perform feats of arms, but to collect all sorts of
information which might be useful to his beloved native land, where he
proposed ultimately to lay his bones.

No longer was he accompanied by his faithful Terence, but solitary and
alone did the aged Palmer go forth.  Great as he was, many sins had he
to mourn, and much had he to be sorry for.

Among the things he most regretted were the opportunities he had lost of
doing good, and of gaining that knowledge which would have made him
useful in his generation.  However, he thought that he would make amends
for his early neglect; but even the great Saint had to learn that lost
opportunities in the days of our youth and strength can seldom or never
be recovered when years advance with rapid strides and lay a heavy hand
upon us.  Thus, resting on his staff, with a scallop shell in front of
his broad-brimmed hat, in russet coat and wallet at his back, the old
hero set out once more on his adventurous journey.

Many strange adventures even then befell him.  Often was he assailed by
fierce temptations, but bravely he resisted them, as he had done his
enemies of old.  The laws and institutions of foreign countries were the
chief objects of his inquiries.  Nothing came amiss to him; he asked
about everything he saw, and never seemed weary of gaining information.
Even into cook-shops and kitchens he found his way; and some assert that
the Irish from him learned how to cook potatoes properly, though I do
not see exactly how that can be the case, seeing, as may be remembered,
that potatoes came from America, and that America did not happen to be
known in those days.  Perhaps he, however, may have been over there
unknown to the rest of the world.  Others say that, at all events, he
introduced the Irish-stew; but to that there seems also some little
objection of the same character, as "praties" enter largely into its
composition.

Then, again, that objection is overruled by those who assert that some
other root or some cereal might have been used in their stead.  No true
Irishman, however, doubts the following fact, which is about to be
described.

Travelling onwards, he at length reached a part of Africa, often much
infested by serpents.  He was there told of a rare and wonderful means
which the inhabitants employed to get rid of the serpents.  Having
caught them, they tied fish-hooks to their tails.  No sooner did the
serpents find this incumberance attached to them, than in their rage
they never failed to turn round and bite at their other extremities.  In
this way they invariably caught their mouths in the hooks, and thus
being turned into hoops or rings, from which uncomfortable position
being utterly unable to escape, they were easily caught up on long
sticks and thrown over the left shoulder into the nearest lake or river,
from which they were certain never again to come back.

This was only one, it must be remembered, of the many important pieces
of information that blessed Saint and great man Saint Patrick picked up
in his latter travels.  Some say that he taught the Irish to read and
write.  Certain, at all events, it is that he introduced that fine and
glorious weapon, the shillelagh, among them; and, moreover, taught them
the use of it, for which his memory is ever to be held in due reverence,
not to speak of many other reasons why he should be loved and admired by
all the sons of Erin.

At length, Saint Patrick, feeling that his latter days were approaching,
got back safe to Old Ireland, there firmly purposed to leave his bones.
The country, at that time there can be no manner of doubt about it, was
overrun with serpents, big and little, in great numbers, whose bite was
so venomous, that, if a man got stung by one of them, he in a minute or
less swelled up into a mountain.  So the people came to Saint Patrick,--
for to whom else should they go, seeing that, of course, he was one of
the wisest men in the kingdom?--and they told him that it was their firm
belief that the whole land, from north to south, would be depopulated
before long if the snakes were not driven out of it.  So, just then
thinking of something else, he told them to take their shillelaghs and
to knock the snakes on the head, and to drive them into the sea, he
himself setting the example; and right lustily he laid about him, as he
was wont to do in his early days, among Pagan hosts, or wild beasts, or
giants, or ogres.

Suddenly, as he was attacking a monstrous serpent wriggling about before
him, he recollected the way in which he had seen the snakes got rid of
in Africa.  So, ordering all the fish-hooks to be procured throughout
Ireland to be brought to him, he had them tied on to the tails of all
the serpents to be found.  Instantly the serpents were turned into
hoops, and calling his faithful followers, he showed them how to ring
them all on their shillelaghs.  This done, staggering away with them at
their backs, all the serpents, and snakes, and vipers, were carried off
to the sea, into which they were thrown and drowned, and from that day
to this not one has ever ventured to come back to the shores of Old
Ireland, and none ever will, that we may be assured.

After this great and important achievement, the pious Saint wished to
retire altogether from public life.  So he had a hermitage cut for
himself out of a big grey moss-overgrown rock, on an island in a lake
surrounded by trees, where very few people ever thought of coming to see
him; but some good pious families, who lived near, used to take him
fish, and other provisions, to supply his daily wants, which were,
indeed, but few.

There he lived on for some years, his existence being neither very
useful nor very interesting, and the puzzle was how he managed to pass
his time.  His hair grew longer than ever, and so did his nails; and at
length it was discovered that he was with them, day after day, engaged
in digging his own grave.  Like the mole, working away, he turned up the
earth till he had made it deep enough and long enough to suit his taste.
When it was completed he laid himself down in it, weary of the world,
and never rose from it again.

When the peasants came the next morning, they found the old Saint dead;
so, mournfully they threw back the earth he had turned up; and many
years afterwards, the exact spot being ascertained, a magnificent church
was raised over it to his memory.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

THE DEATH OF SAINT DAVID.

Pen would fail to write, or man to tell, all the gallant achievements
which the noble Knight, Saint David of Wales, and his faithful Squire,
Owen ap Rice, performed during their foreign travels.

At length even they began to weary of the constant hazardous adventures
in which they were engaged.  Age had begun to dim the lustre of Saint
David's eye, and to unnerve his arm, but not to lower the courage of his
heart.

News was now brought him that an army of Pagan barbarians was about to
attack his native land.  No time was to be lost if he would render
service to his country.  On his homeward way he collected all the
gallant knights, and their squires, and men-at-arms, with whom he and
the faithful Owen had, in their travels, become acquainted.  Thus, by
the time he reached the borders of Wales, he had assembled an army
which, though small, was well able to perform deeds such as ten times
the number of ordinary men would not have dared to attempt.

Sad was the state of Wales when they entered it in battle-array, seeking
the enemy,--towns were unpeopled, houses overthrown, monasteries
pillaged, corn-fields burnt, farms destroyed, while from the caves and
woods came forth the unhappy people, to welcome him as their deliverer,
and to pray for his success.

These sights so fired the spirit of the aged Champion, that he vowed
never to rest till he had driven the enemy from his native soil.  Still
the task was no easy one.  They were very numerous, fierce, and brave,
and trained to arms.

The aged bards of Wales struck their harps to encourage the warriors to
strive bravely in the fight.

It was, however, discovered that many recreant knights had joined the
forces of the Pagans; they and their followers being habited in armour
little differing from that of the Champion of Wales and those knights
who had accompanied him from abroad.

Summoning his warriors around him, he addressed them in a speech which
encouraged and animated their valour to the highest pitch.  Thus he
concluded:--

"Then follow me, my gallant warriors!  I will give the signal for the
onset, which will lay thousands of our foemen low; and see, for my
ensign, I do wear upon my burgonet this leek, which will, if we gain the
victory, be ever after held in honour throughout Wales, and on this
first day of March be worn by all Welshmen in commemoration of our
victory."

Thrice struck the bards their harps, while cheers, loud and long,
replied to the speech, each warrior of Wales forthwith plucking up a
great leek, and placing it on his casque, or head-piece, so that in the
thickest light friends might be known from foes.

Now there stepped forth a bard, and struck a mournful strain.

  "Sad, sad are the notes I sing,
  And sad the news I bring,
  For many a gallant knight, and many a warrior bold,
  Will fall to-day,
  And turn to clay,
  Before swift time grows old.
  The noblest and the best before the eve must die,
  Ere the fell Pagan host are taught to turn and fly."

These words struck the gallant old Champion's ears.  He had never at any
time thought little of his own prowess, while he, like a true patriot,
had always been ready to sacrifice himself for the good of his country.
He resolved, accordingly, should the tide of battle set strong against
his followers, to charge onward amid the hosts of the enemy, and to fall
nobly among them, knowing that his friends, for the love they bore him,
would, for the sake of recovering his body, charge into the midst of the
foe, and assuredly retrieve the fortunes of the day.

With a cheerful voice, as if he had been giving orders for the
commencement of a tournament, the noble old Champion gave the promised
signal for the onset.  Furiously charged the army of Welshmen.  Bravely
were they met by their Pagan foes, who, with valour worthy of a better
cause, charged in return, and many on both sides sunk on the ensanguined
plain never to rise again.

Knight after knight sank down under the terrific blows of the Pagan
clubs and battle-axes, till there seemed but little prospect that the
patriot army would gain the victory.  In vain the Christian army shouted
and charged.  The sturdy Pagans refused to give way.

At length, Saint David, recollecting the words uttered by the prophetic
bard in the morning, assembled round him his bravest knights, and,
throwing up his visor, exhibited his countenance, whereon sat a beaming
smile, expressive of patriotism and valour.

"One of the noblest in the land, it is said, must this day fall before
the battle is won!" he exclaimed.  "If such I am, then happy shall I be
to be thus honoured in my death.  Charge! brave knights, charge!"

With these words, the last he ever uttered, the noble Champion rushed
into the thickest of the fight, where a hundred battle-axes rattled on
his helmet, a hundred swords were pointed at his side, a hundred spears
thrust against his fearless breast, and a hundred arrows shot at his
head.  Pierced by a hundred wounds he fell, but his followers bravely
avenged his death.  The Pagan hordes were put to flight; and Saint David
has ever since, even to the present day, been held in affectionate
remembrance, as he fully deserved, by all Welshmen.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE DEATH OF SAINT DENIS.

Saint Denis of France, like his brother Champions, much desired, after
his long wanderings, to see once more the smiling fields of _la belle_
France, and thus he, too, followed by the faithful Le Crapeau, turned
his steps homeward.  Time had not failed to leave its hoary marks on
him, and his snowy locks and flowing beard showed full well that the
winter of his life had at length overtaken him.

Still he kept his armour on, though his shrunken form often seemed to
rattle within it; and the chill blasts, as they entered the crevices,
blew round and round him, and made him often wish for his armchair, and
dressing-gown, and slippers, as does many another elderly gentleman, who
would be far wiser if he kept by his own fireside, instead of allowing
himself to be dragged about the world, in search of a very doubtful sort
of advantage or amusement for the younger branches of his family.

Saint Denis had not neglected in his travels to discover many things
which he thought might be with advantage introduced into his native
country.  He taught the people how to cultivate the vine, and make
_chausse_ roads, though the latter were never very satisfactory.  But
many cunning arts and manufactures also he introduced from the far east,
of which there is not space now to speak.  The greatest benefit,
however, he conferred on his countrymen was in instructing them in the
important art of cookery.  Fricassees and ragouts were by his means
brought to great perfection, and, more than all, he instructed them how
to dress frogs and snails, of which art they were before his time
totally ignorant.  Who could ever imagine that there was a time when
Frenchmen knew nothing of that important part of the culinary art?  Till
Saint Denis, the hero of a hundred fights, aided by the faithful Le
Crapeau, caught the frogs and cooked them, and, moreover, eat them, the
ignorant Frenchmen could not believe that they were intended to be used
as food.

But mark the ingratitude of a people--the fickleness of a crowd.  The
great Saint Denis, who had fought so long, and upheld the name of France
in so many strange lands, was accused by a recreant knight of heresy and
of high treason, and of endeavouring to introduce bad and mischievous
customs among the people.

Old as he was, although he had long laid aside his armour, the fire of
his youth burned up within him, and he challenged his malignant accuser
to mortal combat.

The Champion and the false knight met; but the latter, by the arts of a
wicked enchanter, had come so prepared by talismans for the fight, that
all the skill and courage of Saint Denis could not overthrow him.

Again and again the aged Champion charged with all the agility and
courage of a young man, and few would have supposed that he who sat
within that iron mask, and wielded that heavy lance, had seen near
eighty winters pass over his hoary head.  Once more he charged--his
lance was shivered, and he was borne helpless to the ground.

Then were the evil designs of his fell enemy victorious.  He was
condemned to death.  No rescue came, and he was led, yet habited in his
armour, to the block.  With a courageous look he lay down his head; but
scarcely had the axe of the cruel executioner fallen upon it, than a
fearful tempest burst forth.  The headsman, the recreant knight, and all
who had assisted willingly at the execution, were struck to the ground,
becoming black masses of cinder, by a flash of fearful lightning; and
then the people learned and acknowledged that right and justice were on
the Champion's side.

Monuments were built and churches erected to his memory, and he was ever
after reverenced as the Patron Saint of France and of all Frenchmen.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE DEATH OF SAINT JAMES.

Saint James, as long as his arm could wield a lance, continued his
heroic combats with pagans and infidels of all sorts, magicians and
necromancers, giants and ogres, wild beasts and evil spirits of every
kind, sort, and description; but he, at length, too, finding his
strength departing, and his hair growing grey, resolved to return home.
One day, however, as he was about to put on his armour, to ride forth as
usual, he discovered that he could scarcely lift it.

"The time has come, my faithful Pedrillo, when no longer as a steel-clad
knight, but as a humble pilgrim, I must wander through the world," he
remarked, sitting down again on the couch from which he had risen.  "Go
forth, my faithful Squire, and purchase me a palmer's habit, a hat of
grey colour, and a broad scallop shell.  Never more will I put on yonder
coat of steel.  I should but disgrace the name I have so long borne as
one of the bravest knights of Christendom."

[Well would it be if other generals and admirals would take a hint from
Saint James, and, following his example, would retire, when their powers
are failing them, from public life.]

With a sigh the faithful Pedrillo went forth, and procured, as he was
directed, a palmer's habit for his master, and one for himself.  Their
armour being packed up and carried on their war-steeds, they now, as
pilgrims, journeyed homewards; but all who met them knew full well what
they had been, and even midnight robbers and outlaws respected them, and
allowed them to pass unmolested.

Thus travelling on, they reached at length the wide plains of sunny
Spain.  There Saint James resolved to build a chapel, and to devote
himself to its service.  He erected also a hermitage hard by, where he
and his faithful Pedrillo, who would not quit him, took up their abode
as hermits.  Then the peasantry from far and near came to visit them.
Much good advice Saint James could give them, and many things he taught
them, while numberless were the strange stories he could tell of the
wonderful things he had seen and done in foreign lands.

In time, his chapel, from the gifts brought to it, became one of the
richest in the land; and this so excited the envy and anger of the monks
of a neighbouring convent, that they conspired together to accuse him of
necromancy and other terrible crimes.

Saint James boldly refuted the accusations, and offered, once more, to
try his lance against any friar among them who was man enough to put on
armour and meet him in single combat; but they all declined the honour,
though they did not the less hurl their invectives against him, and seek
opportunities for his destruction.

At length, he and some of his more pious fellow-worshippers were caught
one day inside their chapel.  The doors were closed upon them, and the
wicked monks, hiring a band of Pagan mercenaries, had them all shot to
death by poisoned arrows.  In spite of the pain they suffered, the Saint
and his companions continued singing their hymns to the last, while a
bright silvery light burst forth in the chapel--(so says the ancient
chronicler)--which continued burning glorious as ever; and when, at
length, the chapel was opened, the body of Saint James and the bodies of
his companions were found to be perfectly embalmed.  Then they were
placed in marble tombs with silver lids; and, to the present day, Saint
James, by all real Spaniards, is held in the highest esteem and
reverence.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE DEATH OF SAINT ANTHONY.

About the same time that his brother knights ended their martial career,
Saint Anthony, with his faithful follower, Niccolo, likewise, for the
same reason, resolved to turn his face homewards.  Rome was the city of
his birth, and to Rome he went.

Rome was a Christian city, but there were still many Pagans in the
neighbourhood, and many of the shrines had as yet scarcely been
accommodated to the new faith, so that the pious Saint Anthony had
considerable difficulty in distinguishing one from the other.  This very
much grieved his heart.  Even when he went among the priests he could
not always make out to which faith they belonged.  They made him long
harangues, and assured him that their great wish was to develop their
ancient and time-honoured institutions into whatever form was likely to
prove most popular.

Saint Anthony, who was a simple-minded man, was sorely puzzled by all
this; so, after vainly endeavouring to comprehend the state of things in
the ancient capital of the world, he retired to a hermitage, where he
lived for the remainder of his days; nor would he ever again enter Rome.

Thus, in the fragrant odour of sanctity, he died at a green old age.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

THE DEATH OF SAINT ANDREW.

Saint George and Saint Andrew were the last of all the Seven Champions
who remained together, rivalling each other in gallant deeds of arms.

Where breathes the Scotchman who does not desire, when his life's work
seems almost done, to return once more to scent the air of his own free
heathery hills, to climb their rocky heights, and to wander around their
fertile vales?  Strongly did the desire to turn homeward seize the heart
of Scotland's Champion.  He, however, did not lay aside his spear and
sword; but old as he was, still clad in his armour, bestriding his
war-horse, and followed by the faithful Murdoch, he kept steadily
travelling on, day by day, towards the north.

Thus should the true knight do.  Life is a battle from the beginning to
the end--as the brave Saint Andrew well knew; and never should the
armour, the shield, or sword, be laid aside till death strikes the knell
which summons the warrior from the world.

Many were the adventures he and the faithful Murdoch met with on their
journey.  More than one giant was slain, numbers of unhappy people
released from slavery, and many districts cleared of wild beasts, before
the aged Knight and his faithful Squire reached the fair shores of
Scotia.

The fame of their deeds had gone before them, and all the nobility of
the realm, and a vast concourse of people, assembled to do them honour.
It was a proud day for the aged Saint Andrew, when, clothed in his
well-worn suit of armour, with Murdoch McAlpine of that ilk carrying his
spear by his side, he rode through the streets of auld Reekie, with the
shouts of the delighted populace sounding in his ears and singing his
praises.

"Long live Saint Andrew!  Long live Saint Andrew!  Wherever the Scottish
name is known there will we Scotchmen boast of our own Saint Andrew--of
the gallant deeds he has done--of the name and of the fame he has won!"

Such were the cries which from far and near saluted his ears.

A grand tournament was also given in Saint Andrew's honour, at which the
aged Knight sat as umpire, though he wisely refrained from running a
tilt, much as his heart tempted him to put on armour for the occasion.

Soon after this, being assured that feats of arms were no longer suited
to him, he resolved to instruct his countrymen in certain important
branches of knowledge which he had acquired in his foreign travels.  To
prepare himself for this new work he retired to a hermitage he had built
high up on the side of a mountain.  Thither, however, in a short time,
resorted to him all the youths of aspiring minds who desired to acquire
information, and to receive instruction from the sage.  Thus, in process
of time, the rude hut became a spot celebrated for learning and piety.

There, happily and usefully employed, the old warrior spent many years
of his declining life.

But, alas! what virtue, what piety, can enable a man to escape from the
snares of enemies and detractors?  Accused of witchcraft, and other
malpractices, the aged Saint was brought before some stern judges, who
forthwith condemned him to death.  Scarcely, however, had his head been
cut off than his innocence was discovered, and a church was raised to
his memory; and he has ever since been held in honourable recollection
by all Scotchmen as the Champion of whom his country should be proud--a
knight _sans peur et sans reproche_.

Such, however, is the way of the world.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

THE DEATH OF SAINT GEORGE.

The last Champion who appears in this wondrous, strange, and eventful
history, is the great Saint George.

Towards the fair land of his birth, right Merrie England, he, too, when
he found age creeping on him, resolved to turn his steps.  Still lance
in hand, and clad in steel, his brave lion heart yet undaunted, with the
faithful De Fistycuff by his side, he at length homeward set his eyes.
His faithful chronicler relates numberless adventures he met with,
scarcely less marvellous than those he encountered in his youth.  Many a
hard blow he got, which he still was able to return with interest, ably
seconded by De Fistycuff, though, it must be confessed, his Squire had
grown somewhat obese and unwieldy.

At length, the chalky cliffs of Britain, which for twice twelve years
the noble Champion had never seen, came in sight.  Joyful to him was the
prospect; more joyful still the towns and villages, the pleasant aspect
of the fields, and the green waving woods, as he travelled on towards
Coventry.  There, with warm greetings, the inhabitants of high and low
degree received him.

Sadness, however, he saw on the countenances of many; and this was
owing, as the veracious chronicler, from whose erudite work this history
is drawn, informs us, to "a doleful report--how, upon Dunmore Heath,
there raged up and down an infectious dragon, that so annoyed the
country that the inhabitants thereabouts could not pass by without great
danger; how that fifteen knights of the kingdom had already lost their
lives in adventuring to suppress the same."

Saint George no sooner heard thereof, and what wrongs his country
received by this infectious dragon, than he purposed to put the
adventure to trial, and either to free the land from so great a danger,
or to finish his days in the attempt.  So, taking leave of all present,
he rode forward with as noble a spirit as he did in Africa, when he
combated the mighty green dragon.

So, coming to the middle of the plain, he there saw his dreadful enemy,
crouching on the ground in a deep cave.  The monster, by a strange
instinct knowing that his death drew nigh, made such a hideous yelling,
that it seemed as if the sky was bursting with thunder, and the earth
rocking with an earthquake.  Then, bounding forth from his den, and
espying the aged Champion, he ran with a fury so great against him as if
he would devour both knight and steed, armour and all, in a moment.  But
the brave Saint George, knowing well how to deal with dragons, and all
such-like monsters, quickly wheeled his horse out of his way, and with
such force did the monster rush on that he drove his sting full three
feet into the ground.  Returning again, however, with furious rage, he
made at the Knight, and would have carried both him and his charger to
the ground, but that Saint George, thrusting his spear at his throat,
the monster, to avoid it, threw himself back, and fell happily over,
with his back on the turf and his feet in the air, wriggling about all
the time his long forked tail.  Whereat the noble Champion taking
advantage, leaped from his horse, and, throwing down his sword, seized
him in his arms before he could rise, and pressed his huge body so
tightly in his arms, and held him there, that he squeezed the very life
out of him; but alas! the dragon's sting annoyed the good Knight in such
sort, that the dragon being no sooner slain and weltering in his
venomous gore, than Saint George likewise took his death's wound by the
deep strokes of the dragon's sting, which he received in divers parts of
his body, and bled in such abundance that his strength began to enfeeble
and grow weak: yet, retaining his true nobleness of mind, he valiantly
returned victor to the city of Coventry, where all the inhabitants stood
without the gates to receive him in great royalty, and to give him the
honour that belonged to so worthy a conqueror.

No sooner, alas! had the brave old Knight arrived before the city, and
presented the people with the head of the dragon which had so long
annoyed the country, which was borne before him by the trusty old De
Fistycuff, than, what with the abundance of blood that issued from his
deep wounds, and the long bleeding without stopping of the same, he sunk
back into the arms of his faithful Squire, and, without a sigh, he
yielded up his breath.  Great was the moan that was made for him
throughout the country, and all in the land, from the King to the
shepherd, mourned him for the space of a month.  The King also, in
remembrance of him, ordained for ever after to be kept a solemn
procession by all the princes and chief nobility of the country upon the
twenty-third day of April, naming it Saint George's Day; on which day
the brave old Knight was most solemnly interred in the city where he was
born.  The King likewise decreed, by the consent of the whole kingdom,
that the patron of the land should be named Saint George our Christian
Champion, in that he had fought so many battles to the honour of
Christendom.

Thus ends the ancient, authentic, and most credible chronicle from which
I have quoted.

There are many other documents extant, giving accounts of the exploits
of Saint George's three sons, and of the sons of some of the other
Champions of Christendom; but as I do not consider that they emanated
from sources so reliable and unexceptionable as those chronicles from
which I have quoted, I have not thought it advisable to introduce them
in the present veracious narrative.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seven Champions of Christendom, by 
W. H. G. Kingston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVEN CHAMPIONS OF CHRISTENDOM ***

***** This file should be named 21454.txt or 21454.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/4/5/21454/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
