The Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Jack Rabbit and the Squirrel Brothers, by 
David Cory

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Little Jack Rabbit and the Squirrel Brothers

Author: David Cory

Illustrator: H. S. Barbour

Release Date: May 16, 2007 [EBook #21497]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE JACK RABBIT ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Linda McKeown, Jacqueline Jeremy
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE SQUIRREL BROTHERS




LITTLE JACK RABBIT
BOOKS

(Trademark Registered)

BY
DAVID CORY

        *       *       *       *       *

LITTLE JACK RABBIT'S ADVENTURES
LE JACK RABBIT AND DANNY FOX
LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE SQUIRREL BROTHERS
LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND CHIPPY CHIPMUNK
LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE BIG BROWN BEAR




[Illustration: Professor Crow Took Hold of Featherhead's Ear.
                                 _Frontispiece_--(_Page_ 14)]




LITTLE JACK RABBIT BOOKS
(Trademark Registered)

       *       *       *       *       *

LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND
THE SQUIRREL BROTHERS

BY
DAVID CORY


Author of
LITTLE JACK RABBIT'S ADVENTURES
LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND DANNY FOX
LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND CHIPPY CHIPMUNK
LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE BIG BROWN BEAR


ILLUSTRATED BY
H. S. BARBOUR


NEW YORK
GROSSET & DUNLAP
PUBLISHERS

Made in the United States of America


COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY
GROSSET & DUNLAP




CONTENTS

                                   PAGE

THE GAME OF MARBLES                   9

A LITTLE PIECE OF LOOKING GLASS      13

THE FLEET                            16

MORE NUTS                            20

OLD SQUIRREL NUTCRACKER              23

HOME HUNTING                         26

AN OLD CROW'S NEST                   30

PARSON OWL EXPLAINS                  34

THE LITTLE GOLD RING                 38

WEDDING BELLS                        42

"NUTS AND RAISINS"                   46

BAD NEWS                             49

POOR JIMMY MINK                      53

PROFESSOR JIM CROW'S LESSON          57

TO THE POST OFFICE                   61

MORE STAMPS                          65

BUSY TIMES                           69

AN ACCIDENT                          73

TWO PIGEONS                          77

MISS PUSSY                           81

A BUSY BEAVER                        85

DON'T WORRY                          89

THE LITTLE FROSTY PAINTER            93

GRANDPA POSSUM                       97

COUSIN CHATTERBOX                   101

JIMMY JAY                           105

THE TIP OF A TAIL                   109

OLD BARNEY OWL                      113

"HELP! HELP!"                       117

PUMPKIN PLACE, P. O.                121

AN ICE CREAM PINE CONE              125




LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE SQUIRREL BROTHERS


THE GAME OF MARBLES

    Never stop upon your way,
    Just to fool around and play.
    Learn to quickly go to school;
    Never, never break this rule.

But, oh dear me. One morning when Little Jack Rabbit met the Squirrel
Brothers, Featherhead, the naughty gray squirrel, asked him to stop and
play a game of marbles.

"Where are your marbles?" asked the little rabbit.

"Here they are," answered Featherhead, taking some red and yellow oak
apples out of his pocket. "They make dandy marbles."

Little Jack Rabbit dropped his school books, and quickly dug a hole in
the ground. Then they all took turns rolling the marbles to see who
would have the first shot.

The little bunny's was the first to drop into the hole, although Twinkle
Tail's was very close and Featherhead's not far away.

It was then easy for Little Jack Rabbit to hit the two marbles. Why, he
couldn't miss them, they were so close. I guess they would have been
playing until now if all of a sudden, just like that, Bobbie Redvest
hadn't called out:

"Ding-a-ling! ding-a-ling! the school bell is ringing."

"Gracious me!" cried little bunny, and off he went, clipperty clip,
lipperty lip. Featherhead and Twinkle Tail picked up their books and
followed.

It certainly was lucky that the little robin had shouted, "Ding-a-ling!
ding-a-ling!" for hardly had they reached the top of the hill when the
school bell commenced: "Ding, dong! ding, dong! ding, dong!"

"Hurry up!" cried Little Jack Rabbit, "or we'll be late," and he hopped
along faster than ever.

Professor Crow was standing in the doorway waiting for the last scholar
to arrive.

    All out of breath and scared to death,
    Came little Jackie Bunny.
    And Twinkle Tail began to quail,
    And Featherhead felt funny.
    They thought the teacher standing there
    Gave them a cold and angry stare.
    Perhaps he did, but soon he went
    And o'er his platform table bent,
    While Featherhead and Twinkle Tail
    Slipped in their seats with faces pale.
    Then up stood stern Professor Crow
    And said some scholars are so slow
    That if they'd stop upon the way
    They'd never get to school all day.

Then he sat down and called the school to order. But, oh dear me! None
of the little marble players knew his lesson. And instead of being
allowed to go when school was over, they were kept in and made to
study until late in the afternoon.




A LITTLE PIECE OF LOOKING GLASS

    If you a naughty act will do,
    You may at first escape;
    But soon or later you'll get caught--
    So don't get in a scrape.


Featherhead was the worst pupil in the Shady Forest School and made lots
of trouble for Professor Crow.

One day he held a small piece of looking glass in the sunlight. The
flash almost blinded the poor old crow's eyes, and at first he couldn't
tell who had done it. But naughtiness will always out, and the next time
Featherhead was caught.

Yes, sir! The next time he tried it on Professor Crow, that old
gentleman bird jumped down from the platform and took hold of that
naughty squirrel's ear. And not so very gently, either.

Featherhead squirmed and tried to get away, but the good professor held
on tight, and pretty soon the little squirrel grew very quiet indeed. He
grew as quiet as a little lamb; that's what he did.

"Young man!" said Professor Crow in a hard, stern voice, "your father,
Squirrel Nutcracker, is a dear old friend of mine. If it weren't for
that I'd give you a flogging."

Goodness me! When Featherhead heard that he trembled all over, and his
beautiful bushy tail lost its curl and dragged on the floor like a piece
of string!

"You're a bad lot," went on the old professor bird. "You never know
your lessons, and if you don't mend your ways I'll expel you from the
school!"

Gracious me! Think of having that said to you! Goosey Lucy's little son,
Goosey Gander, almost fell off the dunce stool, and Little Jack Rabbit
was so frightened that his little pink nose trembled for an hour.

Nobody played games during recess that day, but hung around in little
groups talking it over. And you may be sure they kept away from
Featherhead, who stood all alone by the flag pole wishing he hadn't
been such a bad squirrel.




THE FLEET


Something had happened in the Shady Forest since Busy Beaver had built
his dam. You see, as it held back the Bubbling Brook, the water grew
deeper and deeper, and by and by it began to spread all around, until
after a while, there was a pond.

This didn't trouble the Little People of the Shady Forest. No, indeed.
They liked to have a pond in the forest. But they didn't like to have
the Big Chestnut Tree right in the middle of it. No, sir. The water had
spread all around the biggest and finest nut tree in the whole forest,
and, of course, now no one could gather the nuts.

"What are we going to do?" asked Chippy Chipmunk.

"Make a boat and sail over," answered Featherhead, the gray squirrel.
This wasn't a bad idea, but who was going to make the boat? Nobody in
the Shady Forest knew how to build one.

Professor Crow suggested that the birds carry the nuts for the
four-footed people, but they answered that they had all they could
do to feed themselves and couldn't spare the time. And Grandmother
Magpie said she wouldn't carry nuts for anybody, even if she had all
the time that was wasted every day by some people right there in the
Shady Forest.

Just then along came Old Squirrel Nutcracker.

"Why not make rafts out of twigs? You don't need a boat builder for
that, you know."

This seemed a splendid idea, and at once all the squirrels set to work,
and in a short time quite a fleet was ready to be launched. There wasn't
room for more than one squirrel on a raft, so some of the squirrels had
to stay ashore.

Featherhead was the first to shove off. He had a little sack and a large
oar, and spread out his tail for a sail.

Billy Breeze was very kind and blew the rafts over to the island on
which the Big Chestnut Tree stood. Then all the squirrels went ashore
and commenced to fill their sacks with nuts, when, all of a sudden, Old
Barney Owl looked out of his nest and said:

"This is my tree and these nuts belong to me. If you wish any, you must
pay a penny!"

"If we bring you something to-morrow, will that do?" asked Twinkle Tail.

"Yes," answered the old owl.

So the squirrels filled their sacks and sailed home.

    But soon the news from Squirrelville
    Spread o'er the meadow to the hill,
    And up the Shady Forest Trail,
    And through the quiet verdant vale.

    It's strange how Rumor quickly goes;
    It runs on very nimble toes,
    And everybody hears the news
    Before it has worn out its shoes.




MORE NUTS


It wasn't very long before all the Little People in the Shady Forest had
heard how the squirrels had sailed over to the island after nuts. So
when Featherhead and the other squirrels set out the next day there was
quite a crowd on shore to watch them.

Featherhead had a nice new-laid egg from Henny Penny for Old Barney Owl,
and Twinkle Tail a little fish from the Bubbling Brook.

When they reached the island, the two little squirrels ran up the Big
Chestnut Tree and rapped on Old Barney Owl's front door. They had to
rap three or four times before he opened it. He was cross and sleepy,
and at first didn't remember them at all. In fact, his eyes were so
blinky that I don't believe he even saw them.

"We have brought you an egg for the nuts we took yesterday," said
Featherhead.

"And here is a little fish for what we'll take to-day," added Twinkle
Tail.

Old Barney Owl opened one eye and, taking the egg and the little fish,
closed the door without even thanking them.

"He didn't say we could have any nuts to-day," said Twinkle Tail. "He
took the little fish, so I guess it's all right."

"Guess it's all right!" cried Featherhead. "Of course, it's all right.
What do we care, anyway? he can't see in the light. What right has Old
Barney to say all these nuts belong to him?"

It didn't take the squirrels long after the sacks were filled to carry
them down to the shore and load them on the rafts. But, oh dear me.
Billy Breeze wasn't very kind this time. No matter how they held up
their tails for sails, as soon as they had pushed off, he blew them
right back on the land.

"We'll have to paddle around to the other side," said Featherhead.
"Then perhaps Billy Breeze will push us home."

After a good deal of trouble, for it was no easy matter to paddle the
rafts around the island, they set off once again. And this time Billy
Breeze did his best, and landed them safely on the mainland.

"I couldn't help you on the other side," he explained. "You see, I can
blow only one way to-day."

"That's all right," answered the Squirrel Brothers. "We have the nuts!"
and away they scampered.




OLD SQUIRREL NUTCRACKER


Twinkle Tail and Featherhead were old enough to find homes for
themselves, so Old Squirrel Nutcracker thought. And when that old
squirrel had thought out a thing seriously he was pretty likely to
put it into words.

"I feel sorry for the boys," said Mrs. Nutcracker, wiping her eyes with
her calico apron, as she stood beneath the Big Chestnut Tree talking to
Mrs. Rabbit. "They've had such a comfortable home, if I do say it myself.
But last night Squirrel Nutcracker said after dinner:

"'Boys, it's time for you to get out and hustle for yourselves. It will
make men-squirrels out of you. If you get into trouble, always remember
your father will help you. And don't forget your mother.'"

Poor Mrs. Nutcracker threw her apron over her head and burst into tears.
"Don't cry," said the kind bunny lady, and very soon she said good-by
and hopped home to the Old Bramble Patch to tell her little rabbit the
news.

When Mrs. Nutcracker reached home she found her little squirrel boys
packing up their things. Twinkle Tail had his nearly finished, but
Featherhead was only half through. So Mrs. Nutcracker helped him, and
when it was all done, she sat down and cried again. Poor Mrs. Nutcracker
felt so badly she just couldn't help it.

Just then Old Squirrel Nutcracker came up the stairs, so she dried her
eyes and the two little squirrels picked up their trunks and started
down the tree.

When they reached the first landing, a great big limb that spread out to
one side, there stood Squirrel Nutcracker. His voice was a little husky
as he said:

"I want to be proud of you, Twinkle Tail and Featherhead. See that you
find nice homes and that you don't do anything to make me ashamed of
you." Then he hugged them good-by and went upstairs to Mrs. Nutcracker.




HOME HUNTING


It was a week or so after the Squirrel Brothers had left Nutcracker
Lodge to find homes for themselves that Little Jack Rabbit came across
Twinkle Tail.

It's not an easy thing to find a new home, especially when all the nice
warm hollow trees were already crowded with little people. Twinkle Tail
discovered this when he started in house-hunting.

"Why don't you take Grandmother Magpie's nest?" asked the little rabbit.
"She hasn't used it for some time and nobody seems to want it." This was
very true; perhaps it was because nobody liked Grandmother Magpie.

But after Twinkle Tail had taken it over you never would have known it.
You see, he altered it and arranged it and patched it up to suit
himself.

While he was putting on the finishing touches, who should come along but
the old lady magpie herself.

"Do you mind my doing this to your old place?" he asked, looking up from
his work.

"Not at all," replied Grandmother Magpie, "I'm done with it. You're
quite welcome to it, my dear."

This was the first time she had ever done a nice thing for anybody in
the Shady Forest. But, you see, she liked Twinkle Tail. He was the only
person she did like. I guess the reason was that she had never forgotten
he had once been very polite to her.

"Thank you," said Twinkle Tail, smiling sweetly, and then he set to
work harder than ever.

After that the old lady magpie flew away, thinking how strange it was
that a house which one has grown tired of often suits another person
very well.

By and by Twinkle Tail had another caller. It was Bobbie Redvest.

"How do you like the way I'm fixing up my house?" asked the little
squirrel.

"I think you've made one mistake," replied Bobbie Redvest.

"What is it?" asked Twinkle Tail anxiously.

"The great thing, you know, is to hide your house as much as possible."

The little squirrel dropped the piece of green moss he was about to use,
and waited.

"You should make it look like the place it's in," went on the little
robin. "You have chosen a browny place, so you must use brown moss on
the outside."

"That sounds like good advice," said Twinkle Tail. "I'll do as you say."

    Here a leaf and there a twig,
    Piece of twine to bind them--
    Then some moss to spread across,
    Till it's hard to find them.

    Soon the tiny Treetop House
    Will be built and ready;
    Dry beneath the pelting rain,
    Against the wind quite steady.




AN OLD CROW'S NEST


Now Featherhead had a much harder time finding a home than Brother
Twinkle Tail. He traveled from the oaks to the beech trees, jumping
from branch to branch, peeping first into this place and then into
that, but every hole and hollow had a tenant.

By and by he ran down to the ground and along the winding paths through
the leaves and brush, but even then he could find nothing. No, sir.
There didn't seem to be a single place in the whole big forest for this
little squirrel.

"Goodness me!" he exclaimed, "what shall I do? I don't want to go back
to Nutcracker Lodge and tell them I can't look out for myself. I'd feel
like a baby." So he sat down to think it over.

All of a sudden who should come by but Jimmy Crow.

"What's the matter? You look dreadfully worried."

"And so I am," replied the little squirrel. "And so would you be if you
couldn't find a home for yourself."

Jimmy Crow turned his head first to one side and then to the other, and
winked his bright little eye. Then he winked the other several times.
After that he wagged his feathered tail and opened both eyes.

"I know just the place for you."

"You don't mean it," cried Featherhead.

"I certainly do," replied Jimmy Crow, "if you'll follow me I'll take
you there in a jiffy." And Jimmie Crow knew what he was about, for he
quickly led the little squirrel to a tall oak tree whose acorns lay in
heaps all over the ground. Way up high on a branch was an old crow's
nest.

"There's the place for you," cried Jimmy Crow. "You can fix it up in no
time."

Featherhead thanked him and ran up the tree to look it over. It didn't
take him long to make up his mind what to do. Pressing the sticks more
closely together, he covered them overhead and all around with leafy
twigs, until it looked like a great big ball of leaves. In one side he
made a little round hole for a doorway, and as the roof was nicely
rounded, and this was the only opening, the rain couldn't get inside.

"With a good supply of nuts," he laughed, "I won't have to go down to
the ground for my meals, and can sleep for days at a time when it's cold
and stormy!"

    My little house up in the tree
    Is just the very thing for me.
    It holds my food and keeps the rain
    From off my comfy counterpane.

    But sometimes it seems lonely quite
    When fall the shadows of the night,
    And I have no one but myself
    To climb up to the pantry shelf.




PARSON OWL EXPLAINS


One day as Twinkle Tail was taking a walk through the treetops, he met
a young lady squirrel. She was anxiously looking here and there as if
in search of something.

"Are you looking for anybody?" asked Twinkle Tail, lifting his little
fur cap and bowing politely.

"Not exactly," she replied, "I'm looking for a furnished apartment. Do
you know of one?"

Twinkle Tail didn't answer at once. He wanted to say something, but as
he was a bashful little squirrel, it took him some time to make up his
mind. Miss Squirrel, however, was not the least impatient, but curled
her beautiful bushy tail up over her back and looked her prettiest.

At last he said: "Why don't you share my house? It's a very nice sort of
a place since I fixed it up. It once belonged to Grandmother Magpie, you
know."

After little Miss Squirrel had looked it over, she seemed greatly
pleased, especially with the kitchenette, in which were stored lots of
beech nuts, hazels and fir-cones. And I think she was even more pleased
with Twinkle Tail, for she agreed to get married to him at once. So off
he started for Parson Owl and a little gold ring, while she went into
the kitchenette to get the wedding supper.

On his way he met little Jack Rabbit.

"I'm going to get married to-day! Come to my house this afternoon at
five," shouted Twinkle Tail.

"All right," answered the little rabbit. "I'll run home to tell mother."

Pretty soon Twinkle Tail met Squirrel Nutcracker.

"I knew there was going to be a wedding," he exclaimed, when he heard
the news. "I saw three magpies this very morning, and that's a sure
sign." Then he patted the little squirrel's head and promised that he
and Mrs. Nutcracker would surely come.

By the time Twinkle Tail reached the parsonage at the top of the old oak
tree it was quite late. "Have you got the wedding ring?" asked Parson
Owl as the little squirrel turned to go.

"Goodness gracious meebus!" exclaimed Twinkle Tail, "I've forgotten all
about it."

Parson Owl yawned, for it's only in the night-time that owls are wide
awake, you know, and replied:

"Can't marry you without a ring. No, indeed. Who ever heard of a wedding
without a ring?"

(Parson Owl was wide awake enough to know that! Goodness me! I hope the
little squirrel will find a jewelry store somewhere in the Shady
Forest.)




THE LITTLE GOLD RING


Twinkle Tail felt dreadfully worried as he left the parsonage. Where was
he to get the ring? Without it, Parson Owl had said there could be no
wedding. Little Miss Squirrel was waiting for him at the house, and all
the guests would be there at five o'clock. Parson Owl had agreed to be
on time although it was a trifle too bright at that hour for his blinky
old eyes. There was only one thing missing--the little gold wedding
ring.

"There's only one person who can help me," cried Twinkle Tail, and off
he ran to the Old Bramble Patch. In answer to his impatient knock,
Little Jack Rabbit opened the door. Then they both sat down on the
stone step while the little squirrel told his troubles one by one.

"Parson Owl says there can't be a wedding without a ring," sighed
Twinkle Tail, finishing his story. "But where to get the ring, I
don't know."

"I do," answered the little rabbit, jumping up quickly. "Come with me,"
and up the Old Cow Patch, over the Sunny Meadow, he hopped with Twinkle
Tail close to his heels.

By and by they came to the Old Farm Yard. There stood Ducky Waddles by
the old creaking gate. He had just come in from a swim in the Old Duck
Pond and was combing his feathers with his big yellow bill.

"Good afternoon," said the little bunny. "I've come to ask a favor."

"What is it?" asked Ducky Waddles.

"You explain matters first, Twinkle Tail, and then I'll talk to Ducky
Waddles," said Little Jack Rabbit.

It didn't take Twinkle Tail long to tell his troubles--how little Miss
Squirrel had agreed to marry him that afternoon; how all the little
people of the Shady Forest were coming to the wedding at five; how
Parson Owl had agreed to marry them; how everything was ready except
the little gold wedding ring.

"Who told you I had a little gold ring?" asked Ducky Waddles.

"Nobody," answered the little squirrel, "but I suppose it's all right."

"Yes, it's all right," laughed Ducky Waddles with a funny quack, "and
now, Mr. Jack Rabbit, what's the favor you wish me to do?"

"Won't you give Twinkle Tail the little gold ring you found in the
Bubbling Brook last Sunday?"

Ducky Waddles took a little gold ring out of his feather waistcoat
pocket and handed it to Twinkle Tail.

(Pretty soon we'll hear the wedding bells tinkling in the forest
dells.)




WEDDING BELLS


Twinkle Tail was delighted to get the little gold ring.

"You must come to the wedding," he said to Ducky Waddles. "It's to be at
five o'clock at my house. Please tell Henny Penny and Cocky Doodle that
they're invited, and ask Goosey Lucy and Turkey Tim to come, too. I'm in
such a hurry I can't wait to see them."

"I'll come," answered Ducky Waddles, "and I won't forget to tell the
Barnyard Folk that they're invited."

"Don't lose the ring," cautioned Little Jack Rabbit, as he and the
little squirrel hurried down the Old Cow Path to the Shady Forest. Just
then they met Mrs. Cow. She was wagging her head back and forth to brush
off the flies and the little bell on her leather collar made a pretty
tinkling sound.

"Let's ask her to come and ring the wedding bells."

"The very thing," laughed Twinkle Tail. "Won't you come to my wedding,
Mrs. Cow? Please do."

"When is it to be?" she asked.

"To-night at five," answered Twinkle Tail, with a blush.

"Pretty near milking-time," explained Mrs. Cow.

"Oh, it won't take long," replied the little rabbit. "Do come, Mrs.
Cow. We want you to ring your bell at the wedding. Did you ever ring
a wedding bell?"

"No," answered Mrs. Cow, "but I guess I know how. I'll come, but I may
not be able to stay all the time for I must get back in time for
milking."

Then the three started off together, and when they reached the Shady
Forest, Twinkle Tail looked back and saw Henny Penny and Cocky Doodle
coming up the Old Cow Path dressed in their Sunday clothes. Just behind
them were Ducky Waddles and Goosey Lucy and in the distance Turkey Tim
hurrying along the Old Rail Fence to catch up to them.

"Goodness me!" exclaimed the little squirrel, "I won't have much time to
dress," and he set off at a great pace, leaving Mrs. Cow and Little Jack
Rabbit behind.

When he reached his house he found Miss Squirrel anxiously looking out
of the window, but when she saw him, she laughed and said, "I thought
you were lost, dear Twinkle Tail!"

Pretty soon Parson Owl arrived, and when all the guests were seated, he
told Twinkle Tail and Miss Squirrel to stand up before him. And after
Twinkle Tail had placed the little gold ring on Miss Squirrel's little
finger toe, Mrs. Cow rang the wedding bells and Bobbie Redvest sang a
song.




"NUTS AND RAISINS"


There was a grand feast after the wedding of Twinkle Tail and little
Miss Squirrel. There were nuts and raisins for everybody, and I don't
know of anything much nicer than nuts and raisins.

Of course, all the Barnyard Folk ate raisins, for they couldn't crack
the nuts. It almost gave Ducky Waddles a toothache watching Twinkle Tail
crack the shells.

Cocky Doodle made a pretty speech, wishing the Twinkle Tails a long life
and a happy one, in which all the little people of the forest joined
him.

After that everybody looked at the wedding presents, which if not
beautiful, were very useful.

Henny Penny gave a nice new laid egg and Turkey Tim a bag of corn.
Little Jack Rabbit brought a big carrot and Chippy Chipmunk a basket of
nuts. Of course Ducky Waddles didn't give them anything more--the little
gold ring was his present, which Twinkle Tail had slipped on the little
toe-finger of Miss Squirrel at a nod from Parson Owl.

You see, Twinkle Tail had never been married before, so Parson Owl had
helped him a little--which I presume all good kind ministers do when
they marry young people. At any rate, Parson Owl did, and so everything
went off very smoothly.

On the way home if it hadn't been for some friendly Fireflies, Little
Jack Rabbit might have lost his way. And then again, maybe not, for he
was a pretty bright little bunny and like all the Forest Folk, knew how
to take care of himself. At the same time, it's nice to have a lantern
on a dark night. One might, you know, stumble into a deep hole.

When they reached the Old Bramble Patch, the little rabbit said: "I'd
ask you in, only I'm afraid mother's asleep."

"Thank you just the same," answered the kind Fireflies. "We are glad to
have helped you with our little lanterns," and they flew away to the
Sunny Meadow to wink and blink like little stars among the tall grasses.

The little rabbit opened the door and hopped softly up to his room and
was soon fast asleep in his comfortable bed.




BAD NEWS

    It's really too bad that the Miller's Boy
    Should be snooping around with his gun.
    Why doesn't he stay in the Old Mill all day
    And leave little folks to their fun?


That's what the Little People of the Shady Forest and the Sunny Meadow
thought. You see, the Miller's Boy had very little to do just now, for
the farmers were busy in the fields and the corn wasn't ready to be
ground into meal. So all the Miller's Boy had to do was to attend to a
few chores and then get out his gun and go hunting. And of course all
the little four-footed and feathered people were dreadfully afraid of
that great noisy gun.

"Look here," said Mrs. Rabbit, one day to her little son, "you had
better be careful. You can't run faster than a bullet, you know. It's
all very well to run away from Danny Fox and Mr. Wicked Weasel, or to
dodge from under Hungry Hawk, but a bullet is a different thing," and
the kind lady bunny patted her small son on the left ear and gave him
a piece of cherry pie.

Well, as soon as the pie was gone, Little Jack Rabbit hopped out of the
Old Bramble Patch, clipperty clip, lipperty lip, and pretty soon he met
Chippy Chipmunk and Woody Chuck in the Shady Forest.

"Mother says a bullet goes faster than Danny Fox," explained the little
bunny, and as everybody in the Shady Forest knew Mrs. Rabbit never told
anything that wasn't true, as Grandmother Magpie did, for instance,
these two little friends looked very serious. Yes, indeed, they looked
serious. They began to feel that the Miller's Boy was a dangerous
person.

"Let's tell all our friends," said Woody Chuck, so off the three started
and by and by, not so very far, they came to the Shady Forest Pond where
Busy Beaver lived.

"Pooh, pooh!" he said, when he heard the news. "I'm safe in the water.
He can't get a shot at me."

"Don't be too sure," answered Little Jack Rabbit, as he ran down to the
Old Duck Pond to tell Granddaddy Bullfrog.

Now the old gentleman frog was half asleep on his log, his chin resting
on his gray waistcoat and his eyes closed, for he had just eaten a big
dinner of flies.

"Helloa, there, Granddaddy Bullfrog," shouted the little rabbit. The
old frog opened his eyes and took out his watch to see the time, for he
thought at first it was Mrs. Bullfrog calling him home.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" he said to the little rabbit. "Gracious me, I
must have fallen asleep, for I had a dream.

    "I thought I'd caught a thousand flies,
       All on this summer day.
     But now that you've awakened me
       They all have flown away.

    "Oh, it was such a pleasant dream,
       I fear I shall grow thinner.
     You should have let me slumber on
       Until I'd finished dinner."




POOR JIMMY MINK


As soon as Little Rabbit had told the old gentleman frog to watch out
for the Miller's Boy, he hopped along by the Bubbling Brook, as it wound
in and out among the trees of the Shady Forest or went splashing over
rocks and fallen logs. All of a sudden he met Jimmy Mink. But, oh dear
me! What was the matter with Jimmy Mink? He was hobbling on three legs.
What could be the matter?

"Helloa, there, Jimmy Mink," shouted the little rabbit.

    "What makes you walk on three legs,
     When you can walk on four?
     I didn't know that you had been
     A soldier in the war."

"I haven't," replied Jimmy Mink. "I got caught in a trap," and he lifted
up his right foreleg.

"Why, your foot's gone!" gasped the little rabbit. "Isn't that
dreadful?"

"Yes, it's pretty bad," answered Jimmy Mink. "But the only way I could
free myself was to bite off my foot."

"Oh! oh! oh!" cried the little rabbit, sorrowfully. "Tell me how it
happened." So Jimmy Mink explained how one day when he had crept out
of his little house under the bank of the Bubbling Brook, he had seen
a nice fat trout on an old log. "There was a queer looking iron thing
there, too," he said, "but I didn't think anything about that. But, oh
dear me! When I picked up the trout, something snapped and my leg was
caught fast. Oh, how it pinched! I pulled and pulled. But I couldn't
get away. Then I tried to bite the iron thing that held my foot, but
I couldn't break it. So at last I gnawed off my foot."

"Whew!" whistled the little bunny through his teeth. "I never could do
that. My, but you're a brave fellow."

"There's the iron thing over there," said Jimmy Mink, pointing to a trap
that lay on an old log close to the bank. The little rabbit hopped over
and looked at it. And, sure enough, pinched in between the jaws of the
cruel trap was Jimmy Mink's little black foot.

"But I've learned my lesson," said Jimmy Mink. "Next time if I want
trout, I'll catch him in the water, not on top of a log," and he jumped
into the pool and swam away. Then the little rabbit hopped along the
Shady Forest Trail, but he couldn't forget poor little Jimmy Mink.

Well, after a while, all of a sudden, he heard a great chickering and
chirring overhead. Around and around the trunk of the tree went two
bodies, one a yellowish brown, about as large as a cat, and the other
gray, with a long bushy tail.

Up to the top they went as fast as lightning, around and around,
corkscrew fashion, and then down they came to the ground and before
his yellowish brown enemy could catch him, Twinkle Tail dashed into
a crack between two stones.




PROFESSOR JIM CROW'S LESSON


"I'm so glad Twinkle Tail got away," said Little Jack Rabbit to himself,
as the frightened gray squirrel squeezed in between the rocks. And then
the little rabbit hopped away as fast as he could, and pretty soon he
saw Professor Jim Crow with his little Black Book in his claw.

"Tell me, Professor Jim Crow," said the little rabbit, "what is the name
of the yellowish-brown animal that chases little gray squirrels around
and around the trunks of trees?"

"How big was he?" asked the wise old bird, putting on his spectacles and
turning over the leaves of his little Black Book.

"Larger than the farmer's black cat," answered the little rabbit.

"Did it look something like a fox?" asked the old crow.

"Yes, he did," replied the little rabbit.

Professor Jim Crow smiled and turned to page 49. "Listen!" he said. "The
Marten looks very much like a young fox about two months old. Its color
is a yellowish-brown, a little darker than a yellow fox, with a number
of long black hairs. It is a great climber, hunts squirrels and robs
birds' nests."

Then the wise old crow closed his book and wiped his spectacles. "You
have learned something to-day, little rabbit. Mother Nature's School
House will teach you lots of things," and the old professor bird flew
away.

[Illustration: "I'm in the Hollow Stump Telephone Booth."
                                               _Page_ 59]

"Well, I'm going to have a good time now," thought the little rabbit to
himself. "I've learned my daily lesson. I'll call up Uncle John." So off
he hopped to the Hollow Stump Telephone Booth.

"What number do you want?" asked the telephone girl who was a little
wood-mouse.

"One, two, three, Harefield," answered the little rabbit, and in
less than five hundred short seconds, he heard his Uncle's voice
over the wire.

"Goodness gracious meebus!" exclaimed Mr. John Hare, "I thought you'd
forgotten all about your old uncle. Where are you?"

"I'm in the Hollow Stump Telephone Booth," answered the little rabbit.

"I'll come right over to the Old Bramble Patch," said Uncle John, and
the old gentleman hare dropped the receiver on his left hind toe he was
so excited. You see, he hadn't heard from his little bunny nephew for so
long that he supposed he had enlisted in Uncle Sam's Army or Aunt
Columbia's Navy! Well, anyway, as soon as the little rabbit had paid the
little wood-mouse five carrot cents, he hopped home to tell his mother
that Uncle John Hare was coming over to supper.




TO THE POST OFFICE

    "Billy Breeze, please blow no more
     The leaves around the kitchen door.
     It takes my time till ten fifteen
     To make the doorstep nice and clean,"


said Little Jack Rabbit the next morning after he had polished the front
doorknob and fed the canary and filled the woodbox in the kitchen with
kindling wood.

Oh, my, yes, he was a busy little rabbit. He had to help his mother in
lots of ways, especially when Uncle John Hare was making a visit at the
Old Bramble Patch.

Well, when the little rabbit had done all these things, his mother asked
him to go down to the post office and buy her three War Savings Stamps
and the Rabbitville Gazette for Uncle John, who had a touch of
rheumatism in his left hind toe and didn't feel like hopping around, but
preferred to sit in an armchair on the back stoop where it was warm and
sunny.

Now, as Little Jack Rabbit hopped along, he met Chippy Chipmunk under
the Big Chestnut Tree, so of course he stopped and said good morning.

"Where are you going?" asked the little Chipmunk. And when he found out,
he took two twenty-five carrot cent pieces out of his pocket and asked
the little rabbit to buy him two Thrift Stamps.

"All right," said the little bunny, dropping the two quarters in his
knapsack, and by and by, not so very far, he met Squirrel Nutcracker.

"Where are you going?" asked the old gray squirrel.

"Down to the Post Office," answered the little rabbit.

"Will you buy me a dollar's worth of Thrift Stamps, please," said
Squirrel Nutcracker. So the little rabbit tucked the lettuce dollar
bill in his waistcoat pocket and hopped along. And pretty soon, not
so very far, he met Busy Beaver. He was plastering the top of his
little mud house and was dreadfully busy, but when he heard where
Little Jack Rabbit was going, he put his little muddy paw in his
pocket and took out a fifty cent piece.

"Please buy me two Thrift Stamps, I've no time to go to the village. I
must finish my house before the frost comes."

The little rabbit put the fifty cent piece in his knapsack and hopped
along, and by and by Parson Owl, who sat winking and blinking in his
Hollow Tree House, called out to the little rabbit as he hopped over
the dry leaves:

"Hey, there! Where are you going?"

"Down to the Post Office to buy stamps!"

"Will you buy me ten dollars' worth if I give you the money?" asked the
winky, blinky old owl. Goodness me; it will take another story to tell
what happened after that.




MORE STAMPS


Now let me see. We left little Billy Bunny on his way to the Post Office
to buy Thrift Stamps and the Rabbitville Gazette. And, oh dear me! I'm
all mixed up. I can't remember whether Timmy Chipmunk gave the little
rabbit ten dollars or whether Old Parson Owl did. Or whether the
Squirrel Brothers wanted two stamps, or whether it was Busy Beaver
who wanted three, or maybe four and perhaps five. Oh dear me again!

But never mind. I guess the little rabbit wasn't mixed up, for he hopped
along as happy as you please, and just before he came to Rabbitville,
he heard a voice in the treetops say:

    "Where are you going, little Hoppity Hop,
     You're going so fast maybe you can't stop."

"Oh, yes, I can," answered Little Jack Rabbit. "What do you want?"

"That depends on where you are going," said Professor Jim Crow, for it
was the old blackbird who had stopped the little rabbit, you see.

"I'm going to the Post Office to buy Mother Three Thrift Stamps and
Uncle John the Rabbitville Gazette, and let me see. Oh, yes; oh, yes.
Chippy Chipmunk gave me two quarters to buy him two Thrift Stamps, and
Squirrel Nutcracker handed me a lettuce dollar bill to buy him four, and
Busy Beaver gave me a fifty-cent piece to buy him two, and Parson Owl
just now pinned in my inside pocket a ten-dollar lettuce bill to pay for
forty stamps."

"I wonder what he wants so many stamps for?" said Professor Jim Crow.
"Why doesn't he buy a Liberty Bond?"

"Maybe he wants to give them away," answered the little rabbit. "But I
mustn't stop--I must be going."

"Wait, wait," said Professor Jim Crow. "Here's some money. Buy me ten
Thrift Stamps," and he handed over a two and one-half dollar lettuce
bill. "Don't lose the half," added the wise old crow, and then he flew
up into his old pine tree and cawed away right merrily. And after that
the little rabbit hopped along and when he came to the Post Office, he
went up to the little stamp window and asked the old maid grasshopper,
who was the postmistress, you remember--but if you don't, she was, just
the same, for Bobbie Redvest told me so--if there were any letters. But
there was only the Rabbitville Gazette done up in a pink wrapper and
yellow two-cent stamp.

"Have you Thrift Stamps?" asked Bunny Boy. And when the lady grasshopper
said yes, he told her just how many he wanted, for he could remember
everything, you see, which is more than I can, let me tell you, unless
I look back over this story. And after he had put the stamps carefully
in his knapsack with little pieces of wax paper between so that they
wouldn't stick together, he started back for the Old Bramble Patch. And
in the next story, if all those stamps don't get angry and try to lick
each other, I'll tell you what happened after that.




BUSY TIMES


When Little Jack Rabbit finally reached home with the stamps and the
Rabbitville Gazette, he found his Uncle John singing at the piano this
lovely song:

    The Autumn leaves are falling
    Along the Woodland ways,
    In scarlet, brown and yellow coats
    These cool November days.

    They rustle by the Old Rail Fence,
    They whisper in the lane,
    Or from the shivering half-clad trees
    They sing a sad refrain.

But Mrs. Rabbit was too busy putting up carrot preserves and lettuce
pickles to even listen. All the little people of the Shady Forest and
Sunny Meadow were getting ready for Winter.

The little feathered people were pruning their wings for a long flight
to the warm Southland, and the four-footed folk were gathering nuts and
grain for their storehouses.

The Squirrel Brothers had a bushel of nuts, and maybe more, laid away
carefully in the old chestnut tree, and Chippy Chipmunk had filled his
underground storeroom with nuts and corn.

Granddaddy Bullfrog was almost ready to dive into the Old Duck Pond to
hide in the soft warm mud. Teddy Turtle, too, would soon find for
himself a nice warm spot on the mud bottom of the mill pond before Jack
Frost touched the water with his icy fingers.

And Mr. John Hare had telephoned to the Old Red Rooster to come over and
put up Mrs. Rabbit's storm-door and bank the cellar windows with dry
leaves.

"Mother," said Little Jack Rabbit, as he polished the brass doorknob, "I
guess Jack Frost will soon be around."

"Shouldn't wonder," she replied, "but who's afraid of Jack Frost? Danny
Fox and Mr. Wicked Weasel, to say nothing of Hungry Hawk, are more to
be feared." And that good lady rabbit began her ironing, for it was
Tuesday, the day when all Rabbitville irons Monday's wash, I'm told.

Just then Bobbie Redvest began to sing:

    The summer time is over,
    And all the golden hours,
    No more the roses crimson bloom
    Amid the garden bowers.

    The little birds have left their nests
    And now are strong of wing,
    They will not build themselves a home
    Until the lovely spring,

    But fly away to Southern lands,
    Where warmth and sunshine reign,
    They cannot brave the winter wind,
    The snow drifts in the lane.

    And little four-foot furry folks
    Will safely hide away,
    And sleep until the winter's past
    And Spring has come to stay.




AN ACCIDENT


Well, after Uncle John Hare had spent about a week at the Old Bramble
Patch, he thought it time to go home. So he called up his house and
ordered his Bunnymobile sent for him.

"Now don't worry about Little Jack Rabbit," he said to the anxious lady
bunny, "I'll take good care of him and send him home safe and sound."

Then he put on his goggles while the little rabbit cranked up the
Bunnymobile, and off they went.

You see, Uncle John was so fond of his little rabbit nephew that he
just had to take him out for a drive.

But, goodness me. They had gone only a little way when they ran into a
load of hay. And, oh dear me! It tumbled down on top of them and hid
the Bunnymobile from sight. Wasn't that dreadful?

Well, I don't know what would have happened--they would have been
smothered or had hay fever, I guess--if a big Circus Elephant hadn't
come hurrying along just then.

Well, sir! He wound his trunk around that pile of hay and put it back on
the wagon. Then he dropped in his pocket the nickel the farmer gave him,
but he wouldn't take the carrot cent that grateful Uncle John offered
him.

[Illustration: The Elephant Put the Hay Right Back on the Wagon.
                                                      _Page_ 74]

"I'm so nervous you'd better drive," cried the old gentleman hare. So
Little Jack Rabbit took the wheel and for a little while everything went
along nicely. But pretty soon it grew dark, so the little rabbit hopped
out to light the lamps. But when he struck a match he found that the
lamps were smashed to pieces. You see, they had hit the back of the
hay wagon.

"What shall we do?"

"Get in and go along the best you can," answered the old gentleman hare.
"We ought to be pretty near home by this time." And I guess they would
have reached his little red house in a few minutes if the Policeman Dog
hadn't stopped them.

"What do you mean by running your Bunnymobile without lights?" he
growled. "I'll fine you ten bones!"

"Make it carrots and I'll pay you," said Uncle John.

But the Policeman Dog wouldn't take carrots. You see, he liked bones
much better. Then he jumped on the running board and told them to drive
to Station House No. 13.

But wasn't it lucky? They had gone only a little way when they came to a
butcher shop, where Uncle John traded ten carrots for ten bones. And
when he gave them to the Policeman dog, he told them they might drive
home slowly.

But, oh dear me. All of a sudden a big owl gave a hooty toot. No sooner
did the two little rabbits hear that dreadful noise than they hopped out
of the Bunnymobile and into a hollow stump. "You'll be safe, now," said
a little grasshopper from her Clover Patch House, nearby.




TWO PIGEONS


Well, I'm going to tell you right away that the two little rabbits got
safely home, although they had to hide all night in the hollow stump
from the old owl. But the grasshopper stayed in the clover patch and
built a little house with a front-door latch.

Well, as soon as they had run the Bunnymobile in the garage, they went
into the little red house, and had breakfast. After that was over Little
Jack Rabbit said good-by and hopped off home to the Old Bramble Patch.
And while he was hopping along who should come by but old Professor Jim
Crow with his little Black Book.

"Helloa there, little rabbit," said the wise old bird, and then he
opened his little Black Book and, turning to page 23, he said:

"Let me read you something about pigeons."

"Why?" asked the little bunny, wiggling his little pink nose so fast
that old Professor Jim Crow's eyes filled with tears, and he had to take
off his spectacles and wipe them with his silk pocket handkerchief.

"Because," answered the old crow, "two pigeons have made their home in
the loft of your mother's old barn." Then he put on his spectacles again
and commenced to read aloud:

"Pigeons always lay two eggs, and these produce a male and a female, so
they are mated from birth, and, could they remain so, they would be the
happiest of winged beings."

And then the old professor closed his book and said, "Better hurry home
and see the new pigeons." So away hopped the little rabbit, clipperty
clip, lipperty lip, over the Sunny Meadow until, by and by, after
awhile, he came to the Old Bramble Patch. There stood his mother in the
backyard. She had just placed a pan of water under a tree for the
pigeons.

"Don't make any noise," she said, as the little rabbit drew near. Pretty
soon Mr. Pigeon flew down to taste the water, and by and by Mrs. Pigeon
fluttered down by his side.

    "Cock-a-doodle-do,
     Of pigeons we have two,
     But some day there'll be dozens more
     A-cooing by the old barn door,"

sang the old Red Rooster who had come over from Uncle John's to help
Mrs. Rabbit weed the carrot patch.

After that she and her little bunny boy hopped up on the front porch to
hear the canary bird in her gold cage sing:

    "I wouldn't be a pigeon
     And live in an old red barn,
     I'd rather be here when the weather is drear
     And watch Mrs. Bunny darn."

Which made the kind lady rabbit laugh, for she spent lots of time, let
me tell you, darning the holes in her little bunny boy's golf
stockings.




MISS PUSSY

    The pumpkins in the cornfield
    Are as yellow as can be,
    And the apples, red and golden,
    Are hanging on the tree,
    The grapes in purple clusters
    Are swinging on the vine,
    And the old crow's nest is empty
    Upon the lonely pine.


"Ha, ha," shouted Little Jack Rabbit, as Billy Breeze blew across the
Sunny Meadow, and, let me tell you, Billy Breeze was just a little bit
chilly, this cool November morning.

"I wonder what I'll do," thought the little rabbit, and he wiggled his
little pink nose sideways, and then off he went, clipperty clip,
lipperty lip, and by and by he came to an old hollow stump. So he peeked
in, and then, all of a sudden, a purring voice asked:

"What are you doing, Mr. Curious One?"

"Oh, I wasn't doing anything wrong," answered the little bunny. "I just
wanted to see what was inside."

"Well, I'll show you," answered the voice, and out popped a little black
cat, with green eyes and a pink ribbon.

"Oh, it's you, Miss Pussy," laughed the little rabbit. "I'm glad it
wasn't a bear or a wildcat," and he laughed some more and wiggled his
little pink nose just for fun, you understand.

"What are you doing out here?"

"Looking for mice," answered the little black pussy.

"Don't you bother Timmy Meadowmouse," said Little Jack Rabbit quickly;
"he's a friend of mine."

And then, what do you suppose happened? Why, the Farmer's dog came by,
and away went the little rabbit, and up went Miss Pussy Cat's back, and
her tail grew so big that had she tried to get back into the hollow
stump I guess she would have had to leave her tail behind her! But she
didn't. No sireemam. She just humped her back and meowed, and the
Farmer's dog kept right on after Little Jack Rabbit, but of course he
never caught him.

Well, as soon as the little bunny was safe in the Shady Forest, he
looked about him, and pretty soon, not so very long, he saw Professor
Jim Crow with his little Black Book under his wing.

"Read me something, won't you please," begged the little rabbit. So the
old professor bird took out his book and turned over the pages until he
came to "The early worm must look out for the bird."

"Ha, ha," laughed the little rabbit. "I must tell that to mother. She
always tells it the other way 'round." Then off he hopped, and the old
black bird flew away to his tree in Kalamazoo. For that was the name of
the little village where Professor Crow has his home, and where he
taught in the grammar school arithmetic and the Golden Rule, and
sometimes Latin and sometimes Greek, and anything else that a bird can
speak. Goodness me, if my typewriter hasn't made up this poetry all by
itself. I wonder where it went to school.




A BUSY BEAVER


"Bunny Boy!" called Little Jack Rabbit's mother, oh, so early, as Mr.
Merry Sun climbed up the blue gray sky of the early morning, "Get up,
little bunny!"

So the little rabbit hopped out of bed; and after he had combed his hair
with a little chip, he ran downstairs to ask his mother about the early
worm Professor Jim Crow had mentioned in the last story. After breakfast
he hopped out on the Sunny Meadow and looked about him. Mr. Merry Sun
was shining down on the frosty dew and Billy Breeze was very chilly,
and the meadow grass brown and withered. It didn't look at all like the
lovely Sunny Meadow.

"Oh, dear," sighed the little rabbit, "all the flowers are gone, and
most of the birds have flown to the sunny South." Just then Professor
Jim Crow flew by with his little Black Book under his wing:

"Helloa, there, little bunny, how are you this chilly day?" And then
that old crow began to read out of his little book:

    "Little rabbit's coat of brown
     Soon will turn to white.
     Then among the snowy drifts
     He can hide from sight.

"You see how Mother Nature looks after you," said that wise old
blackbird. "In the summer your coat is brown like the dry grass
and brambles. But when winter comes it turns white so that you
won't be seen so well against the snow."

Then away flew Professor Jim Crow to read his little Black Book to
somebody else, and the little rabbit hopped along and by and by he
came to the Bubbling Brook where the speckled trout swam in and out
among the rocks and the little fresh water crabs played in the quiet
pools. All of a sudden down fell a tree.

"There," said Busy Beaver, "I'll now have some logs to make a dam."

"Why do you want a dam? Do you want to spoil the Bubbling Brook?"

"It won't spoil the brook," answered the little beaver. "It will only
make it deep so that when I build my house for the winter my front door
won't freeze up tight."

"Oh, I see," said Little Jack Rabbit, and he wiggled his little pink
nose sideways. "And how soon will you have it finished?"

"Oh, long before Old Mr. North Wind brings the snow," answered Busy
Beaver.

    Old Mr. North Wind
    On his Snow Horse,
    Swiftly is riding
    Down the golf course,

    Over the meadow
    And up the steep hill,
    Shouting so hoarsely;
    "Gid ap, there, Bill!"




DON'T WORRY


In the last story Little Jack Rabbit, of Old Bramble Patch, U. S. A.,
was talking to Busy Beaver, who was making a dam across the Bubbling
Brook, you remember, to keep the water from freezing up his front door
in the cold winter time.

"Every one is getting ready for the cold weather. It won't be long
before my dam is finished and then I'll set to work and make my house of
mud and sticks," and Busy Beaver jumped into the water with a flap of
his broad tail and disappeared. So the little rabbit hopped along, and
by and by he came to the cave where the Big Brown Bear made his home.

"Helloa!" said Little Jack Rabbit, as the Big Brown Bear looked out of
his front door. "Winter time will soon be here."

"Oh, that doesn't worry me," said the Big Brown Bear.

"But what will you eat?" asked the little rabbit.

"When you're asleep you don't feel hungry. On a warm sunny day I may
come out for a little while and find something to eat. I don't worry."

    Worry never makes you fat,
    Instead, it makes you lean.
    Never worry for a minute,--
    Worry has the devil in it,--
    Keep your mind serene.

And if you don't know what "serene" means, take your father's dictionary
and look up, for the more words you know the wiser you'll grow.

"Well, I don't have to worry about the cold weather," laughed the little
rabbit. "Mother Nature will give me a new white fur overcoat, and the
Old Bramble Patch will keep the wind away, and the cabbage leaves which
mother and I have stored away will last all winter." And then away he
went to see more of his friends in the Shady Forest.

Well, by and by, after a while, he heard the honk of an automobile horn.
"I wonder whether that's Uncle John," and Little Jack Rabbit stopped and
looked all around, and pretty soon, not very long, Mr. John Hare drove
by in his Bunnymobile. He looked very fine in his polkadot handkerchief
and gold watch and chain and a great big immense diamond horseshoe pin
in his pink cravat. Oh, my, yes! Uncle John was quite a dandy. He was
the best dressed Hare in Harebridge, and why shouldn't he be when you
consider he was President of the bank and the Harum Scarum Club!

"Helloa, there, little nephew," he shouted.

    "Hop in and take a ride with me,
     We'll take a spin for a mile or three,
     And maybe we'll come where the lollypops grow,
     Pink and yellow, all in a row."




THE LITTLE FROSTY PAINTER

    There's a little frosty painter
    Who soon will come around
    To put a silver edging on
    The grasses on the ground,
    Upon the window pane he'll paint
    A fairy landscape, strange and quaint,
    And some cold morning you'll awake
    To find he's frosted Mother's cake.


Now can you guess who this little frosty painter is? Why, it's Jack
Frost, the son of King Winter.

"Ha, ha," crowed the Weathercock on the Big Red Barn. "Jack Frost is
here, for I can see the silver frost upon the grass in the Sunny
Meadow," and then that gilded rooster turned his head to the North and
blew on his gilt toes to keep them warm.

Pretty soon Old Sic'em walked out of his little dog house and shook
himself. "Bow wow," he said, "it's a chilly morning."

"Cock-a-doodle-do," said Cocky Doodle, and then Henny Penny cackled
loudly:

    "I've laid an egg so white and clean
     'Twould grace a breakfast for a queen.
     But if a little girl should beg
     The farmer for my pretty egg,
     I'd tell him quick to let her go
     And take my egg as white as snow."

As the little hen finished her song, she noticed Little Jack Rabbit by
the Old Rail Fence.

"Helloa, Mrs. Henny Penny," he said. "I like your song. If I see any
poor little girl I'll tell her!" and then the little rabbit hopped
away, for he just couldn't stay a moment in one place, let me tell you.
He wanted to be on the hop, skip and jump all the time, just like lots
of little boys and girls I know.

Well, by and by, after a while, he saw Old Professor Jim Crow scratching
his head with his claw.

"What's the matter?" asked the little rabbit.

"I can't make out something I've written in my little Black Book,"
answered the old black bird, and he scratched his head again and looked
dreadfully perplexed, which means worse than worried, you know.

"Let me look," said Little Jack Rabbit. And when the old blackbird had
flown down from his pine tree, the little bunny leaned over his
shoulder, and read: "Oh, oh, oh, Squirreltown!"

"Why, that's the Squirrel Brothers telephone number," he laughed. "So it
is," said Professor Jim Crow. "I'm so glad you told me! Let's call them
up!"

    "'One, three, five, Chestnut Hill!'
     Keep on ringing, Central, till
     Some one answers, 'Hello! who
     Is calling up my Bungaloo!'

    "But if no one says a word;
     Not a twitter from a bird,
     Nor a chatter comes your way,
     Call again another day."




GRANDPA POSSUM


But! gracious me! Central gave Little Jack Rabbit the wrong number, for
as he stood in the Hollow Stump Telephone Booth, with the receiver to
his ear, he heard Grandpa Possum say:

    "I don't care how hard it snows,
     Nor how Old Mr. North Wind blows,
     For I'm as safe as safe can be
     In a big warm hole in the old nut tree."

"Ha, ha!" laughed the little rabbit, hopping out of the booth, just
as Grandpa Possum poked his head out of his hollow tree house, "you
certainly look sleepy. What made you wake up?"

"What woke me?" asked the possum gentleman angrily. "Why, those good
for nothing Squirrel Brothers threw a snowball into my window." And
then Grandpa Possum shook the snow out of his left ear and looked
around to find those naughty squirrels.

All of a sudden, quicker than a wink, another snowball hit the old
hollow tree a tre-men-dous whack.

"Goodness me!" said Grandpa Possum, "if I ever catch those pesky
squirrels I'll make them wince, yes, I will, as sure as I'm twenty-one!"

And he began to grin, for Grandpa Possum is full of good nature and
never can stay angry very long.

    "If you're good natured, every one
     Will love you more and more,
     So don't get mad, be always glad,
     And lend a helping paw,"

sang Grandpa Possum, winking at Little Jack Rabbit, as Squirrel Twinkle
Tail peeked out and said:

    "Excuse me, Grandpa Possum,
     For throwing snow at you,
     'Twould be too bad to make you mad
     Or just a little blue."

And then he and his mischievous brother Featherhead ran away and didn't
bother Grandpa Possum for a long time.

"Well, I guess I'll be getting along," said the little rabbit and he
hopped away and by and by he came to the Shady Forest Pond where Busy
Beaver had his home. But of course he wasn't anywhere to be seen. No,
siree. He was in his little mud hut whose roof stuck up above the ice
and whose cellar door was way down deep where the water was free from
ice and he could swim in and out as he pleased.

So the little rabbit didn't wait, but hopped along until he came to the
edge of the forest, when he started to hop across the Sunny Meadow to
the Old Barn Yard where Henny Penny and Cocky Doodle lived all the year
'round. But just then he heard the supper bell. So, instead, he hurried
home to be in time for Aunt Jemima's angel cake.




COUSIN CHATTERBOX


Little Jack Rabbit loved the snow that covered the ground with a soft
white carpet. His feet never grew cold. No siree, they didn't. All the
little Forest Folk liked the snow, for Loving Mother Nature had given
them warm fur, and warm fur laughs at cold just as love laughs at
troubles.

Even Mrs. Grouse was happy. And if you've forgotten why, I'll tell you
again. It was because dear Mother Nature had given her a pair of
snow-shoes. Yes, indeed. The skin had grown out between her toes until
she could walk as nicely as you please over the snow. And what is more,
Loving Mother Nature had taught her to dive into a snowbank where she
could stay for the night as snug and warm as you please, when Old Mr.
North Wind blew upon his chilly horn.

Neither did Squirrel Nutcracker care that the ground was covered with
snow, and he could find no more nuts. He had a supply hidden safely away
in the old hollow chestnut tree. But he did mind having other people
take them. And when his cousin, Chatterbox, in his red fur coat, tried
to break into his storehouse, Squirrel Nutcracker was as mad as mad
could be.

    "Whoever steals a nut from me
     From out my storehouse in this tree,
     A friend of mine shall be no more,
     So let him stay outside my store."

Chatterbox grew very angry as he peeped down from the chestnut tree and
saw Little Jack Rabbit with a big smile on his face. It told the naughty
red squirrel that the little rabbit knew whom the little gray squirrel
meant.

But when Little Jack Rabbit opened his knapsack and took out a lemon
lollypop, you should have seen those two squirrels forget all about
their quarrel and scramble down the big chestnut tree. Yes, sir.
Squirrel Nutcracker forgot that Chatterbox wanted to steal his nuts, and
Chatterbox forgot that he had been caught! And now that I come to think
it over, perhaps that is the reason the little bunny laughed just before
he opened his knapsack! I guess he knew how quickly those two little
squirrels would forget everything when they saw a lemon lollypop!

    "Now promise me one thing to-day,
     You little squirrels, red and gray,
     That you will quarrel nevermore
     Nor steal a nut from any store.
     For he who steals will always end
     In having neither love nor friend."

Now don't you think it wonderful that the little rabbit could make up
such lovely poetry? Well, I do, but the two little squirrels thought
what he does in the next story even more wonderful.

    But you must not impatient get,
    If mother says, it's growing late.
    Just wait until another time,
    And kiss good-night your Auntie Kate.




JIMMY JAY


Now just as I finished the last story Little Jack Rabbit handed Squirrel
Nutcracker and Chatterbox each a lovely lemon lollypop. I would have
told you that before, only I had no more room, so I had to wait. But
it's a good thing the little Squirrels didn't have to wait, isn't it?

Well, after the lemon lollypops were all gone, the little bunny went
upon his way, hipperty hop, lipperty lop, until he saw Jimmy Jay on the
Old Rail Fence.

Now you know that Jimmy Jay is a very mischievous little bird. Yes, sir,
he certainly loves to tease. Grandmother Magpie is mischievous, too,
but she's no worse than little Jimmy Jay. She does harm by meddling and
Jimmy Jay by teasing.

Yes, it certainly is too bad that such a pretty bird as Jimmy Jay should
cause so much trouble. Why, his coat's as blue as the summer sky when
Mr. Merry Sun is shining at his best.

    "Hip, hip, hurray,
     I'm Jimmy Jay,
     And I'm proud of my coat of blue.
     Go on your way,
     I'm Jimmy Jay,
     I've no time to talk to you."

"You're too fond of yourself, Jimmy Jay," said Little Jack Rabbit, and
he wiggled his pink nose till the little Jay bird almost fell off the
rail. You see, Little Jack Rabbit had the habit of wiggling his nose so
fast that it made everybody dizzy to look at it.

    "Mother says it's not the clothes
     You wear that make you good;
     It's having a contented mind
     And doing what you should."

Then away hopped the little rabbit, leaving Jimmy Jay to think it over.
Perhaps it kept that mischievous little Jay Bird from looking at himself
in the Bubbling Brook. Or maybe it was because it was all frozen over
with a thick coat of ice.

Well, anyway, the little rabbit hopped along for maybe a mile or maybe
less, until he came to a little hole in snow, when, all of a sudden, out
popped Timmy Meadowmouse. You see in the winter time, Timmy Meadowmouse
makes little tunnels under the snow, and every once in a while, here
and there, he climbs up a stiff stalk of grass and pokes out his head to
look around. And wasn't he glad to see the little rabbit. Well, I just
guess he was. But if he had seen Danny Fox instead he wouldn't have been
so pleased. No sireemam. And in the next story, if the little
meadowmouse doesn't play hide-and-seek in the snow till that sly old fox
comes around, I'll tell you what happened after this.




THE TIP OF A TAIL


Now let us see--oh, yes, I remember now. We left off just when little
Timmy Meadowmouse poked his head up through the snow and said, "Helloa!"

    "Howdy, Timmy Meadowmouse,
     Through the chimney of your house
     Looking o'er the meadow white,
     Glancing round from left to right,
     You might lose your woollen socks
     If 't weren't I, but Danny Fox,"

laughed Little Jack Rabbit, kicking up his strong hind legs until a big
snowball hit Timmy Meadowmouse, knocking the hat off his head into a
snowbank.

"Look out! What are you doing," cried Timmy Meadowmouse. "That's the new
hat Mother gave me for Xmas." Pretty soon he began to laugh, too, for
he's a merry little fellow and a good friend.

"My, but it's lonely these long winter days," sighed the little bunny.
"Everybody's sound asleep in his winter home. Only you and I and a few
others are about," and the little rabbit sighed again, for what he says
is true, let me tell you.

    For in the good Old Summer time
    'Most everybody's round,
    The feathered folk are in the trees,
    The furry on the ground.
    And all the sweet and verdant dells
    Are ringing with the flower bells.

"Cheer up, little rabbit," said the merry little Meadowmouse, "spring
will soon be here. The buds on the trees are waiting for little Miss
South Wind to open them," and after that the little meadowmouse
disappeared into his tunnel and the little bunny hopped away, clipperty
clip, over the snow till he came to the Shady Forest. And after he had
gone in a little way, not so very far, he saw something that made his
heart go pitter, pat. And what do you suppose it was? I'll give you
three guesses and then I'll tell you. The footprints of Danny Fox. Yes,
sir! Right there in the snow were the marks of that sly old fox's feet.

Little Jack Rabbit stopped right then and there to look about him.
But Danny Fox was nowhere in sight, but that was no reason why he
might not be, at that very moment, hiding behind a tree. The little
rabbit looked again at the footprints in the snow. There they were,
but, thank goodness! They led away, far away, into the Shady Forest.
Just then, all of a sudden, the Miller's Boy jumped out from behind
a clump of bushes.

"Run! run!" screamed Jimmy Jay, who happened by just then. And
the little rabbit did. He went so fast that his shadow couldn't
keep up with him and neither could the Miller's Boy. But, oh,
dear me! The Miller's dog did. Yes, sir! He kept so close that
before he popped into the Old Bramble Patch he caught the end
of the little rabbit's tail.




OLD BARNEY OWL


Well, I'm mighty glad the little rabbit lost only the fur tip to his
tail. That was bad enough, but he forgot all about it the next morning
when the Squirrel Brothers invited him over the 'phone to meet them at
the Shady Forest Pond. He spent no time at all getting out his skates,
but his mother took two minutes and a half tying a woolen muffler around
his neck. She knew, like all wise mothers, that it's lots more fun to
skate when one is nice and warm.

When he reached the pond the Squirrel Brothers were already there,
skating merrily over the ice.

Busy Beaver in his winter home below could hear them whirring along,
cutting fancy figures in the ice, and calling merrily to one another.

After a while, when the little rabbit and the squirrel brothers had
grown tired of skating, they ran over to make a call on Old Barney Owl,
who lived in the Big Chestnut Tree on a small island, right in the
middle of the pond.

Although it was now pretty late in the afternoon, the old gentleman
owl was still asleep, and when he opened the door, his eyes winked and
blinked, and at first he didn't know them at all. In fact, he shut the
door right in their faces. I suppose he thought they had knocked just to
wake him up. Perhaps they had, for when the door closed with a bang they
all began to laugh.

[Illustration: Little Jack and The Squirrel Brothers Skated Merrily.
                                                         _Page_ 113]

By and by Featherhead knocked again, and when Old Barney Owl opened it
a second time, the naughty little squirrel said:

"Here is a nice fresh egg!"

Goodness me! When the old owl, whose eyes were still very blinky, found
out it wasn't an egg, but a snowball, he dropped it on the little
squirrel's head, and slammed the door again.

Now, if Featherhead had only gone back to his skating, all would have
been well. But he didn't. No, indeed. Instead, he knocked again, and
when the old owl opened the door, that naughty squirrel dropped a
snowball down his collar. Goodness gracious me! What a scuffle there
was all at once, and, just like that! the old owl pulled the little
squirrel into his house and closed the door.

    Oh, what a scowl had Mr. Owl,
    And Featherhead felt nearly dead.
    He was so scared at what he'd done
    He couldn't move his feet to run.

    And, goodness gracious! so would I
    Have felt as if I'd surely die,
    If some big giant from his tree
    Had through his doorway pulled poor me.

    From head to toe I'd surely quake,
    And feel my frightened heart would break.
    But now let's turn the page to see
    If ever Featherhead gets free.




"HELP! HELP!"


Little Jack Rabbit threw himself against the door as soon as it closed
on Featherhead. But Old Barney Owl had fastened the latch and it
wouldn't open. My! What a dreadful scuffling was going on inside.

"Open the door! Open the door!" shouted the little rabbit, pounding on
the wooden panels with his strong hind feet. But Old Barney Owl paid no
attention. Maybe he had all he could do to hold Featherhead.

By and by it grew very quiet and Twinkle Tail peeped in through the
keyhole, but he couldn't see anything.

"Oh, dear me!" cried Little Jack Rabbit. "Perhaps Old Barney Owl has
eaten Featherhead!" Poor Twinkle Tail's heart almost stopped beating.
Maybe it would have if he had known that the old owl had dragged his
little brother squirrel upstairs by the tail.

"Snowballs and eggs! Snowballs and eggs!" muttered Old Barney, shaking
Featherhead until his teeth rattled. "You little rascal! You thought I
couldn't tell a snowball from an egg, eh?" and he gave the little
squirrel another shake.

"Now I'm going to skin you and eat you for supper!"

Oh, dear me! How Featherhead trembled when he heard that.

Just then there came a tremendous crash downstairs, and as the old owl
looked over the railing, Twinkle Tail and Little Jack Rabbit broke in
the door.

"Help! Help!" shouted Featherhead.

"Rats and mice! Rats and mice!" cried Old Barney Owl, still keeping a
tight hold on the little squirrel's tail.

He knew there was going to be trouble, but he wasn't going to let his
supper get away from him without a fight, let me tell you. No, siree.
Old Barney Owl was too hungry for that. But he changed his mind pretty
quickly. Yes, siree. When Little Jack Rabbit let fly his hind feet,
thumpty-thump, thumpty-thump! knocking the old owl head over heels, he
changed his mind. He let go of Featherhead, and before he could change
it again there was nobody in the house except himself.

Gracious me! How the Squirrel Brothers scurried home. And the little
rabbit lost no time, either. He went to bed early and in the middle of
the night, when Old Barney Owl went "Hooty, toot!" he shivered and
pulled the bedclothes up over his head.

    "Toot, toot, hoot!"
    Old Barney plays his flute.
    It sounds so shivery in the dark,
    The firefly's tiny gleaming spark,
    Goes out because the firefly
    Is frightened by the old owl's cry.




PUMPKIN PLACE P. O.


"Little Jack Rabbit!" said his mother, the next morning, "run down to
the post office and see if there's a letter for me." So the little rabbit
put on his khaki cap and his little knapsack and started off, and by and
by, after a while, he came to Rabbitville, where the post office stood on
the corner of Pumpkin Place and Corn Cob Lane.

"Is there a letter for Mrs. John Rabbit, Old Bramble Patch, Rail
Fence Corner, U. S. A.?" he asked the lady postmistress, an old maid
grasshopper who worked for Uncle Sam in the winter and in the summer
played in the wheat field.

"I think there is," she said, looking in box 13, and, sure enough, there
was. Then she handed the letter to the little rabbit, and shut the door
of the little window and after that she took out her vanity bag and
powdered her nose.

The little rabbit put the letter in his knapsack and started home, but
just as he reached the Shady Forest, whom should he see but Squirrel
Nutcracker. The old gray squirrel had come out of his hollow tree for
a little run in the sun. You see, on cold days he curled himself up in
a ball and kept very quiet, but on warm days he came out and jumped
from limb to limb to get the cramps out of his leg muscles.

"Where are you going, little rabbit?" he asked, and then he took a nut
out of his pocket and cracked it with his sharp teeth without a bit of
trouble.

"I've got a letter for mother," said Little Jack Rabbit, "and I mustn't
stop to talk to any one," and he hopped along as fast as he could, for
he was afraid he might lose the letter, you see. Well, pretty soon, not
so very long, he came to the Old Bramble Patch, and after he had given
the letter to his mother he hopped out on the Sunny Meadow, and just
then, all of a sudden, Old Professor Jim Crow flew by. He had his little
Black Book under his wing, and as soon as he saw the little rabbit he
lighted on a bush and turned to page 23.

"Let me read you something," he said, putting on his spectacles, and
after he had cawed three times and a half he began:

    "Little rabbits should take care
     To every morning comb their hair.
     They always should be clean and neat
     And keep their dispositions sweet."

And then that wise old bird looked up over his spectacles and winked at
the little rabbit. "Did you comb your hair this morning?" he asked. And
wasn't it lucky that Little Jack Rabbit hadn't forgotten to? Well, I
just guess it was.




AN ICE CREAM PINE CONE


Pretty soon it began to snow and soon the Sunny Meadow was just as
white and smooth as Mrs. Rabbit's best table cloth, for the feathery
snowflakes fell so softly you could almost hear the stillness. Little
Jack Rabbit opened his knapsack and pulled out his rubber boots. Then he
put on his ear muffs and his nice warm mittens and slung his knapsack
over his back, but very carefully, for there were lots of nice things to
eat in that knapsack. Yes, siree. His kind mother always filled it up
with cakes and sweets. I guess the little rabbit knew that very morning
his dear mother had baked lettuce cakes, and how he did love lettuce
cakes. Yes, indeed he did, and so would you and so would I if we could
only get one, I'm sure.

Well, after he had hopped along a little way, he began to sing,

    "Three little bunnies a-sliding went
     On a winter's day,
     The ice was thin, and two fell in,
     And the third one ran away."

"Ha, ha!" cawed an old crow from a tree top, "that's a very fine song!"

"Well, if you think it's such a fine song, throw me down an ice cream
pine cone," said the little rabbit. But the selfish old crow wanted it
for himself, and instead threw down a snowball, which hit the little
rabbit on the tip of his tail.

The little rabbit wasn't going to stay there and have snowballs thrown
at him. No, sireemam, he wasn't. And pretty soon, not so very far, he
met Jimmy Mink creeping along by the Old Duck Pond.

"I have to be very careful these winter days," said the little mink.
"Everybody wants to wear fur in the winter time, you know, and if that
dreadful Miller's Boy sees me, he might shoot me and sell my fur for a
muff!"

"They set traps for me," answered the little rabbit. "And Danny Fox and
Mr. Wicked Weasel are always after me. And Hungry Hawk, too. You're not
the only one who has to look out for himself."

Then the little rabbit took a lovely lollypop out of his knapsack and
gave it to Jimmy Mink, and asked him to make a visit at the Old Bramble
Patch.

"I'll get Uncle John to take us riding in his Bunnysnowbile." This
tickled the little mink almost to pieces, for he'd never ridden in
a Bunnysnowbile, and neither have I and neither have you, but perhaps
some day we will if we happen to be around when Mr. John Hare comes by.
And in the next book, if the smoke doesn't blow down our chimney and
choke the cook so that she can't bake the biscuits for breakfast, I'll
tell you more about Little Jack Rabbit and his friends who live in
Bunnyville, U. S. A.


THE END




LITTLE JACK RABBIT BOOKS

(Trademark Registered.)

By DAVID CORY

Colored Wrapper and Text Illustrations Drawn by
H. S. BARBOUR

       *       *       *       *       *

PRINTED IN LARGE TYPE EASY TO READ. FOR
CHILDREN FROM 3 TO 8 YEARS

       *       *       *       *       *

A unique series, about the furred and feathered little people of the
woods and meadows.


LITTLE JACK RABBIT'S ADVENTURES

Little Jack Rabbit is a jolly fellow, but he has to keep away from Danny
Fox, Wicked Weasel and Hungry Hawk.


LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND DANNY FOX

Many a hairbreadth escape has Little Jack Rabbit from this old rascal,
who lives on the woody hillside under a pile of rocks.


LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE SQUIRREL BROTHERS

Mr. Squirrel Nutcracker's two boys are great friends of Little Jack, but
old Barney Owl makes a lot of trouble for all three.


LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND CHIPPY CHIPMUNK

Little Jack Rabbit visits Chippy Chipmunk's store, but you should read
about what happens to the sign over the door.


LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE BIG BROWN BEAR

The Big Brown Bear is a particular friend of Little Jack Rabbit. Cosey
Cave, where he lives, is well stored with honey and lollypops.


LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND UNCLE JOHN HARE

Tells all about the bunnymobile, Ragged Rabbit Giant and the Rabbit
Fairies.


LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND PROFESSOR CROW

Professor Crow, with his Wisdom Book, teaches Little Jack Rabbit many
interesting things.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *




LITTLE JOURNEYS TO HAPPYLAND

(Trademark Registered)

By DAVID CORY

Individual Colored Wrappers. Profusely Illustrated

       *       *       *       *       *

=Printed in large type--easy to read. For children from 4 to 8 years.=

       *       *       *       *       *

A new series of exciting adventures by the author of LITTLE JACK RABBIT
books.


The Happyland is reached by various routes: If you should happen to miss
the Iceberg Express maybe you can take the Magic Soap Bubble, or in case
that has already left, the Noah's Ark may be waiting for you.

This series is unique in that it deals with unusual and exciting
adventures on land and sea and in the air.


The Cruise of the Noah's Ark

This is a good rainy day story. On just such a day Mr. Noah invites
Marjorie to go for a trip in the Noah's Ark. She gets aboard just in
time and away it floats out into the big wide world.


The Magic Soap Bubble

The king of the gnomes has a magic pipe with which he blows a wonderful
bubble and taking Ed. with him they both have a delightful time in
Gnomeland.


The Iceberg Express

The Mermaid's magic comb changes little Mary Louise into a mermaid. The
Polar Bear Porter on the iceberg Express invites her to take a trip with
him and away they go on a little journey to Happyland.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Jack Rabbit and the Squirrel
Brothers, by David Cory

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE JACK RABBIT ***

***** This file should be named 21497.txt or 21497.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/4/9/21497/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, Linda McKeown, Jacqueline Jeremy
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
