The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rowena & Harold, by Wm. Stephen Pryer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rowena & Harold
       A Romance in Rhyme of an Olden Time, of Hastyngs and Normanhurst

Author: Wm. Stephen Pryer

Release Date: May 17, 2007 [EBook #21509]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROWENA & HAROLD ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Illustration: Cover art--Old Ragnor's Crypt.]






[Frontispiece: Wm. Stephen Pryer]






DEDICATION.

DEO LAUS.

In grateful remembrance of Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria's
unprecedentedly long, illustrious, and beneficent reign of sixty years
(1837-97), and of fifty years of service (1847-97) in the cause of
National Education by Her Majesty's most loyal and devoted servant,

THE AUTHOR.




ROWENA & HAROLD:


  A Romance in Rhyme
  Of an Olden Time,
  Of Hastyngs and Normanhurst.


by

WM. STEPHEN PRYER,



Author of "Thought Crystals in Verse," Etc.



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS & PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR.




London:

WARD, LOCK & CO.

Forest Gate, E.:

THE ELECTRIC PUBLISHING CO.




INDEX.


  Old Ragnor's Cliffs
  Sir Guy de Warre
  Sir Harold Wynn
  Sir Harold Spurned
  The Deserted Eyrie
  Sir Harold Sails
  Rowena's Lonely Vigil
  Rowena's Song
  Sir Harold at Acre
  The Saracen Maid's Secret
  The Secret Assassin
  The Light in the Turret Tower
  Death at Ragnor's Tower
  Rowena's Grief
  Rowena's Lament
  The Holy Friar's Consolation
  Rowena Enters a Convent
  Nigh unto Death
  The Demon Wrecker
  Old Ragnor's Dungeons Grim
  Eric Entombed
  The Rift in Hell Gate
  The Crucified One
  Eric Faithful unto Death
  Eric to be Crucified
  To Die or Live
  Eric Escapes
  The Smuggler's Den
  Rowena's Fiery Furnace
  The Dungeon's Angel
  Rediviva
  Convalescent
  Rowena's Te Deum
  The Lights of Home
  The Lamp of Death
  The Wreck of The "Holy Cross"
  Grief at Wynnwood Hall
  Saved
  Two Lives in One
  The Lost Missive
  Another Dungeon Tenant
  Nemesis
  The Demon Exorcised
  Father and Child
  Reconciliation
  A Royal Visitor
  The Royal Pardon
  The Deserted Brides
  Heart Chords
  Home, Sweet Home




ILLUSTRATIONS


Old Ragnor's Crypt . . . . . . . . . _Cover Art_

Wm. Stephen Pryer . . . . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

The Castle, Hastyngs.

St. Hilda's Keep.




[Illustration: The Castle, Hastyngs.]


Old Ragnor's Cliffs.

    Like some horrific Gorgon's mammoth skull,
    Thrown up by Titan spade,
        From out those caves
    Where saurians with mastodons had played,
    Before the sea had made their homes their graves,
  And scared their ghosts with screech of sea-born mew and gull,

    Is Ragnor's beetling brow, the seaman's dread,
    That scowls by night and day
        On that same sea
    And with earth-shaking sound is heard to say,--
    Which sound the waves roll back with mocking glee--
  "What!  Not enough of life ye must e'en have the dead?"

    The ragged remnants of an ancient crown
    Adorn his kingly head:
        'Tis Hastyngs' Tower.
    Here dwelt a maiden fair, so fair, 'tis said,
    That suitors rich and princely sought her bower,
  To sue in vain: whereat her father's haughty brow would frown.




Sir Guy de Warre.

    Like Ragnor's rocks.  He swore that she should wed
    Sir Ralph of Normanhurst,
        His sister's son.
    Would not the Holy Church deem her accursed,
    Dared she defy his will and marry one
  Of her own choice!  Were't so, 'twere better she were dead!

    "Dear father, mine," Rowena pleaded sore,
    On bended knee, "The heart
        Belongs to God.
    To wed where hallowed love can have no part
    Were sin, deserving His all-chastening rod,
  Whose blessing on such tie 'twere impious to implore."

    "Sir Guy, my spouse, a mother's prayers, I too
    Would blend with hers.  O yield,
        Our only child,
    Possession sweet of woman's holy field--
    Affection's glebe--a virgin soil denied
  When wedlock makes those one whose hearts can ne'er beat true."




Sir Harold Wynn.

    Sir Guy de Warre, the fair Rowena's sire,
    Of haughty Norman birth,
        With pure descent,
    Held Saxon, high or low, as scum of earth;
    And deemed his name more worth and honour lent,
  Than line directly traced from Alfred could inspire.

    Dark-visaged man, his countenance repelled;
    His restless eyes flashed fire;
        His voice sent dread
    Through every soul that felt his fearful ire.
    At its fell sound both beast and children fled.
  Rowena, with her mother, hid till it had quelled.

    Sir Harold dared his daughter's hand to seek!
    No word the fierce knight spake
        But ope'd the door,
    And, scowling, said--"No Saxon churl shall make
    Rowena wife; and dare he woo her more,
  Upon him, would Sir Guy a direful vengeance wreak."




Sir Harold Spurned.

    To sue and lose, his knightly soul might bear;
    But insult galled him sore.
        Should he imbrue
    His puissant sword in her own father's gore?
    That were to do a deed he e'er must rue;
  Unfit it for a place in his Walhalla there.

    No, better far to don the holy cross,
    As valiant knight became;
        Then if he fell,
    He would at least have saved his honoured name;
    Could say with life's last flitting breath--"'Tis well,
  For so to live or die, to me were gain, not loss."

    Yet spite of all, one parting word and kiss,
    From dear Rowena's lips.--
        May be the last!
    God knows.  That when his life felt death's eclipse,
    Her angel-presence would its brightness cast
  And dissipate its gloom.  O thus to die were bliss!




The Deserted Eyrie.

    But how and where they twain could meet unseen,
    Unknown!  Love found the way,
        The place, the hour.
    Rowena with her page was wont to stray
    Along the topmost cliffs.  Here was a bower
  Hemmed in by rocks, where once an eagle's nest had been.

    By Eric's loyal hand a note was brought.
    Sir Harold scarce could bear
        To break the seal.
    "To-night at nine, be at the eagle's lair;
    Let Eric guide.  Yours, aye, come woe, come weal."
  Too slowly moved the hours with love's dear issues fraught.

    They met.  No eye but Heaven's the secrets knew,
    That sad, sweet hour betrayed,
        Their hearts nigh burst
    'Twixt hope and fear.  Yet now, no more afraid
    To face the world and say "Yea, do your worst;
  For aye, come weal, come woe, each will to each be true."




Sir Harold Sails.

    Sir Harold Wynn set sail for Holy Land
    With Richard, Lion-heart,
        Peerless, whose fame--
    There, if he might, to act a leal knight's part
    And add fresh lustre to his martial name,
  Wherewith to move Sir Guy and gain Rowena's hand.

    Of Saxon race, Sir Harold Wynn was fair,
    Noble in mien and gait,
        Stalwart of frame;
    In powers of mind and heart a worthy mate
    For any lady.  Few beside could claim
  Domains so large and rich, as could with his compare.

    The first knight's sword hung high in hall,
    Had healed the feud of race,
        By val'rous deeds.
    Beneath it in the same proud resting place,
    The sons fixed theirs with other warlike meeds,
  To prove their martial line had known nor break nor fall.




Rowena's Lonely Vigil.

    She sought her chamber in yon spectral keep
    With ivy wreaths now crowned;
        Whose casket rent
    By Time's grim hand and strewn by fragments round,
    Once held a jewel whose rare beauty lent
  Its light to cheer the sailors toiling on the deep.

    Her vestal lamp she nightly trimmed and fed,
    A beacon light more true
        Than stars above;
    For darkness only made the light it threw
    More bright--bless'd, too, as emblem of her love
  For those who else might make Hell's caves their last lone bed.

    "Hist! Hist!" They'd cry: and straight the plash of oar,
    And creak of sail were stilled;
        And every ear
    Was tent to catch the strains her sweet voice trilled.
    Avast to gloomy thoughts and boding fear!
  Alack the day when she should witch their hearts no more!




Rowena's Song.

            Sea, sea,
        Bounding and free,
  O soothe me to sleep with thy sweet lullaby!
        As when a child,
        Sportive and wild,
  Thy waves and I gamboll'd, thou gem-crested sea!

            Sea, sea,
        Laugh on in glee;
  How dear to the sailor thy sweet monody!
    Soul-soothing calm,
    Soul-healing balm,
  For hearts beating fondly for hearts on the sea!

            Sea, sea,
        Tempest-lashed sea!
  O spare in thy fury, smite not angrily
        Hearts true and brave,
        Breasting thy wave,
  Who love as they trust thee, thou beautiful sea!

            Sea, sea,
        Bring back to me
  One that thou bearest to war's pageantry!
        Bear him my love,
        Life-lasting love,
  For him and him only, then speed him to me!




Sir Harold at Acre.

    So sang Rowena, from her turret bower,
    Her plaintive notes each night,
        In seamen's ears.
    Their hearts sank deep.  They long had watched her white
    And care-worn cheeks; but now they knew her fears
  And wept with her to see the darkling storm-clouds lower.

    Meanwhile her red-cross knight was lying prone,
    Sore wounded, life nigh spent,
        On Acre's plains.
    He'd swooned and woke to find him 'neath a tent.
    With balm a maiden soothed his throbbing veins.
  No other soul came near save she a maid unknown.

    Low whispers could he often hear without.
    Fresh unctions were applied;
        His wounds soon healed.
    Whene'er he groaned swift flew she to his side:
    At other times the maiden lay concealed.
  At last she brought the news of Saladin's great rout.




The Saracen Maid's Secret.

    What secret spring had moved this maiden's heart
    To save her nation's fee,
        At risk of life?
    Far rather had he died than live to know
    That precious secret was to be his wife.
  Too well she knew that now 'twas death from him to part!

    At length the lingering weeks of healing passed
    He e'en must quit for aye
        Her angel tent.
    "Take me, Sir knight, to be your slave alway!
    O leave me not, or my poor heart is rent!"
  She said, and at his feet her tender form she cast.

    He bade her rise! then heard her fearful tale--
    An orphan doomed to be
        A lifelong slave
    And serve a tyrant's lust and infamy.
    From such, Sir Harold swore he would her save,
  Whate'er the cost the deed might to himself entail.




The Secret Assassin.

    He smuggled her on board one darksome night.
    In deepest hold she lay,
        Till safe at sea.
    And when at last they found the stow-away
    The hearts of all rejoiced that she was free
  While midst the sick she moved a minist'ring sprite.

    When, too, they heard she'd saved Sir Harold's life
    And why she wished to fly
        Her native land,
    They swore, as salt tears filled each manly eye,
    To be her knight till safe on England's strand;
  And happy would he be who won her then for wife!

    On deck, one eve, she told Sir Harold, how,
    She'd seen an English knight,
        Sir Ralph by name,
    Deal him his wound, then rush into the fight
    And fall.  He died; so never more could claim
  Rowena's hand.  Now would her haughty sire relent his vow?




The Light in the Turret Tower.

        Rowena sings.
  Burn bright, burn bright,
  Dear light, sweet light,
  To guide him back to me.
    My knight, own knight,
    Brave knight, true knight,
  My love sent o'er the sea.

        O light, O light,
  Burn bright, burn bright,
  And keep strict watch for me;
    Some night, some night,
    My knight, own knight,
  Will come from o'er the sea.

        Stars light, stars light,
  My knight, brave knight,
  Gone from me o'er the sea;
    Shine bright, shine bright,
    Each night, each night,
  Till he come back to me.




Death at Ragnor's Tower.

    The flag on Ragnor's tower hung half-mast high
    Smote old and young with grief.
        A death it told.
    They long had watched her wither like a leaf;
    Her warm hands too had grown of late so cold.
  So young, so fair, so good.  Alas! that she should die.

    But no!  It was her lady mother. She
    Full long had seen her child
        Slowly decay.
    Her father's temper, too, had grown more wild.
    She could but pray that ere she passed away,
  Rowena's knight would safe return from o'er the sea.

    Her mother dead!  Her one true guide and friend!
    Her heart seemed reft in twain.
        Would she had died!
    A year at least it meant ere yet again,
    She needs must list to suits to be denied.
  O death, or Harold, come and let there be an end!




Rowena's Grief.

    She straightway sought the dim-lit chamber, where,
    Beside her mother's bier,
        Her heart might break.
    So frail her bark to stem life's sea so drear.
    She fain would die, yet live for his dear sake.
  But then "He might not live!" she cried in wild despair.




Rowena's Lament.

    O mother, mine, no longer mine!
  My life for thine, yea twice for thine!
    O take it Death!  Why not, O Death?
    Why is our breath, life's fleeting breath,
  Not ours to take, to give or take?
    Life's cord will break, life's cord must break.
    Why may we not, why dare we not,
    Clean cut its knot, its painful knot?




The Holy Friar's Consolation.

      A voice she hears, a tender voice,
      Which says: No choice, my child, no choice
      Is left for thee, for me or thee.
      There's naught for thee, for thee or me,
      But bear the cross, the bitter cross.
      The cup of woe you now must drain,
      Will bring sweet gain, for you sweet gain.
      Pax vobiscum, my child; Pax vobiscum!
    Heaven's peace, dear maid, be thine,
            For evermore!
    Go seek its home at good St. Hilda's shrine;
    In holy mother's ears thy sorrows pour;
  Within those peaceful gates no earthly ill can come."




Rowena Enters a Convent.

    'Twas thus the holy friar of Senlac spoke.
    His words the flood gates burst
        And tears like rain
    On land whose fissures stand agape with thirst,
    Now filled her soul with joy intense as pain
  Before.  At length her whispered thanks the silence broke.

    Within Old Ragnor's walls a chapel stood;
    And there, in crypt below,
        With Warre's proud race,
    His gentle wife they laid, while monks with slow
    And solemn steps, with incense filled the place.
  The stern knight's sob was heard throughout the holy rood.

    Next night, while weary warders timely slept,
    And snow fell thickly round,
        Rowena fled;
    Nor stayed till she had peace and safety found,
    Where good St. Hilda's lights her footsteps led.
  Meanwhile the kindly snow her dreaded secret kept.


[Illustration: St. Hilda's Keep.]


Nigh Unto Death.

    The lady mother passed the live-long night
    Beside her bed whom sleep
        Deserted long.
    Delirium seized her, when she'd leap
    And clutch, as if she'd rend the bars so strong
  Which girt the windows round, and cry "More light!"

    She wanted not more light herself, but he,
    Her knight, so true and brave,
        Filled all her soul.
    She thought she saw him drown yet none to save
    Him, bent an oar.  Her brain burnt like a coal.
  She cried: "O let me go and plunge in yon dark sea!"

    Weeks passed and still she only moaned and raved.
    Nor slept by night or day.
        One voice alone
    At last was found the fever's course to stay;
    'Twas when she heard her faithful Eric's tone,
  When he in hot haste came and instant audience craved.




The Demon Wrecker.

    If grief had wrung Sir Guy's stern heart that night,
    He stood among his dead;
        'Twixt grief and ire,
    He now a maniac grew.  Sleep from him fled;
    He passed the night with warders round their fire,
  While every turret-room was all ablaze with light.

    Days, weeks, and months thus passed, but still,
    No sign Rowena gave.
        She's dead, he thought;
    Yon yawning sea no doubt conceals her grave.
    And then his rage a direful vengeance wrought,
  For him whose steadfast love had made her thwart his will.

    No turret lights now burned at night, save one,
    And that a feeble speck,
        Straight o'er Hell Rock.
    On this a noble ship, one night, became a wreck;
    The cliffs resounded with the awful shock--
  The Demon-Wrecker thought too well his work was done!




Old Ragnor's Dungeons Grim.

    Hewn out of solid rock, some fathoms deep
    Old Ragnor's dungeons lay.
        A massive chain
    Which two men scarce could move a foot away,
    Joined door above to door below.  Its strain
  Upon the stone-cut stairs still makes the flesh to creep.

    Here faithful Eric found himself immured
    To try if gloom and fear
        Of tortures dire
    Could wring from him a secret held more dear
    Than life itself.  Nay!  Famine, rack, and fire,
  Swift death or tortures slow--all, all should be endured

    For his dear lady's sake.  Though but a page
    He'd learn to value truth
        In word and deed
    From her whose noble love inspired his youth
    And taught him lessons from her living creed.
  Her foe had thrown the glove he dared take up the gage.




Eric Entombed.

    Entombed alive!  A struggling streak of light
    Made visible the gloom,--
        His living shroud.
    He felt himself alive yet without room
    To live or breathe.  He groaned, then cried aloud,
  "O God, while in this porch of hell, be Thou my light!"

    Next morn--if morn, it were--no count of hours,
    The dungeon-tenant kept,--
        A silver ray
    Woke hope afresh, as down a cord there crept
    A basket full of meats, while 'neath them lay
  A lamp and tools, with hints where he might try their powers.

    Henceforth work's pulses guaged his night and day,
    As sandstone rock he bored.
        His ear supplied,
    By sound of sea, how much his axe had gored,
    As clearer came the welcome rush of tide.
  Hope made his feeble lamp effulgent as sun's ray!




The Rift in Hell Gate.

    The first hole pierced, his head grew sick and faint.
    To pray he tried; no word
        Escaped his lips.
    Yet sure he felt his spirit's groanings heard,
    As prone he lay and gasped the air by sips;
  For that he'd breathed so long, was foul with dead men's taint.

    His strength now grew with every stroke he plied.
    At sound of sea and men,
        Death's clammy sweat
    Was changed for drops that told of health again,
    While through his languid frame life's current swept,
  It only made him feel how nearly he had died.

    At last his living tomb of rock was rent;
    Though but a narrow rift
        He yet had made
    Enough; it did a horrid monster lift,
    That clutched him close and held aloft a blade;
  He felt himself undone, when, lo! God had deliv'rance sent.




The Crucified One.

    So wildly beat his heart and throbbed his veins,
    As morn's first struggling gleam.
        His rift net caught,
    He e'en must follow its meandering beam,
    Till something on the walls his footsteps brought
  To rest.  He shuddered as he saw the death-throe stains

    Of some whose hands and ankles, staple-bound,
    Had graved thereon the sign
        Of crucified.
    "My God!" he cried, "such fate may yet be mine!"
    He turned and lo! close at his feet he spied
  A note.  A piercing wail then woke the echoes round.

    "To-morrow, Eric, will decide your fate.
    Confess and you are free;
        Else will you die
    A death of torture, marks of which you'll see
    Upon the walls around.  Fly, Eric, fly,
  This night, this very night, or it will be too late!"




Eric Faithful Unto Death.

    When Eric woke to thought, the light had flown,
    With Hope upon its wing
        And left Despair.
    One thought alone could light and comfort bring--
    His secret--This, not death should from him tear.
  Rowena's safe retreat, he never would make known!

    The rasp of grating chains and rush of air
    Awoke the sleeping page
        From frightful dreams.
    A voice he heard.  Alas! 'twas fierce with rage,
    While on his sight there flashed the fitful gleams
  Of warders' arms.  In haste they clangour down the stair.

    "Come forth, young man!  Sir Guy awaits above.
    We dare not tarry long;
        He's mad this morn.
    Keep up your heart, my son!  Be firm, be strong!
    A page, yet truer knight was never born!
  Betray her not, brave youth, as you esteem her love!"




Eric to be Crucified.

    "Have rats and goblins eaten up your pride
    And will you tell me now
        What well you know?
    The holy father, here, can loose your vow.
    Still silent!" roared Sir Guy, "O there!  Below
  With him, and if rack fail, let him be crucified."

    "I fear not crucifixion, master mine,
    As oath forsworn from fear
        Of death.  No pangs
    Shall ever make me breathe to mortal ear
    Her safe retreat.  Transfix me with your fangs
  With speed; my life for hers I freely will resign."

    "Fear not, brave youth, Sir Guy doth go
    This night to meet Prince John,
        Who claims the crown.
    But we do hear our king will come anon;
    Then woe to all who have incurred his frown!
  For sure he'll vengeance take on John and every foe."




To Die or Live?

    At least he knew his fate--Condemned to die!
    He bade farewell to all,
        Then went below.
    The darkness closed around him like a pall
    The dead.  Yet drain the bitter cup of woe
  For her, e'en to the dregs, he would without a sigh.

    Yet did he not despair.  Athwart the gloom
    A gleam of hope there stole.
        As clothed in light,
    He saw the form that could his fears control,
    And which the darkness only made more bright--
  It was her angel presence lit his rock-hewn tomb!

    It beckoned him; he boldly followed till,
    Beside the narrow cleft,
        His axe had wrought,
    It stood.  He saw the fissure wider reft.
    To challenge death then fly--ignoble thought!--
  He knelt and prayed: "O God, but show me now Thy will!"




Eric Escapes.

    He rose and turned a quick retreat to make,
    When lo! that presence bright
        Still barred his way,
    And stood with hand stretched towards the rift's pale light--
    A sign which Eric felt in words would say--
  "What God, in mercy sends, dare you refuse to take?"

    As Cherubim with flaming sword it kept
    The gates of death.  How could
        He pass them now?
    Enough, that she would know his will was good,
    From, what he'd suffered for his loyal vow.
  "Heaven's will be done!" he cried, and through the portal crept.

    The sudden call to life from out the tomb;
    Death's bands thus swiftly rent,
        Life's tidal force
    Undammed, had rushed with too impetuous vent,
    Did not a tortuous cave arrest its course,
  Ere he at length emerged beneath night's starless gloom.




The Smuggler's Den.

    Along the shore he sped nor stopped his flight
    Until a burly voice,
        His fleet foot stayed.
    That voice he knew full well.  He had no choice
    But one--to yield himself--nor felt afraid,
  Within the smuggler's den to rest at least, the night.

    So sweetly sound his sleep, without a dream
    To shorten his repose;
        The watcher's eye
    Could scarce perceive he breathed save as arose
    And fell his manly chest with deep-drawn sigh;
  Which sign the smuggler caught beneath his lantern's gleam.

    His story told, young Eric found a friend
    And guide in one he feared;
        Who bade him stay
    Until he'd seen the coast of foes was cleared,
    Then to St. Hilda's shrine he'd lead the way,
  Those saintly walls to him would peace and succour lend.




Rowena's Fiery Furnace.

    Now all this while Rowena struggled still,
    Bound fast by fever's chain.
        There seemed no hope!
    No leech nor nurse could ease her tortured brain,
    Or help her frail and sinking frame to cope
  With all the fiery imps that sported there at will.

    She sank at last in stupor so profound
    They deemed her dead indeed,
        And forthwith sent
    A messenger to Ragnor's Tower with speed.
    But as the heavens no light propitious lent,
  The morn beheld the rider horseless on the ground.

    Him bleeding sore, the smuggler found; his steed
    Was grazing close at hand.
        His master groaned,
    And begged with tears, as one by fear unmanned
    To die, for then his life will have atoned
  For what may hap unless his note were sent with speed!




The Dungeon's Angel.

    The smuggler promised, but when Eric read
    The note, he knew Sir Guy
        Was far away.
    No need of guide, the horse did homewards fly
    And at St. Hilda's gate alone made stay.
  This was the night young Eric stood beside Rowena's bed.

    Soon after midnight, life once more returned;
    Her pulse beat full and fast.
        The fever's power,
    Some mystic spell had bound but not to last,
    Save for one long more dead than living hour;
  And now with force renewed, it once more raged and burned.

    "Fly, Eric, fly," she cried, and pointed where
    The morn's sweet dawning gleamed.
        And as upright
    She stood, the living counterpart she seemed
    Of her whose presence made Hell's dungeons bright,
  O God! his angel guide now raved in madness there!




Rediviva.

    "Dear mistress mine," young Eric cried and rose;
    Then took and kissed her hand,
        As he had done,
    That night he had received her last command--
    To make her place of refuge known to none.
  O blessed charm which brought her life and sweet repose!

    When she awoke next morn she gazed on all
    Around with look so calm
        And smile so sweet,
    As fell upon each soul like holy balm
    Of healing.  Yet their eyes could only greet
  Her look of grateful love with tears unbidd'n to fall.

    "That voice I heard last night," she weakly said,
    "Whose tones familiar sent
        A magic thrill
    Through all my veins and fever's fetters rent,
    Was Eric's, faithful youth, whom they would kill
  In Ragnor's deadly vaults!  O say he is not dead?"




Convalescent.

    "He'll come anon," the holy mother said,
    And kissed her death-white cheek.
        "Now sleep! and while
    We swiftly send your gallant page to seek,
    Let holy thoughts and dreams the time beguile!"
  She woke and lo! he stood 'mong those beside her bed.

    She clasped his hand and whispered low.  He bent
    Once more to hear that voice
        He must obey,
    E'en though 'twixt life and death, no choice
    It might him leave.  She only bade him stay
  Nor leave her more.  The lady mother gave assent.

    As flowers to sun respond with blushing hues
    And grateful scents distil
        Their voiceless praise;
    So now as through her veins life's pulses thrill
    Amid the breath of flowers and wood-choirs' lays,
  She could, no more than they, her hymn of thanks refuse.




Rowena's Te Deum.

    "O flowers," she sang, "sweet flowers,
    Where beauty hath her throne,
        Yea, smile away life's hours;
    For you they'll soon be flown!
    Then nursed awhile in womb of mother earth,
  Ye'll rise, to taste with me, the joys of second birth!

    O birds of happy wing!
    With flowers' sweet incense blend
        Your joyous notes and sing;
    For soon your songs will end!
    When summer's warmth again awakes your trills,
  Ye too may know the joy which now my bosom fills!

    The world seems one great heart,
    Whose pulses move my soul.
        I feel a feeble part
    Of some mysterious whole!
    Thy mighty heart, O God, 'tis thine alone,
  That makes all things now breathe, responsive to mine own!"




The Lights of Home.

    With sails full set to catch the western breeze,
    The stout ship, Holy Cross,
        The Channel ploughed;
    Nor dreamt those noble hearts on board of loss;
    Or that those silvered waves might prove their shroud;
  As o'er her staunch bulwarks they pictured home and ease.

    "What light is that which glimmers on yon height?"
    The gallant captain cried,
        "'Tis Ragnor's Tower,"
    Sir Harold said, "where dwells my lady bride.
    That light she vowed should never quit her bower.
  Haste, captain, haste, I pray, and land me there this night."

    "Steer straight for yonder light on Ragnor's crown!"
    The captain made reply.
        They set the helm;
    And now with wings outstretched they swiftly fly,
    Where demons will with mocking laugh o'erwhelm
  And dance with fiendish glee to see them sink and drown.




The Lamp of Death.

    Sir Guy had heard afar the tidings fell
    Of Harold Wynn's return
        From Holy Land.
    The news more fiercely made his wrath to burn.
    Hence hot with hate he sought Old Ragnor's strand,
  Whose peaceful haunts became again a very hell.

    By Eric fed, the beacon lamp once more
    Shone o'er the treach'rous sea
        Which hid Death's maw.
    Rowena had a secret gate whose key,
    Her page had used.  Her light, Sir Guy first saw.
  O madd'ning sight!  "If saved, Rowena dies," he swore.

    The light of life, he quenched, and straightway hung
    A lamp to lure to death.
        His eyes shot fire
    As straight he saw her come. He held his breath,
    At length he heard the crash.  No Nero's lyre
  Across his work of death such yells of triumph flung!




The Wreck of the "Holy Cross."

    The noble ship had freight of nobler men,
    Whose crosses bore the stain
        Of deadly strife
    With Turc and Saracen, on Acre's plain
    And wounded sore had scarce escaped with life.
  How beat their hearts with joy at sight of home again.

    At home, alas! did foes more deadly wait
    Than Saladin's fierce crew.
        The lamp of love
    Was changed for one of hate, which threw
    Its false and fatal skein of light above.
  A shuddering shock, a fearful crash, foretold the vessel's fate.

    For many nights before, two lonely men
    Stood ready, boat at hand.
        God speed them now!
    As swift they row and quick return to land,
    Bearing a lifeless form with sword-cleft brow,
  Whose arms fast clutch a maid.  They bore them to their den.




Grief at Wynnwood Hall.

    The news soon spread from coast to country round
    That lost was every soul.
        At Wynnwood Hall,
    Sir Harold's home, their grief knew no control.
    That he should be the first Wynn not to fall
  In battle's heated fray; but should be basely drowned!

    His helmet, cloak, and sword he'd cast aside,
    To save the girl who clung
        Around his neck.
    These relics dear were found and silent hung
    Beneath the rest.  None sought grief's tears to check
  To see the blood-stained cross for which he'd fought and died.

    Alack!  The ill-starred news had reach the shrine
    Where sat mid birds and flowers,
        His new-born bride.
    To her the lead-winged moments seemed as hours;
    And yet her bounding hope her baleful fears belied.
  What tidings would morn bring.  O could she but divine!




Saved.

    The smuggler's patient skill soon fanned life's spark
    Into a feeble flame.
        Sir Harold first
    The solemn quiet broke to breathe the name
    Of Ruth, the Saracene who had him nurs'd
  And hid with all a sister's love and care within her ark.

    "She's saved?  Thanks be to God," he said, and wept.
    "And she, my lady bride!
        O can you say
    She too doth live?  Or better yonder tide
    Now held this hopeless wreck of life its prey!"
  "She lives, brave knight," they said.  He smiled his thanks
          and slept.

    A messenger of life, young Eric sped
    And death's fell courier caught
        At Hilda's gate.
    The sisters' tears foretold the mischief wrought,
    "She's swoon'd," they said.  He curs'd his cruel fate.
  They led him to her couch whereon she lay as dead.




Two Lives in One.

    "Sir Harold saved!"  Like drops of heavenly balm,
    With healing quickening power,
        The tidings thrilled
    Her soul with joy intense as in that hour,
    The rush of new-found life her pulses filled.
  Her anxious fears allayed, she felt a holy calm.

    Two lives in one, although they dwelt apart.
    A sympathetic glow,
        Each seemed to feel,
    To pass from soul to soul; a constant flow
    Of thought and feeling made their wounds to heal;
  As though betwixt the two there beat one common heart.

    Who nightly scared the darkness-loving owl
    And made the hills resound
        With watch-dogs' bark?
    But he who faithful unto death was found;
    Who'd buried been in Ragnor's dungeons dark,
  While round him Death's grim shades pursued their midnight prowl.




The Lost Missive.

    One night as Eric rode, a bolt whizzed by,
    With well-nigh fatal aim.
        He faster flew,
    Until, alack! his faithful steed fell lame.
    He leapt aground and o'er his arm he drew
  The reins.  What joy to find the smuggler's den was nigh!

    For Eric's belt then held in close embrace,
    As erst long months ago,
        A precious note.
    'Twas gone! and its contents would clearly show
    His lurking place and hers--Alas! who wrote
  To beg she soon might see her Harold face to face.

    The smuggler begged young Eric show the road
    He'd come.  Then armed they go;
        But without need;
    For where Rowena's page alighted, lo!
    The missive lay.  They hasten back with speed;
  And as they give God thanks, more eyes than one o'erflowed.




Another Dungeon Tenant.

    "We e'en must quit, dear Mike, thy safe retreat;
    'Tis clear, they're on our track.
        Of this be sure,
    That you henceforth in life shall nothing lack
    That heart can wish or wealth of mine procure.
  Swift send to Wynnwood Hall, a trusty man and fleet!"

    "I'll go myself, Sir knight," old Michael said;
    "For Eric here must stay
        And hide awhile.
    You'll see me back again by break of day;
    With talk and sleep you can the hours beguile;
  But one at least much [Transcriber's note: must?] watch,
        for mischief broods o'erhead!"

    When Mike returned, his den indeed was there
    But tenants only one
        Who bound him fast
    And bade him take his leave of yonder sun,
    For sure enough this look would be his last;
  In Ragnor's gloomy vaults he'd find nor light nor air.




Nemesis.

    Sir Guy's dire act of awful vengeance ta'en
    A ravenous brood of prey,
        To make their nest,
    Seemed gnawing at his heart-strings night and day;
    With croaks like drowning cries they filled his breast
  And raised with fluttering wing the ghosts of those he'd slain.

    No dove of peace on wings of morn returned.
    He watched with eager eyes
        Day's amber birth
    And saw, or thought he saw, a form arise;
    'Twas his--Sir Harold's--just as when on earth
  He came to plead his suit and was with insult spurned.

    "O God, have mercy!  Grant it may be true
    That he indeed doth live!
        Oh! warders, fly,
    Proclaim--a thousand livres I will give
    To know the Knight of Wynnwood did not die
  In that night's fearful wreck.  If found, I'll make it two!"




The Demon Exorcised.

    As beasts and lands welcome the rain they craved
    And ope their parch-ed lips
        To drink their fill;
    So felt Sir Guy the demons loose their grips,
    As warders, one by one, the news distil,
  To quench their hell-lit fires--'that all on board were saved'!

    Like savage beasts when bite and roar grow weak,
    Seek out some lonely nook
        Wherein to die;
    So now Sir Guy, whose thunderous voice once shook
    Old Ragnor's walls and made the bravest fly,
  Would feebly cry: "My child!" then, death-like, swoon away.

    Full ten days passed ere conscious life again
    Illum'd those once stern eyes,
        With rays serene,
    Now mildly placid as the azure skies,
    On which one grateful turns from sun's fierce sheen;
  Refreshing, too, his milder tones as summer rain.




Father and Child.

    "Rowena, Harold, Eric, friends, forgive!
    And could I hear her say
        'Dear father mine,
    We all forgive'--I would no longer pray
    For life; but to atone my all resign
  To those I've wronged: for this alone I fain would live."

    "They live, Sir Guy, and ere the sun has set
    Will hither come!" they said.
        He crossed his hands
    While o'er his face a smile complacent spread
    And docile as a child to their commands
  To sleep he yields his eyes with gracious tear-drops wet.

    Rowena's kiss, yet sweeter far the sound
    She breathed of 'Father mine'
        The knight awoke;
    Another moment and their arms entwine.
    She checked the word ere from his lips it broke
  'Forgive'!  Father and child long-lost, again were found.




Reconciliation.

    His outstretched hands did next forgiveness seek
    Of one who long had prayed
        This hour to see.
    With hands close clasp'd, no words the knight essayed;
    In tears he quenched a life-long enmity.
  Thus did the Saxon's love triumphant vengeance wreak!

    Then last, though not the least who'd borne the cross
    And bravely gone to die
        In flower of youth,
    Young Eric caught the knight's atoning sigh,
    Who joined his hands with those of faithful Ruth
  Thus triumphed faith and love o'er pain and death and loss.

    And what of him whose kind and skilful care
    Had saved the life of three?
        Forget they him?
    Not so! a gracious pardon, full and free,
    With thankful joy they bear to dungeons grim;
  And one more doomed to die from death's fierce grip they tear.




A Royal Visitor.

    Unfurl the banner, let it court the breeze
    Once more, on Ragnor's Towers.
        A wedding peal
    Now ring.  Come virgins, strew with flowers
    Their bridal path, whose woes this day will heal!
  Look bright, ye frowning cliffs and laugh ye moaning seas!

    What means that wild commotion an the strand?
    A stately vessel nears
        Old Ragnor's port!
    "King Richard comes!"  Sir Guy with terror hears.
    "Haste, Harold, pay our sovereign royal court;
  Crave pardon for me!  Say, I lie at death's command!"

    "Welcome, my liege!"  "Sir Harold, welcome, too,
    Is sight of thee, brave knight!
        But where is he.
    Sir Guy de Hastyngs,--flies he now my sight?"
    "Nay, nay, my liege! his sponsor will I be;
  His heart for thee, his king, doth bear allegiance true!"




The Royal Pardon.

    "Your gracious pardon grant, my liege, I pray;
    He has atonement made
        For all he's done:
    And nature's last great debt will soon be paid;
    His life may even set with yonder sun!"
  "Lead on, Sir Knight, I'd see him, ere he pass away."

    "Farewell," King Richard said, "Heaven's peace be thine!
    And you, Sir Harold, kneel!
        Hand me your sword!
    Now rise, for valiant deeds and service leal,
    Of Hastyngs' lands and Normanhurst the Lord!
  Till on young Eric's heels the spurs of knighthood shine!"

    Once more old Ragnor's rocks resound with cries,
    Of grief?  Nay--joy and pride!
        For on the sea,
    A noble, full-rigged ship doth stately ride--
    The Orient Pearl--her white cross streaming free;
  Whose captain Mike and crew now laugh at frowning skies!




The Deserted Brides.

    Hearts bound so late by love's sweet hallowed chain
    By war's fierce edicts rent,
        Lie bleeding sore;
    And scan with eyes from weeping well-nigh spent,
    Love's waning signals till they see no more.
  Heaven grant them soon to see those signals once again!

    By Bertram's arrow pierced with fatal aim,
    The Lion-heart was torn.
        Beside him lay,
    Of strength, by pain and bleeding torn,
    One Eric whom the king had dubbed that day
  A knight--no worthier yet--adorned the roll of fame!

          *      *      *      *      *      *

    Once more on Ragnor's brow the beacons blaze,
    The Orient Pearl to greet,
        On her return.
    Two brides wait mid a throng of friends to meet
    Their war-proof knights.  The shades of rank they spurn;
  They'd vowed for each a sister's love for aye and aye.




Heart Chords.

    Sweet harpings break the stilly night's repose.
    The seamen list once more,
        As from her bower,
    There fall those witching sounds they've heard before,
    In days long gone, from Ragnor's lofty tower.
  When hearts with voices blend what heavenly music flows!

    Breathe fair, ye winds, breathe fair;
      My true love's on the sea.
    God, hear the lone one's prayer,
      And bring him back to me!
  God guide the helm, God fill the sails
  And waft him with propitious gales!

    Breathe fair, ye winds, breathe fair,
      And bear my true love home!
    Love's bonds shall hold him there,
      No more, no more to roam.
  God guide the helm, God fill the sails,
  And speed him home propitious gales!

    She flies the holy cross
      That talisman divine
    Shall shield from loss and harm.
      Her faithful knight and mine.
  "O Christ, bid thou the storm to cease
  And fill our hearts with joy and peace!"




Home, Sweet Home!

    They light the beacon fires the hills around.
    All eyes are eager bent
        Across the sea,
    To cheer the night, a hundred voices blent
    To chase the gloomy hours with mirthful glee;
  Till shouts of "ship ahoy!" made every heart rebound.

          *      *      *      *      *      *

    And now for many days round Ragnor's Towers,
    Life flowed in mirth away.
        "Let feast and song,"
    Sir Harold said, "have free unbounded sway;
    For grief and gloom have lorded here too long.
  Let joy now rule the day and strew her path with flowers!"

    And yet a year, the joy-bells ring again;
    For sons are born to sires
        Of knightly fame.
    Once more the swains, light up the beacon fires;
    Old Hastyngs flashed to Normanhurst the flame;
  For Harold had to Eric given Ruth's hand and Ralph's domain.




VALE!











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rowena & Harold, by Wm. Stephen Pryer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROWENA & HAROLD ***

***** This file should be named 21509.txt or 21509.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/5/0/21509/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
