Project Gutenberg's Song Book of Quong Lee of Limehouse, by Thomas Burke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Song Book of Quong Lee of Limehouse

Author: Thomas Burke

Posting Date: October 25, 2008 [EBook #2161]
Release Date: April, 2000

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONG BOOK OF QUONG LEE ***














The Song Book of Quong Lee


by

Thomas Burke



CONTENTS

  Buying and Selling
  The Power of Music
  The Lamplighter
  In Reply to an Invitation
  A Night-Piece
  A Smile Given In Passing
  Of a National Cash Register
  Under a Shining Window
  Exchange of Compliments
  A Song of Little Girls
  Of Shop Windows
  At the Feast of Lanterns
  One Service Breeds Another
  An Offer of a Lodging
  Of Two Dwellings
  Concerning English Gambling
  Of Politicians
  Of the Great White War
  At the Time of Clear Weather
  Parent and Child
  Of Worship and Conduct
  Going to Market
  A Portrait
  On a Saying of Mencius
  Dockside Noises
  Reproof and Approbation
  The Feast of Go Nien
  Directions for Making Tea
  Of Inaccessible Beauty
  Night and Day
  Of a Night in War-Time
  A Love Lesson
  A Rebuke
  Upstairs
  Footsteps
  Making a Feast
  The Case of Ho Ling
  An Upright Man
  Breaking-Point
  An English Gentleman




  Buying and Selling

  Throughout the day I sit behind the counter of my shop
  And the odours of my country are all about me--
  Areca nut, and betel leaf, and manioc,
  Lychee and suey sen,
  Li-un and dried seaweed,
  Tchah and sam-shu;
  And these carry my mind to half-forgotten days
  When tales were plentiful and care was hard to hold.

  All day I sell for trifling sums the wares of my own land,
  And buy for many cash such things as people wish to sell,
  That I may sell them again to others,
  With some profit to myself.

  One night a white-skinned damsel came to me
  And offered, with fair words, something she wished to sell.

  Now if I desire a jacket I can buy it with coin,
  Or barter for it something of my stock.
  If I desire rice-spirit, that, too, I can buy;
  And elegant entertainments and delights are all to be had for cash.

  But there is one good thing above all precious,
  That no man may buy.
  And though I buy readily most things that I desire,
  This thing that the white maid offered at my own price
  I would not buy.



  The Power of Music

  In the little room behind my shop
  I refresh myself of an evening with my machine-that-sings.

  Two songs has my machine-that-sings:
  And these are 'Hitchy Koo' and 'We don't want to lose you.'

  When, in the evening, a friend honours me with a visit,
  I engage his ears with the air of 'Hitchy Koo';
  But when I am afflicted with a visit
  From those who fill me with a spirit of no-satisfaction,
  I command my machine-that-sings
  To render the music of 'We don't want to lose you.'

  The noise that at this moment greets the ear
  Of the elegant visitor to this despicable hovel
  Is the incomparable music of 'Hitchy Koo';
  And the price of this person's tea, mister,
  Is but a paltry six shillings the pound.



  The Lamplighter

  The dark days now begin, when in afternoon
  The Great Night Lantern makes a razor-edge
  Of black and white in the streets.
  And one comes, called the Lamplighter,
  And the straight stiff lamps of these stiff London streets,
  At his quick touch burst into light.

  At this shy hour
  I see from my unshaded window
  Bright girls, hair flowing, go by with shuttered faces,
  Holding close captive their warm insurgent bosoms.
  And then, at the corner,
  Some slender lad of bold and upright carriage
  Greets them, and the shuttered lanterns of their faces
  Burst with light at the touch of the lamplighter.

  Oh, kind ingenious lamplighter,
  Will you please step this way?



  In Reply to an Invitation

  Don't think of me as one of no courtesy
  O elegant and refined foreign one,
  If I do not accept your high-minded invitation
  To drink rice-spirit with you
  At the little place called The Blue Lantern, near Pennyfields.
  Please don't regard me as lacking in gracious behaviour,
  Or as insufferably ignorant of the teachings of the Book of Rites

  But I am sojourning here in a strange land,
  And am not fully informed of the usages of your dignified people.

  As the wise Mencius observed in one of his inspired hours,
  Doubtless thinking forward to situation of this person:
  Child who has once suffered unpleasant sensation of burning,
  Ever afterward reluctant to approach stove.
  Wherefore, as this person once accepted an invitation,
  In words as affable and polished as yours, Mister,
  To drink rice-spirit at The Blue Lantern,
  And was there subjected to a custom of this country
  Of an entirely disturbing and unpleasing nature,
  Known as Ceremony of Confidence,
  He has, since that day, viewed The Blue Lantern
  With a feeling of most decided repugnance.



  A Night-Piece

  I climbed the other day up to the roof
  Of the commanding and palatial Home for Asiatics
  And looked across the city at the hour of no-light.

  Across great space of dark I looked,
  But the skirt of darkness had a hundred rents,
  Made by the lights of many people's homes.

  My life is a great skirt of darkness,
  But human kindliness has torn it through,
  So that it shows ten thousand gaping rents
  Where the light comes in.



  A Smile Given In Passing

   As I walked the street in the purring evening
   A little maid with yellow curls
   Tossed me a smile; and suddenly Pennyfields
   Grew from darkness to light, and the light of the stars
   Grew pale.

   I may not see her again, but I hold her smile in my heart,
   And she is with me in my shop and about the streets.
   My shop may tumble down;
   West India Dock may some time suffer a drought;
   Grief and Joy come for a day;
   And Hope and Fear, and Desire and Deed
   Arise and pass, and are no more;
   But the beauty born of her quickened smile
   Can never die.



  Of a National Cash Register

  Last week this person, desiring to make it known
  That he was in all ways moving up to the date,
  Introduced into his insignificant shop
  A machine-that-counts,
  Called a National Cash Register,
  Which announces to refined and intelligent customers
  The amounts of their purchases.

  This week this person purchased a whole days' amusement;
  And the amount he paid for this was another's discomfiture and pain.
  And, after a night of cogitation,
  He is moved to reflect on the far-reaching and wholesome value
  Of a National Register which would announce to the face
  The cost of such pleasures as this.



  Under a Shining Window

  A lamplit window,
  At the top of a tenement house near Poplar High Street,
  Shines fluently out of the night;
  And looking upward I see
  That the bricks of the houses are bright and fair to the eye.

  There are no flowers in West India Dock Road;
  Nothing but brick and stone, and iron and spent air.
  But when rough brick and stone are a shrine for beauty,
  They become themselves beautiful.
  Perhaps if this person encloses within himself
  Beautiful thoughts and amiable intentions,
  His insignificant frame may acquire
  The noble outlines of that tenement house.



  Exchange of Compliments

  At ten o'clock last night an ugly fellow,
  Of skinny exterior and most ungracious manner,
  Was thrown with a total loss of gravity
  From the flapping doors of the Blue Lantern.

  He lurched in most ungainly fashion past this person's shop--
  This person standing at his door--
  And used base language of an unpolished nature,
  Calling him Ugly Yellow Bastard,
  Hop Fiend and Dirty Doper,
  Eater of Dogs and Cheater at Puckapoo,
  Son-of-a-Bitch and devotee of vice.

  This person did not respond in like manner,
  Knowing that he is not himself all-perfect,
  Nor even in every hour
  A devout follower of the teachings of the Four Books.
  He contented himself with repeating in a far-reaching tone,
  The words of the lofty Lao Tzu:
  When pot upon stove reproveth kettle for blackness,
  Pot speaking out of turn.



  A Song of Little Girls

  I want to make a song of the little girls
  That live about this quarter.
  I could make a song of boys quite easily with words,
  But words are too blunt for such delicate things as girls.
  I would like to make my song of them with bees and butterflies.
  One looks at the boy, and says Boy;
  And lo, one has described him.
  But little girls are morning light and melody;
  Their happy hair flutters and flies, or curtains their laughing faces--
  Faces glad as the sun at dawn.
  Their clear, cool skin is like wine to the eyes,
  The lines of their fluent limbs run like a song,
  And every step is a note of grace which the frock repeats.

  Don't you think it a pity, and greatly to be deplored
  That these should lose this beauty,
  And pass from it to the guile and trickery of woman?



  Of Shop Windows

  Looking closely at the glass windows of my shop,
  I see in them the whole of my shop reflected.
  Looking at my windows closely from the street,
  I see in them the life of the street reflected.
  Yet if I stand away, the glass remains transparent,
  And I see clearly through it to the things beyond.

  If I look with close vision
  Into the hearts of men,
  I see my own small heart reflected.
  I will try henceforth not to look at them too closely.



  At the Feast of Lanterns

  Lithely on their strings swing the many-coloured lanterns,
  For this is the Feast of Lanterns;
  And Pennyfields and West India Dock Road
  Are to-night a part of my own country,
  Aglow with the hues of the Peacock's Tail,
  Very amiable to the eye.

  In a recess of my heart
  Is a poor street hung with lanterns.
  These lanterns are my thoughts,
  And they are lighted at the last hours of the evenings,
  When through this street
  Walks the willowy maiden from the tea-shop across the road.



  One Service Breeds Another

  One of this person's white-skinned friends, Bill Hawkins,
  Who labours at the waterside,
  Had occasion, at the time of unkind weather,
  To rescue from the certain peril of drowning
  One who had slipped from the edge of a wharf to the dock.

  Without reward the flower serves the bee.
  The mother serves the child with pain and toil.
  The soldier serves his king without king's gratitutde.
  And this person has noted with much private amusement,
  How, since this one service rendered,
  Bill Hawkins goes ever from his accustomed path
  To add service to service to the one he rescued;
  While the rescued one looks ever upon Bill Hawkins
  With eyes of no-approval, indeed, with intense disgust.



  An Offer of a Lodging

  Little maid of the yellow curls
  You look sad as you pass my window.
  You look as though you would like to creep into some warm nest,
  And hide your golden head.

  Oh, look, little maid! I have made you a nest!
  Creep into it, and I will hide you away,
  Quietly, in the nest of my heart,
  I will wrap you around with verses and cover you with fair thoughts.

  There is yet one little corner left,
  Free from the world's defilement;
  One little corner where not a breath of wrong
  Shall enter to disturb your slumbering.
  And I will cherish you there
  In the nest you will make so pure.
  I will hold you and guard you safe from the snares of the stony streets.
  Be at peace, little maid, and lie in trust;
  For though my feet may stumble, and I may fall,
  The corner that houses you I will ever keep whole.



  Of Two Dwellings

  At the lower end of Limehouse Causeway
  Is a house where girls surrender their bodies
  To the pleasures of base-minded and unpolished men,
  In return for shillings.
  And on the walls about this house
  Blossoms at summer the wild white rose.

  In a tiny room at the top of a tenement
  Lives a white maid of surpassing virtue,
  Gentle in manner and quiet and dutiful,
  Combing her golden curls each morning
  Before a window that looks out to hell;
  That looks upon cesspools of mud, and mounds of refuse
      and the offal of the shops.



  Concerning English Gambling

  One morning, at the season of Clear Weather,
  As I sat alone in my Tea-House of the Refined White Lily,
  A stranger of affable address approached me,
  And showed me, with a multitude of argument,
  To what advantage I should come
  Were I to place the whole of my substance with him,
  Even to my shirt,
  As a token of my faith in Ice Cream Cornet for the Lincolnshire.

  And because I would not do so,
  He withdrew himself from me as from one of mean birth and behaviour,
  Reviling me with the name of "No-Sport,"
  And other characters of opprobrium.

  But this person told him
  That he carried always on written leaves
  The words of his august father,
  Concerning horses and women, and the wind in the hills
      and the hooting of owls.

  He did not tell him that he knew full well
  That Ice Cream Cornet was a non-starter for the Lincolnshire.



  Of Politicians

  Upon a time the amiable Bill Hawkins
  Married a fair wife, demure and of chaste repute,
  Keeping closely from her, however,
  Any knowledge of the manner of man he had been.

  Upon the nuptial night,
  Awaking and finding himself couched with a woman,
  As had happened on divers occasions,
  He arose, and dressed and departed,
  Leaving at the couch's side four goodly coins.

  But in the street,
  Remembering the occasion and his present estate of marriage,
  He returned with a haste of no-dignity,
  Filled with emotions of an entirely disturbing nature,
  Fear that his wife should discover his absence
  And place evil construction upon it,
  Being uppermost.

  Entering stealthily, then, with the toes of the leopard,
  With intention of quickly disrobing,
  And rejoining the forsaken bride,
  He perceived her sitting erect on the couch,
  Biting shrewdly, with a distressing air of experience,
  At one of the coins.

  Even so it is when Big Politician meets Little Politician.



  Of the Great White War

  During the years when the white men fought each other,
  I observed how the aged cried aloud in public places
  Of honour and chivalry, and the duty of the young;
  And how the young ceased doing the pleasant things of youth,
  And became suddenly old,
  And marched away to defend the aged.

  And I observed how the aged
  Became suddenly young;
  And mouthed fair phrases one to the other upon the Supreme Sacrifice,
  And turned to their account-books, murmuring gravely:
  Business as Usual;
  And brought out bottles of wine and drank the health
  Of the young men they had sent out to die for them.



  At the Time of Clear Weather

  In the agreeable public gardens of Poplar
  The bushes are bright with buds,
  For this is the season of Clear Weather.
  There blossom the quiet flowers of this country:
  The timid lilac,
  The unassuming hawthorn,
  The dignified chestnut,
  And the girlish laburnum;
  And the mandarin of them all is the rhododendron.

  In the untilled field of my heart
  Many simple buds are bursting.
  There is a little bush of kindliness towards all men.
  There is a slender tree of forgiveness for all wrongs.
  There is a humble growth of repentance for past sins.
  And around the field is a thick hedge of thankfulness.

  And Ho! in the midst of all
  Stands the tree of a hundred boughs
  Laden with the sweetest of all buds
  Which are breaking to flower under the sun of a maiden's eyes.



  Parent and Child

  Often of an evening I take the air
  And linger on the bridge by the Isle of Dogs,
  And sometimes see
  The swan-like shape of the ship that brought me hither.
  Often since then that ship has gone
  To the land from which it brought me;
  And on each voyage my heart accompanies it.

  Should I some day in person journey with it,
  My honourable father would welcome his little son.
  He would not see this worn and tattered one,
  This lean and sorrowful son of the waterside.
  He would not see this parchment face,
  This figure without lustre.
  He would see his little son who left him long ago;
  For love would brush away the husk of years,
  And leave a little child.



  Of Worship and Conduct

  At the corner of the Causeway on every seventh evening
  Gathers the band of Salvation Army,
  Making big noise of Washed-in-Blood-of-Lamb.

  At temple in East India Dock Road
  Men gather in white clothes, and sing,
  And march with candles and pray to Lady.

  At shop in Pennyfields, many times a day,
  This person pays respect to Big Man Joss,
  And burns to him prayer-papers and punk-sticks.

  And all day long men toil for wife and child;
  Wife suffer and stint to make bigger plate for child;
  Child beg in street to get food for sick mother;
  Sister wear ragged clothes for sake of little brother.
  And none of these has bowed to Joss,
  Or marched with candle,
  Or washed in blood of Lamb.



  Going to Market

  Good morning, Mister, how do you do?
  I am going to Salmon Lane, to the cheap market for dainty foods.
  Won't you come with me, Mister?

  I shall buy meat and fish and a loaf of bread,
  And fresh fruit and potatoes;
  I shall buy a cluster of flowers and a bottle of wine,
  Some butter and some jam,
  And biscuits, and nuts and candy.
  For I give an English feast to-night to a friend with yellow curls,
  And every dish will be cooked by me.

  Into the pot will go sharp spices,
  To flavour your English meats:
  Cayenne and thyme, and sage and salt,
  A sprig of parsley for garnish,
  And some delicate bamboo shoots.
  But the sweetest spice will not be seen,
  It will leap from my heart to the pot as I stir it.
  I am going to gather it on the way to the market
  From my own sweet thoughts and from elegant conversation
  With notable misters.
  Won't you come with me?



  A Portrait

  How shall I write of you, little friend,
  To my father on the River of Serenity?
  I will tell him of your twenty yellow curls
  Tumbling in a cascade about your shoulders;
  Your bright mouth and fine brow,
  Lit by yet brighter eyes,
  Where fireflies dance;
  How in your cheeks you hold
  The colours of the flower before its leaves unclose;
  How the tones of your voice, sounding in my ears,
  Float before my eyes like strings of lanterns;
  How, when I look closely upon you,
  I see my thoughts like a white river in your eyes;
  How, as I walk down the street where you have trod,
  The very stones are to me the smiles that you scatter as you pass.
  How your look thrills my heart as a guitar thrills to the touch.

  And I will tell him that you are not for me,
  For you are white and I am yellow;
  Unless, perchance, shame and disgrace fall upon you,
  As it falls upon some girls of this quarter,
  And your neighbours and friends pass by the other way.
  Then, perhaps, it would be permitted to me
  To render service to you.



  On a Saying of Mencius

  That was well said of Mencius:
  The misfortunes of one are the entertainment of many.

  When Prosperity attended the occasions of this person,
  And his heart smiled within him,
  He was regarded and received on all sides by his fellows
  With attitudes of dignity and expressions of mandarin-like solemnity,
  And his laughing heart could fetch no smile
  To the faces of those about him.

  But when, on a recent manifestation of evil spirits,
  He was hailed before those in authority
  And commanded to pay very many taels,
  For the fault of possessing some morsels of chandu, the Great Tobacco,
  And his heart was heavy and dark as a raincloud within him,
  He was received on all sides
  With attitudes of mirth and expressions of no-gravity.



  Dockside Noises

  There are in Limehouse many sounds;
  A hundred different sounds by day and night.

  The crash and mutter of the dockside railway,
  The noise of quarrel, the noise of fist on face,
  My country's songs, guitars, and gramophones,
  The noise of boot on stone,
  The noise of women bargaining their flesh,
  The noise of singers in the ships,
  Sounds of threat and sounds of fear,
  Blasts of hammer and steel and iron,
  The scream of syren, the wail of hooter,
  The clangour of angry bells,
  The boom of guns, the clatter of factories,
  The panic of feet, and malevolent words.

  All these sounds I know, and they disturb me not.
  The sound that is to me most terrible,
  That snatches slumber from me,
  Is the sound that is most common:
  The scream of a child at night.



  Reproof and Approbation

  Because I gave a piece of silk
  To my friend of the golden curls,
  One (may the dogs devour him) threw a stone at my window,
  And hooted and jeered and made base noise with his mouth.
  Nay, worse, this son of a sea-slug (may his line perish)
  Hurled hard names at my friend,
  Calling her Tart, and Flusey, and Tom; and, as we walked together,
  Cried: `Watcher, Nancy, who's yer friend with the melon face
  And the bug-eaten cabbage-leaf on his head?'

  The lean and scurvy dog that slinks about Pennyfields
  Flew in great fear at sight of this reprover of our doings,
  And came to me, and rubbed itself against my shoe.



  The Feast of Go Nien

  We are now in the Pepper Month;
  And soon will come the Feast of Go Nien.
  Then I will pay my debts, and gather in my dues.
  I will walk in the great procession;
  And afterwards I will hang up my devil-chasers
  And will proceed to the restaurant of Ng Tack,
  And drink spring wine with him and meet my friends.

  That evening I shall eat of the best:
  Of chicken cream and pigeon in soy-ed,
  With a brown noodle of pork and prawn,
  And a curry of fish and a large Chung Goun,
  Sweet onions, and black eggs and chow chow.
  And when we have done,
  We will have cakes and tea, and music and songs,
  And call in our white friends to sit with us.

  For this one day we shall be each to the other,
  What the other would desire.
  Perhaps it is well that this day
  Occurs but once in the year's calendar;
  For if we always so behaved, one to the other,
  There would be no business done.



  Directions for Making Tea

  In making tchah for table, each man has his own way.
  Some serve it dashed with lemon, and some with bamboo shoot,
  And some with sugar, in the English way,
  And some with spot of sam-shu.;
  But when one offers tchah to distinguished visitor,
  One offers the noble suey sen, and flavors it
  With the dried bud of the noble chrysanthemum.

  Consider these verses, little friend,
  As cups of suey sen
  Flavoured with the buds of the flower of all flowers.



  Of Inaccessible Beauty

  Ladies in elegant silks and laces
  Have come at times to my insignificant shop,
  For pieces of jade, or banners, or curious cuttings of ivory.
  And I look with insufferable emotion
  Upon their roseleaf skin,
  And breathe the soft scents that flow from their garments,
  And long to soothe their lily-fingered hands.
  In their presence
  I am seized with longings unutterable,
  And am filled with a sickness of my present unkind estate.

  But then I remember
  That Beauty's not always a star,
  Not always remote, not always in lofty places,
  Chrysanthemum-clad and lily-sheathed;
  But often lies in the hedges
  And peeps from street-corners
  And lurks shyly behind broken doorways.

  And I think upon the kind and considerate beauty
  Of the maid with the golden curls,
  And her patched, uncoloured robes of common cloth.
  And with a change of mood I charge the elegant ladies
  Three times the value of the articles chosen,
  And thus tear from their flowery bodies
  Pieces of their billowing silk
  To deck the less fervid beauty of my friend.



  Night and Day

  The waters of the river flow swiftly at Limehouse Hole,
  Past wharves, and ugly gardens,
  Past beautiful steel ships and tawny sails,
  Past clamorous factories and broken boats and bells.

  Throughout the day these things are one--
  One body of dire endeavour.
  But when the evening introduces the night,
  This thing is broken into a thousand delicacies,
  And the warm notes of night
  Make happy discord of the day's harsh harmonies.



  Of a Night in War-Time

  Upon a night I sat behind my shop,
  In happy talk with casual company:
  The upright Ho Ling, the grave Cheng Huan,
  And the round-bodied and amiable Sway Too, of my own country;
  Together with the maid of the golden curls,
  A sad-eyed seaman from Malay,
  And two pale Englishmen, Bill Hawkins and Jack Brown.

  We sat beneath the lantern, and drank our tchah in fellowship,
  And spoke of this and of that.
  And the moon rose and mated with the soft smells of my store,
  And brought forth a spirit that spoke to us
  Of things forgotten or lost, or long despaired of.

  Friendship bound us together, and we sat late,
  Glad of the night, and each glad of his companions;
  While men in another land
  Wrought horrors upon their fellows beneath this moon,
  Drunk with the wicked words of the wicked lords of men.



  A Love Lesson

  Last night I dreamed of the maid with yellow curls.
  She came to me in the room above my shop,
  And we two were alone, freed from the laws of day.
  I held her then to myself.
  I took from her her clothing, garment by garment,
  And watched them fall about her feet,
  White petals of a flower.
  And I drew from her to myself her thoughts, one by one,
  As often I had wished, till all of her was mine.

  Then I was sad, for nothing was left to love.
  And I quickly clothed her again, garment by garment,
  And gave her back her thoughts, one by one,
  And awoke in joy.
  I was glad that the dream was a dream,
  And that all of her was not mine;
  For I had learned
  That love released from bond, and unburdened of its fetters,
  Is love no longer.



  A Rebuke

  Excuse me, Mister, if I enter a gentle protest
  About the manner in which you comport yourself
  When taking the air about the streets.
  For, looking at you, one would form the opinion
  That you were a man of much worth and nobility,
  That you were high in officialdom,
  A councillor of the king or a learned judge,
  Or one whose piety and wisdom
  Had marked him out to sit above his fellow.

  One would think thus to see the swinging arms,
  The slow protuberant belly sheathed in a vest of scarlet,
  And the gold chain of Albert, the great Consort;
  To see the haughty head, the portly mien,
  The solemn gait, and the complacency with which you view the world.

  Don't interrupt! I only wished to tell you
  That your claim to the excessive esteem of your neighbours
  Is wholly without foundation.
  Do please remember, Mister, that that scarlet belly
  Was acquired by the labours of little children
  Whom you employ to stick labels on bottles.



  Upstairs

  I have lifted her over my threshold to-night.
  Many moons have risen and set since she received my napi;
  But now she is here and has entered my upper room,
  Where is a shrine for the joss of happiness,
  And a soft couch and delicate hanging,
  And fine things for fine fingers to handle,
  And shaded lanterns and a guitar and my machine-that-sings.

  There are ornaments of jade and lacquer,
  And the bamboo pipe and the hap-heem that I have laid aside,
  And the written leaves containing my verses.
  But there are no writing tables, no ink and no brushes.
  For now my verses will be written upon her brow.



  Footsteps

  As I lie on my pallet at night
  I hear from the street the sound of passing footsteps;
  And I can sort and name these passing footsteps.
  There are the truculent steps of the seeker after trouble,
  There are the fearful feet of those who are not at ease
  In the implacable streets.
  There are the fugitive feet of crime,
  And the solemn reassuring tread of big policemen;
  And the interrupted steps of the revellers,
  And the fleet feet of those who have purchased trouble.

  But those that tread most heavily on my heart
  Are the light and lingering footsteps of tired young women.



  Making a Feast

  Ho! Friends and enemies of Pennyfields,
  A feast is spread, and you are all invited.
  Many tides have risen and retired
  Since I left the fervid skies of my own country
  For the thin skies and leaden streets of the West.
  Long have I sojourned, seeking my desire,
  Keeping my shop, and looking always with long eyes
  At others' guesting-tables, at whose top sat love.

  From my cold corner
  I have watched their feast of fondness, and my heart has flown away,
  And has beaten like a lost bird at their windows,
  And none would let him in.

  But now, O honourables,
  My window is alight, my room is warmed,
  The table is set and the places are laid, and Love waits to greet you.



  The Case of Ho Ling

  Truly the ways of mandarins are inscrutable.
  My estimable and upright friend, Ho Ling,
  Long had desired to return to his own country.
  He bore himself in Limehouse without reproach,
  A reputable stranger, mild of manner and gentle of address.
  Against him none could bring a charge or speak a word of upbraiding.
  He conformed in all ways to the laws of correct conduct.

  Yet when he sought assistance to return to his own country,
  Being without means,
  And hung at the ear of notable men who could help him,
  They refused to hear him,
  And would in no way help him to go where his heart was set.
  Even the charitable ones regretted
  That his case was not for them.

  Wherefore my friend forsook his quiet and regular ways,
  And went about as one possessed by thunder and fire,
  Stormily; doing many things of a reprehensible character,
  Committing grave misdemeanours in the public streets,
  And following evil ways in a manner to attract attention.

  Whereupon,
  The lords of this country placed him upon a boat,
  And commanded that he should be carried, at their own cost,
  To his own country, whither he most desired to go.



  An Upright Man

  The grave and thin-faced one who keeps the Bespoke Tailor's Shop,
  And subjects his child to treatment of a most disagreeable nature,
  Never goes into the Blue Lantern,
  Never takes pellet of li-un or nut of areca,
  Or communes with Black Smoke,
  Or loses money at puckapoo,
  Or makes public outcry or gesture
  Expressive of delight in his friends,
  Or does foolish and unworthy things,
  Or makes exchange of hats with friends.

  He has no friends, for he has no weaknesses.
  While others fall to the simple follies of humanity
  He walks ever upright and self-contained, devout and dignified,
  And ill-treats his child at night.



  Breaking-Point

  Many heavy blows has this patient person's back received,
  These many years.
  He has lost friends and money;
  He has lost his own country;
  His well-framed enterprises have gone awry.
  And his heart has gone hungry these many years for love.

  All these things he has suffered without murmur.
  One thing alone has driven him to utter piercing cries,
  And make gestures expressive of volcano in eruption:
  And that is the bootmender across the road
  Who sings hymns to himself in the evening.

  For that is true that the sage has spoken:
  That it is the smell of gin-and-onions about the secretary
  Which drives his master, who long has suffered gin-and-cloves,
  To the breaking-point of inexpressible exasperation.



  An English Gentleman

  I determined yesterday to become English gentleman;
  And I have this morning bought a bowler hat.
  I have bought brown boots and a suit of rare blue serge,
  Which the affable one who supplied me with it
  Spoke of as Natty, and added his assurance
  That I would look Quite the Gentleman.
  I have bought white collars and many-coloured ties,
  And a walking-stick and a blue-spotted shirt.

  Apparelled thus, I strolled this evening down Pennyfields,
  And the old men came out with expressions of no-kindness.
  They made ugly mouths,
  And passed words one to the other of a derisive nature.

  But I am young Quong Lee,
  Who write verse in the English tongue,
  And am quite English gentleman.
  And English gentleman
  Not suffer himself to be disturbed by hooting of owls.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Song Book of Quong Lee of Limehouse, by 
Thomas Burke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONG BOOK OF QUONG LEE ***

***** This file should be named 2161.txt or 2161.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/6/2161/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
