The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Field and Garden Vegetables of America, by
Fearing Burr

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Field and Garden Vegetables of America
       Containing Full Descriptions of Nearly Eleven Hundred
       Species and Varietes; With Directions for Propagation,
       Culture and Use.

Author: Fearing Burr

Release Date: June 5, 2007 [EBook #21682]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIELD AND GARDEN ***




Produced by Janet Blenkinship, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








  THE

  FIELD AND GARDEN VEGETABLES

  OF

  AMERICA;

  CONTAINING

  FULL DESCRIPTIONS OF NEARLY ELEVEN HUNDRED SPECIES AND VARIETIES; WITH
  DIRECTIONS FOR PROPAGATION, CULTURE, AND USE.

  BY FEARING BURR, JR.

  ILLUSTRATED.


  BOSTON: CROSBY AND NICHOLS,
  117, WASHINGTON STREET.
  1863.

  Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1863,
  BY FEARING BURR, JR.,

  In the Clerk's office of the District Court of the District of
  Massachusetts.


  BOSTON:
  PRINTED BY JOHN WILSON AND SON, 5, WATER STREET


       *       *       *       *       *


  TO

  HON. ALBERT FEARING,

  President of the Hingham Agricultural and Horticultural Society,


    WHOSE EARNEST LABORS AND LIBERAL CONTRIBUTIONS IN THE CAUSE OF
    HUMANITY HAVE ENDEARED HIS NAME TO THE AGED POOR AND TO
    ORPHAN CHILDREN, AND WHOSE ACTIVE SERVICES HAVE
    EXERTED SO BENEFICIAL AN INFLUENCE ON AGRICULTURAL
    PURSUITS IN HIS NATIVE TOWN,


  This Volume is gratefully and respectfully Dedicated

  BY THE AUTHOR.


       *       *       *       *       *


PREFACE.


Though embracing all the directions necessary for the successful
management of a Vegetable Garden, the present volume is offered to the
public as a manual or guide to assist in the selection of varieties,
rather than as a treatise on cultivation. Through the standard works of
American authors, as well as by means of the numerous agricultural and
horticultural periodicals of our time, all information of importance
relative to the various methods of propagation and culture, now in
general practice, can be readily obtained.

But, with regard to the characteristics which distinguish the numerous
varieties; their difference in size, form, color, quality, and season of
perfection; their hardiness, productiveness, and comparative value for
cultivation,--these details, a knowledge of which is important as well
to the experienced cultivator as to the beginner, have heretofore been
obtained only through sources scattered and fragmentary.

To supply this deficiency in horticultural literature, I have
endeavored, in the following pages, to give full descriptions of the
vegetables common to the gardens of this country. It is not, however,
presumed that the list is complete, as many varieties, perhaps of much
excellence, are comparatively local: never having been described, they
are, of course, little known. Neither is the expectation indulged, that
all the descriptions will be found perfect; though much allowance must
be made in this respect for the influence of soil, locality, and
climate, as well as for the difference in taste of different
individuals.

Much time, labor, and expense have been devoted to secure accuracy of
names and synonymes; the seeds of nearly all of the prominent varieties
having been imported both from England and France, and planted, in
connection with American vegetables of the same name, with reference to
this object alone.

The delay and patience required in the preparation of a work like the
present may be in some degree appreciated from the fact, that in order
to obtain some comparatively unimportant particular with regard to the
foliage, flower, fruit, or seed, of some obscure and almost unknown
plant, it has been found necessary to import the seed or root; to plant,
to till, to watch, and wait an entire season.

Though some vegetables have been included which have proved of little
value either for the table or for agricultural purposes, still it is
believed such descriptions will be found by no means unimportant; as a
timely knowledge of that which is inferior, or absolutely worthless, is
often as advantageous as a knowledge of that which is of positive
superiority.

That the volume may be acceptable to the agriculturist, seedsman, and to
all who may possess, cultivate, or find pleasure in, a garden, is the
sincere wish of the author.

                                                       F. B., JR.

HINGHAM, March, 1863.




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.


In the preparation of this work, I have received the cheerful
co-operation of many esteemed personal friends, to whom I would here
express my grateful acknowledgments.

For many valuable suggestions with regard to the culture and general
management of the Potato, as well as for much important information
respecting nearly all of our American varieties of this vegetable, I am
indebted to J. F. C. HYDE, Esq., of Newton, Mass.; whose long experience
in the production of seedlings, as well as in the cultivation of
established kinds, will give peculiar value to this portion of the
volume.

The illustrations, so excellent and truthful, are from the pencil of Mr.
ISAAC SPRAGUE, of Cambridge, Mass.; whose fine delineations of animal as
well as vegetable life have won for him the reputation of being "the
first of living artists."

I am peculiarly indebted to Rev. E. PORTER DYER, of Hingham, for much
valuable advice and assistance; and cannot too fully express my
obligations for the unvarying kindness and courteous manner in which
repeated, and perhaps often unseasonable, requests for aid have been
received and granted.

My acknowledgments are also due to Hon. JOSEPH BRECK, author of "Book of
Flowers," and late President of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society;
to CHARLES M. HOVEY, Esq., editor of "The Magazine of Horticulture," and
President of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society; to P. B. HOVEY,
Esq., nurseryman and seedsman, of Cambridge, Mass.; and to DANIEL T.
CURTIS, Esq., seedsman and florist, and for many years Chairman of the
Committee on Vegetables of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society.

For information or other very acceptable assistance, I am also indebted
to Rev. CALVIN LINCOLN, of Hingham; Rev. JOHN L. RUSSELL, of Salem,
Mass.; JOHN A. BUTLER, Esq., of Chelsea, Mass.; EDWARD S. RAND, Jun.,
Esq., of Boston; Mr. AUSTIN BRONSON, of Enfield, N.H.; GEORGE W. PRATT,
Esq., of Boston; JOHN M. IVES, Esq., of Salem, Mass.; Mr. JAMES SCOTT,
of Hatfield, Mass.; Mr. ALONZO CRAFTS, of Whately, Mass.; Mr. JOHN C.
HOVEY, of Cambridge, Mass.; Mr. ISAAC P. RAND, of Dorchester, Mass.; Mr.
GEORGE EVERETT, of Concord, Mass.; and CALEB BATES, of Kingston, Mass.

From a work entitled "Descriptions des Plantes Potageres, par VILMORIN,
ANDRIEUX, et CIE., Paris;" from CHARLES M'INTOSH'S excellent "Book of
the Garden;" the "Gardener's Assistant," by ROBERT THOMPSON; "Rogers's
Vegetable Cultivator;" and "Lawson's Agriculturist's Manual,"--I have
made liberal extracts; and lest, in the course of the volume, any
omission of authority may occur where it should have been accredited, my
indebtedness to the valuable publications above mentioned is here
candidly confessed.

In adapting directions for cultivation, prepared for one climate, or
section of country, to suit that of another quite dissimilar, so much
alteration of the original text has at times been found necessary, that
I have not felt at liberty to affix the name of the original writer, but
have simply added the usual marks denoting derivation of authority.




ABBREVIATIONS AND AUTHORITIES.


_Big._--Plants of Boston and Vicinity. By JACOB BIGELOW, M.D. Boston,
1840.

_Bon. Jard._--Le Bon Jardinier pour l'Annee 1859. Par A. BOITEAU et M.
VILMORIN.

_Corb._--The American Gardener. By WILLIAM CORBETT. Concord, Boston, and
New York, 1842.

_Cot. Gard._--The Cottage Gardener. By GEORGE W. JOHNSON and ROBERT
HOGG. Weekly. London.

_Count. Gent._--The Country Gentleman. By LUTHER TUCKER and SON. Weekly.
Albany, N.Y.

_De Cand._--The Candolle's Systema Naturale. By Prof. DE CANDOLLE. 2
vols. 8vo. Paris, 1818, 1821.

_Down._--The Fruit and Fruit-trees of America. By A. J. DOWNING. Revised
and corrected by CHARLES DOWNING, 1858.

_Gard. Chron._--The Gardener's Chronicle. Weekly. By Prof. LINDLEY. 1844
to the present time.

_Gray._--Manual of the Botany of the Northern United States. By Prof.
ASA GRAY. New York, 1857.

_Hort._--The Horticulturist, and Journal of Art and Rural Taste.
Monthly. By P. BARRY and J. JAY SMITH. Philadelphia.

_Hov. Mag._--The Magazine of Horticulture, Botany, and Rural Affairs. By
C. M. HOVEY. Boston. Monthly. 1834 to the present time.

_Law._--The Agriculturist's Manual. By PETER LAWSON and SON. Edinburgh,
1836.

_Lind._--A Guide to the Orchard and Kitchen Garden. By GEORGE LINDLEY.
London, 1831.

_Loud._--Encyclopaedia of Gardening. By J. C. LOUDON. London, 1850.

_Loud._--Encyclopaedia of Agriculture. By J. C. LOUDON. London, 1844.

_Low._--The Elements of Practical Agriculture. By DAVID LOW. London,
1843.

_M'Int._--The Book of the Garden. By CHARLES M'INTOSH. 2 vols. Edinburgh
and London, 1855.

_Mill._--The Gardener's and Botanist's Dictionary. By PHILIP MILLER.
Revised by Prof. MARTYN. London, 1819.

_Neill._--Neill's Journal of a Horticultural Tour, &c. 8vo. Edinburgh,
1823.

_New Am. Cyclopaedia._--New American Cyclopaedia. D. APPLETON & Co., New
York. 16 vols. royal 8vo. 1857 to 1863.

_Rog._--The Vegetable Cultivator. By JOHN ROGERS. London, 1851.

_Thomp._--The Gardener's Assistant. By ROBERT THOMPSON.

_Trans._--The Transactions of the London Horticultural Society.
Commenced 1815, and continued at intervals to the present time.

_Vil._--Description des Plantes Potageres. Par VILMORIN, ANDRIEUX, et
CIE. Paris, 1856.


       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.


  CHAP. I.--_Esculent Roots._

  The Beet. Carrot. Chervil, Turnip-rooted. Chinese Potato, or
  Japanese Yam. Chufa, or Earth Almond. German Rampion. Jerusalem
  Artichoke. Kohl Rabi. Oxalis, Tuberous. Oxalis, Deppe's.
  Parsnip. Potato. Radish. Rampion. Swede or Ruta-baga Turnip.
  Salsify, or Oyster Plant. Scolymus. Scorzonera. Skirret.
  Sweet Potato. Tuberous-rooted Chickling Vetch. Tuberous-rooted
  Tropaeolum. Turnip.                                                1-121


  CHAP. II.--_Alliaceous Plants._

  The Cive. Garlic. Leek. Onion. Rocambole. Shallot. Welsh
  Onion.                                                          122-148


  CHAP. III.--_Asparaginous Plants._

  The Artichoke. Asparagus. Cardoon. Hop. Oosung. Phytolacca.
                                                                  149-169


  CHAP. IV.--_Cucurbitaceous Plants._

  The Cucumber. Egyptian Cucumber. Globe Cucumber. Gourd, or
  Calabash. The Melon. Musk-melon. Persian Melons. Water-melon.
  Papanjay, or Sponge Cucumber. Prickly-fruited Gherkin.
  Pumpkin. Snake Cucumber. Squash.                                170-228


  CHAP. V.--_Brassicaceous Plants._

  Borecole, or Kale. Broccoli. Brussels Sprouts. Cabbage. Cauliflower.
  Colewort. Couve Tronchuda, or Portugal Cabbage. Pak-Choei. Pe-Tsai,
  or Chinese Cabbage. Savoy. Sea-kale.                            229-286


  CHAP. VI.--_Spinaceous Plants._

  Amaranthus. Black Nightshade. Leaf-beet, or Swiss Chard. Malabar
  Nightshade. Nettle. New-Zealand Spinach. Orach. Patience Dock.
  Quinoa. Sea-beet. Shepherd's Purse. Sorrel. Spinach. Wild or
  Perennial Spinach.                                              287-314


  CHAP. VII.--_Salad Plants._

  Alexanders. Brook-lime. Buckshorn Plantain. Burnet. Caterpillar.
  Celery. Celeriac, or Turnip-rooted Celery. Chervil. Chiccory, or
  Succory. Corchorus. Corn Salad. Cress, or Peppergrass. Cuckoo
  Flower. Dandelion. Endive. Horse-radish. Lettuce. Madras
  Radish. Mallow, Curled-leaf. Mustard. Nasturtium. Garden
  Picridium. Purslain. Rape. Roquette, or Rocket. Samphire.
  Scurvy-grass. Snails. Sweet-scented Chervil, or Sweet Cicely.
  Tarragon. Valeriana. Water-cress. Winter-cress, or Yellow Rocket.
  Wood-sorrel. Worms.                                             315-405


  CHAP. VIII.--_Oleraceous Plants._

  Angelica. Anise. Balm. Basil. Borage. Caraway. Clary. Coriander.
  Costmary. Cumin. Dill. Fennel. Lavender. Lovage.
  Marigold. Marjoram. Nigella. Parsley. Peppermint. Rosemary.
  Sage. Savory. Spearmint. Tansy. Thyme.                          406-449


  CHAP. IX.--_Leguminous Plants._

  American Garden-bean. Asparagus-bean. Lima Bean. Scarlet-runner.
  Sieva. Chick-pea. Chickling Vetch. English Bean. Lentil. Lupine.
  Pea. Pea-nut. Vetch, or Tare. Winged Pea.                       450-560


  CHAP. X.--_Medicinal Plants._

  Bene-plant. Camomile. Coltsfoot. Elecampane. Hoarhound. Hyssop.
  Licorice. Pennyroyal. Poppy. Palmate-leaved or Turkey Rhubarb.
  Rue. Saffron. Southernwood. Wormwood.                           561-578


  CHAP. XI.--_Mushrooms, or Esculent Fungi._

  Agaricus. Boletus. Clavaria. Morchella, or Morel. Tuber,
  or Truffle.                                                     579-591


  CHAP. XII.--_Miscellaneous Vegetables._

  Alkekengi, or Ground Cherry. Corn. Egg-plant. Martynia. Oil
  Radish. Okra, or Gumbo. Pepper. Rhubarb, or Pie-plant. Sunflower.
  Tobacco. Tomato.      592-652


  INDEX                                                               655




FIELD AND GARDEN VEGETABLES.




CHAPTER I.

ESCULENT ROOTS.

The Beet. Carrot. Chervil, Turnip-rooted. Chinese Potato, or Japanese
Yam. Chufa, or Earth Almond. German Rampion. Jerusalem Artichoke. Kohl
Rabi. Oxalis, Tuberous. Oxalis, Deppes. Parsnip. Potato. Radish.
Rampion. Swede, or Ruta-baga Turnip. Salsify, or Oyster Plant. Scolymus.
Scorzonera. Skirret. Sweet Potato. Tuberous-rooted Chickling Vetch.
Tuberous-rooted Tropaeolum. Turnip.


THE BEET.

Beta vulgaris.

The Common Beet, sometimes termed the Red Beet, is a half-hardy biennial
plant; and is cultivated for its large, succulent, sweet, and tender
roots. These attain their full size during the first year, but will not
survive the winter in the open ground. The seed is produced the second
year; after the ripening of which, the plant perishes.

When fully developed, the beet-plant rises about four feet in height,
with an angular, channelled stem; long, slender branches; and large,
oblong, smooth, thick, and fleshy leaves. The flowers are small, green,
and are either sessile, or produced on very short peduncles. The
calyxes, before maturity, are soft and fleshy; when ripe, hard and
wood-like in texture. These calyxes, which are formed in small, united,
rounded groups, or clusters, are of a brownish color, and about
one-fourth of an inch in diameter; the size, however, as well as depth
of color, varying, to some extent, in the different varieties. Each of
these clusters of dried calyxes contains from two to four of the true
seeds, which are quite small, smooth, kidney-shaped, and of a deep
reddish-brown color.

These dried clusters, or groups, are usually recognized as the seeds;
about fifteen hundred of which will weigh one ounce. They retain their
vitality from seven to ten years.

_Soil and Fertilizers._--The soil best adapted to the beet is a deep,
light, well-enriched, sandy loam. When grown on thin, gravelly soil, the
roots are generally tough and fibrous; and when cultivated in cold, wet,
clayey localities, they are often coarse, watery, and insipid, worthless
for the table, and comparatively of little value for agricultural
purposes.

A well-digested compost, formed of barnyard manure, loam and salt, makes
the best fertilizer. Where this is not to be obtained, guano,
superphosphate of lime, or bone-dust, may be employed advantageously as
a substitute. Wood-ashes, raked or harrowed in just previous to sowing
the seed, make an excellent surface-dressing, as they not only prevent
the depredations of insects, but give strength and vigor to the young
plants. The application of coarse, undigested, strawy manure, tends to
the production of forked and misshapen roots, and should be avoided.

_Propagation and Culture._--Beets are always raised from seed. For early
use, sowings are sometimes made in November; but the general practice is
to sow the seed in April, as soon as the frost is out of the ground, or
as soon as the soil can be worked. For use in autumn, the seed should be
sown about the middle or 20th of May; and, for the winter supply, from
the first to the middle of June. Lay out the ground in beds five or six
feet in width, and of a length proportionate to the supply required;
spade or fork the soil deeply and thoroughly over; rake the surface
smooth and even; and draw the drills across the bed, fourteen inches
apart, and about an inch and a half in depth. Sow the seeds thickly
enough to secure a plant for every two or three inches, and cover to the
depth of the drills. Should the weather be warm and wet, the young
plants will appear in seven or eight days. When they are two inches in
height, they should be thinned to five or six inches apart; extracting
the weaker, and filling vacant spaces by transplanting. The surplus
plants will be found an excellent substitute for spinach, if cooked and
served in like manner. The afterculture consists simply in keeping the
plants free from weeds, and the earth in the spaces between the rows
loose and open by frequent hoeings.

Mr. Thompson states that "the drills for the smaller varieties should be
about sixteen inches apart, and the plants should be thinned out to nine
inches apart in the rows. The large sorts may have eighteen inches
between the rows, but still not more than nine inches from plant to
plant in the row. When large-sized roots are desired, the rows may be
eighteen inches or two feet apart, and the plants twelve or fifteen
inches distant from each other in the rows. But large roots are not the
best for the table; and it is better to have two medium-sized roots,
grown at nine inches apart, than one of perhaps double the size from
twice the space. As a square foot of ground should afford plenty of
nourishment to produce a root large enough for the table, the area for
each plant may, therefore, be limited to that extent. If the rows are
sixteen inches apart, and the plants thinned to nine inches in the row,
each plant will have a space equal to a square foot. Such, of course,
would also be the case if the rows were twelve inches apart, and the
plants the same distance from each other in the row. But it is
preferable to allow a greater space between the rows than between the
plants in the row: for, by this arrangement, the leaves have better
scope to grow to each side, and the plants so situated grow better than
those which have an equal but rather limited space in all directions;
whilst the ground can also be more easily stirred, and kept clean."

_Taking the Crop._--Roots, from the first sowings, will be ready for use
early in July; from which time, until October, the table may be supplied
directly from the garden. They should be drawn as fast as they attain a
size fit for use; which will allow more time and space for the
development of those remaining.

For winter use, the roots must be taken up before the occurrence of
heavy frosts, as severe cold not only greatly impairs their quality, but
causes them to decay at the crown. Remove the leaves, being careful not
to cut or bruise the crown; spread the roots in the sun a few hours to
dry; pack them in sand or earth slightly moist; and place in the cellar,
out of reach of frost, for the winter.

"The London market-gardeners winter their beets in large sheds, stored
in moderately damp mould, and banked up with straw. Mr. Cuthill states
that it is a mistake to pack them in dry sand or earth for the winter;
and that the same may be said of parsnips, carrots, salsify, scorzonera,
and similar roots.

"The object here is, that the moist soil may not draw the natural sap
out of the roots so readily as dry sand would do; and hence they retain
their fresh, plump appearance, and their tenderness and color are better
preserved. In taking up the roots, the greatest care must be exercised
that they are neither cut, broken, wounded on the skin, nor any of the
fibres removed; and, when the small-leaved varieties are grown, few, if
any, of the leaves should be cut off."--_M'Int._

If harvested before receiving injury from cold, and properly packed,
they will retain, in a good degree, their freshness and sweetness until
the new crop is suitable for use.

_Seed._--To raise seed, select smooth and well-developed roots having
the form, size, and color by which the pure variety is distinguished;
and, in April, transplant them eighteen inches or two feet apart,
sinking the crowns to a level with the surface of the ground. As the
stalks increase in height, tie them to stakes for support. The plants
will blossom in June and July, and the seeds will ripen in August.

In harvesting, cut off the plants near the ground, and spread them in a
light and airy situation till they are sufficiently dried for threshing,
or stripping off the seeds; after which the seeds should be exposed, to
evaporate any remaining moisture.

An ounce of seed will sow from one hundred to one hundred and fifty feet
of drill, according to the size of the variety; and about four pounds
will be required for one acre.

_Use._--"The roots are the parts generally used, and are boiled, stewed,
and also eaten cold, sliced in vinegar and oil. They enter into mixed
salads, and are much used for garnishing; and, for all these purposes,
the deeper colored they are, the more they are appreciated. Some,
however, it ought to be noticed, prefer them of a bright-red color; but
all must be of fine quality in fibre, solid, and of uniform color. The
roots are also eaten cut into thin slices, and baked in an oven. Dried,
roasted, and ground, they are sometimes mixed with coffee, and are also
much employed as a pickle. Mixed with dough, they make a wholesome
bread; but, for this purpose, the white or yellow rooted sorts are
preferred. The roots of all the varieties are better baked than
boiled."--_M'Int._

The young plants make an excellent substitute for spinach; and the
leaves of some of the kinds, boiled when nearly full grown, and served
as greens, are tender and well-flavored.

Some of the larger varieties are remarkably productive, and are
extensively cultivated for agricultural purposes. From a single acre of
land in good condition, thirty or forty tons are frequently harvested;
and exceptional crops are recorded of fifty, and even sixty tons. In
France, the White Sugar-beet is largely employed for the manufacture of
sugar,--the amount produced during one year being estimated to exceed
that annually made from the sugar-cane in the State of Louisiana.

For sheep, dairy-stock, and the fattening of cattle, experience has
proved the beet to be at once healthful, nutritious, and economical.

_Varieties._--The varieties are quite numerous, and vary to a
considerable extent in size, form, color, and quality. They are obtained
by crossing, or by the intermixture of one kind with another. This often
occurs naturally when two or more varieties are allowed to run to seed
in close proximity, but is sometimes performed artificially by
transferring the pollen from the flower of a particular variety to the
stigma of the flower of another.

The kinds now in cultivation are as follows; viz.:--


BARK-SKINNED. _Vil._

Oak Bark-skinned.

[Illustration: Bark-skinned Beet.]

Root produced entirely within the earth, broadest near the crown, and
thence tapering regularly to a point; average specimens measuring four
inches in their greatest diameter, and about one foot in depth. Skin
dark brown, thick, hard, and wrinkled, or striated, sometimes
reticulated or netted, much resembling the bark of some descriptions of
trees; whence the name. Flesh very deep purplish-red, circled, and rayed
with paler red, fine-grained, sugary, and tender. Leaves numerous,
spreading, bright green, slightly stained with red; the leaf-stems and
nerves bright purplish-red.

An early and comparatively new French variety, of fine flavor, excellent
for summer use, and, if sown as late as the second week in June,
equally valuable for the table during winter. Not recommended for field
culture.

Sow in rows fourteen inches apart, and thin to six inches apart in the
rows.


BARROTT'S NEW CRIMSON. _Thomp._

Root similar in form to the Castelnaudary, but somewhat larger; smooth
and regular, and not apt to fork. Flesh dark crimson, fine-grained and
tender. Leaf-stalks yellow.


BASSANO.

Early Flat Bassano. Turnip-rooted Bassano. Rouge Plate de Bassano.
_Vil._

Bulb flattened; six or seven inches in diameter by three or four inches
in depth; not very regular or symmetrical, but often somewhat ribbed,
and terminating in a very small, slender tap-root. Skin of fine texture;
brown above ground; below the surface, clear rose-red. Flesh white,
circled or zoned with bright pink; not very close-grained, but very
sugary and well-flavored. Leaves numerous, erect, of a lively green
color, forming many separate groups, or tufts, covering the entire top,
or crown, of the root. Leaf-stems short, greenish-white, washed or
stained with rose.

An Italian variety, generally considered the earliest of garden-beets,
being from seven to ten days earlier than the Early Blood Turnip-rooted.
The flesh, although much coarser than that of many other sorts, is
tender, sweet, and of good quality. Roots from early sowings are,
however, not suited for winter use; as, when overgrown, they almost
invariably become too tough, coarse, and fibrous for table use. To have
them in perfection during winter, the seed should not be sown till near
the close of June.

In moist, favorable seasons, it succeeds well in comparatively poor,
thin soil.

Cultivate and preserve as directed for the Early Turnip-rooted.


CATTELL'S DWARF BLOOD.

Root small, regularly tapering. Flesh deep blood-red. Leaves small,
bright red, spreading, or inclined to grow horizontally. Quality
good,--similar to that of the Red Castelnaudary; which variety it much
resembles in its general character.

On account of its small size, it requires little space, and may be grown
in rows twelve inches apart.


COW-HORN MANGEL WURZEL. _Vil._

Serpent-like Beet. Cow-horn Scarcity.

A sub-variety of the Mangel Wurzel, producing its roots almost entirely
above ground; only a small portion growing within the earth. Root long
and slender, two feet and a half in length, and nearly three inches in
diameter at its broadest part; often grooved or furrowed lengthwise, and
almost invariably bent and distorted,--the effect either of the wind, or
of the weight of its foliage. Flesh greenish white, circled with red at
the centre. Leaves of medium size, green, erect; the leaf-stems and
nerves pale red or rose color.

It derives its different names from its various contorted forms;
sometimes resembling a horn, and often assuming a shape not unlike that
of a serpent.

The variety is much esteemed and extensively cultivated in some parts of
Europe, although less productive than the White Sugar or Long Red Mangel
Wurzel.


EARLY MANGEL WURZEL.

Early Scarcity. Disette Hative. _Vil._

Aside from its smaller size, this variety much resembles the Common Red
Mangel Wurzel. Root contracted towards the crown, which rises two or
three inches above the surface of the soil, and tapering within the
earth to a regular cone. Skin purplish rose, deeper colored than that of
the last named. Flesh white, circled or zoned with pale red. Leaves
spreading, green; the leaf-stems rose-colored.

It is remarkable for the regular and symmetrical form of its roots,
which grow rapidly, and, if pulled while young, are tender, very sweet,
and well flavored. Planted the last of June, it makes a table-beet of
more than average quality for winter use.

When sown early, it attains a comparatively large size, and should have
a space of twenty inches between the rows; but, when sown late, fifteen
inches between the rows, and six inches between the plants in the rows,
will afford ample space for their development.


EARLY BLOOD TURNIP-ROOTED.

Early Turnip Beet.

[Illustration: Early Blood Turnip-rooted]

The roots of this familiar variety are produced almost entirely within
the earth, and measure, when of average size, from four inches to four
and a half in depth, and about four inches in diameter. Form turbinate,
flattened, smooth, and symmetrical. Neck small, tap-root very slender,
and regularly tapering. Skin deep purplish-red. Flesh deep blood-red,
sometimes circled and rayed with paler red, remarkably sweet and tender.
Leaves erect, not very numerous, and of a deep-red color, sometimes
inclining to green; but the stems and nerves always of a deep brilliant
red.

The Early Blood Turnip Beet succeeds well from Canada to the Gulf of
Mexico; and in almost every section of the United States is more
esteemed, and more generally cultivated for early use, than any other
variety. Among market-gardeners, it is the most popular of the summer
beets. It makes a rapid growth, comes early to the table, and, when sown
late, keeps well, and is nearly as valuable for use in winter as in
summer and autumn.

In common with most of the table sorts, the turnip-rooted beets are much
sweeter and more tender if pulled before they are fully grown; and
consequently, to have a continued supply in their greatest perfection,
sowings should be made from the beginning of April to the last of June,
at intervals of two or three weeks.

The roots, especially those intended for seed, should be harvested
before severe frosts, as they are liable to decay when frozen at the
crown, or even chilled. Sow in drills fourteen inches apart; and, when
two inches in height, thin out the plants to six inches apart in the
drills. An acre of land in good cultivation will yield from seven to
eight hundred bushels.


GERMAN RED MANGEL WURZEL.

Disette d'Allemagne. _Vil._

An improved variety of the Long Red Mangel Wurzel, almost regularly
cylindrical, and terminating at the lower extremity in an obtuse cone.
It grows much out of ground, the neck or crown is comparatively small,
it is rarely forked or deformed by small side roots, and is generally
much neater and more regular than the Long Red. Size very large;
well-developed specimens measuring from eighteen to twenty inches in
length, and seven or eight inches in diameter. Flesh white, with red
zones or rings; more colored than that of the last named. Leaves erect,
green; the stems and nerves washed or stained with rose-red.

For agricultural purposes, this variety is superior to the Long Red, as
it is larger, more productive, and more easily harvested.


GERMAN YELLOW MANGEL WURZEL.

Green Mangel Wurzel. Jaune d'Allemagne. _Vil._

Root produced half above ground, nearly cylindrical for two-thirds its
length, terminating rather bluntly, and often branched or deformed by
small side-roots. Size large; when well grown, measuring sixteen or
eighteen inches deep, six or seven inches in diameter, and weighing from
twelve to fifteen pounds. Skin above ground, greenish-brown; below,
yellow. Flesh white, occasionally zoned or marked with yellow. Leaves of
medium size, rather numerous, erect, very pale, or yellowish green; the
stems and ribs light green.

While young and small, the roots are tender and well-flavored; but this
is a field rather than a table beet. In point of productiveness, it
differs little from the Common Long Red, and should be cultivated as
directed for that variety.


HALF LONG BLOOD.

Dwarf Blood. Fine Dwarf Red. Early Half Long Blood. Rouge Nain. _Vil._

[Illustration: Half Long Blood.]

Root produced within the earth, of medium size, or rather small; usually
measuring about three inches in thickness near the crown, and tapering
regularly to a point; the length being ten or twelve inches. Skin
smooth, very deep purplish-red. Flesh deep blood-red, circled and rayed
with paler red, remarkably fine grained, of firm texture, and very
sugary. Leaves small, bright red, blistered on the surface, and
spreading horizontally. Leaf-stems short.

An excellent, half-early, garden variety, sweet, and well flavored, a
good keeper, and by many considered very superior to the Common Long
Blood. When full grown, it is still tender and fine-grained, and much
less stringy and fibrous than the last named, at an equally advanced
stage of growth. It may be classed as one of the best table-beets, and
is well worthy cultivation.


IMPROVED LONG BLOOD.

Long Smooth Blood.

This is an improved variety of the Common Long Blood, attaining a much
larger size, and differing in its form, and manner of growth. When
matured in good soil, its length is from eighteen inches to two feet;
and its diameter, which is retained for more than half its length, is
from four to five inches. It is seldom very symmetrical in its form;
for, though it has but few straggling side-roots, it is almost
invariably bent and distorted. Skin smooth, very deep or blackish
purple. Flesh dark blood-red, sweet, tender, and fine grained, while the
root is young and small, but liable to be tough and fibrous when full
grown. Leaves small, erect-red, and not very numerous. Leaf-stems
blood-red.

This beet, like the Common Long Blood, is a popular winter sort,
retaining its color well when boiled. It is of larger size than the last
named, grows more above the surface of the ground, and has fewer fibrous
and accidental small side-roots. While young, it compares favorably with
the old variety; but, when full grown, can hardly be said to be much
superior. To have the variety in its greatest perfection for winter use,
the seed should not be sown before the 10th of June; as the roots of
this, as well as those of nearly all the table-varieties, are much more
tender and succulent when very rapidly grown, and of about two-thirds
their full size.

Sow in drills fifteen inches apart, and thin to eight inches apart in
the drills; or sow on ridges eighteen inches apart.


LONG BLOOD.

Common Long Blood.

The roots of this familiar variety are long, tapering, and comparatively
slender; the size varying according to the depth and richness of the
soil. Skin dark purple, sometimes purplish-black. Flesh deep blood-red,
very fine grained and sugary, retaining its color well after being
boiled. Leaves rather numerous, of medium size, erect, deep
purplish-red; the leaf-stems blood-red.

One of the most popular of winter beets; but, for late keeping, the seed
should not be sown before the middle of June, as the roots, when large,
are frequently tough and fibrous.

The Improved Long Blood is a variety of this, and has, to a considerable
extent, superseded it in the vegetable garden; rather, it would seem, on
account of its greater size, than from any real superiority as respects
its quality or keeping properties.


LONG RED MANGEL WURZEL.

Red Mangel Wurzel. Marbled Field Beet. _Law._

Root fusiform, contracted at the crown, which, in the genuine variety,
rises six or eight inches above the surface of the ground. Size large,
when grown in good soil; often measuring eighteen inches in length, and
six or seven inches in diameter. Skin below ground purplish-rose;
brownish-red where exposed to the air and light. Leaves green; the stems
and nerves washed or stained with rose-red. Flesh white, zoned and
clouded with different shades of red.

The Long Red Mangel Wurzel is hardy, keeps well, grows rapidly, is very
productive, and in this country is more generally cultivated for
agricultural purposes than any other variety. According to Lawson, the
marbled or mixed color of its flesh seems particularly liable to vary:
in some specimens, it is almost of a uniform red; while, in others, the
red is scarcely, and often not at all, perceptible. These variations in
color are, however, of no importance as respects the quality of the
roots.

The seed may be sown from the middle of April to the last of May. If
sown in drills, they should be at least eighteen inches apart, and the
plants should be thinned to ten inches in the drills. If sown on ridges,
the sowing should be made in double rows; the ridges being three and a
half or four feet apart, and the rows fifteen inches apart. The yield
varies with the quality of the soil and the state of cultivation; thirty
and thirty-five tons being frequently harvested from an acre.

While young, the roots are tender and well-flavored, and are sometimes
employed for table use.


LONG WHITE GREEN-TOP MANGEL WURZEL.

Green-top White Sugar. Long White Mangel Wurzel. Disette Blanche a
Collet Verte. _Vil._

An improved variety of the White Sugar Beet. Root produced much above
ground, and of very large size; if well grown, measuring nearly six
inches in diameter, and eighteen inches in depth,--the diameter often
retained for nearly two-thirds the length. Skin green, where exposed to
light and air; below ground, white. Flesh white. Leaves green, rather
large, and not so numerous as those of the White Sugar.

Very productive, and superior to the last named for agricultural
purposes; the quality being equally good, and the yield much greater.


LONG YELLOW MANGEL WURZEL.

Jaune Grosse. _Vil._

[Illustration: Long Yellow Mangel Wurzel.]

Root somewhat fusiform, contracted towards the crown, which rises six or
eight inches above the surface of the ground. Size remarkably large;
when grown in deep rich soil, often measuring twenty inches in length,
and five or six inches in thickness. Skin yellow, bordering on
orange-color. Flesh pale yellow, zoned or circled with white, not
close-grained, but sugary. Leaves comparatively large, pale green; the
stems and nerves yellow; the nerves paler.

The variety is one of the most productive of the field-beets; but the
roots are neither smooth nor symmetrical, a majority being forked or
much branched.

In the vicinity of Paris, it is extensively cultivated, and is much
esteemed by dairy farmers on account of the rich color which it imparts
to milk when fed to dairy-stock. Compared with the German Yellow, the
roots of this variety are longer, not so thick, more tapering; and the
flesh is of a much deeper color. It has also larger foliage.



PINE-APPLE SHORT-TOP. _Hov. Mag._

Root of medium size, fusiform. Skin deep purplish-red. Flesh very deep
blood-red, fine-grained, as sweet as the Bassano, tender, and of
excellent quality for table use. Leaves very short and few in number,
reddish-green; leaf-stems and nerves blood-red.

In its foliage, as well as in the color of the root, it strongly
resembles some of the Long Blood varieties; but it is not so large, is
much finer in texture, and superior in flavor. It is strictly a garden
or table beet, and, whether for fall or winter use, is well deserving of
cultivation.


RED CASTELNAUDARY. _Trans._

This beet derives its name from a town in the province of Languedoc in
France, where the soil is particularly adapted to the growth of these
vegetables, and where this variety, which is so much esteemed in France
for its nut-like flavor, was originally produced.

The roots grow within the earth. The leaves are thickly clustered around
the crown, spreading on the ground. The longest of the leaf-stems do not
exceed three inches: these and the veins of the leaves are quite purple,
whilst the leaves themselves are green, with only a slight stain of
purple. The root is little more than two inches in diameter at the top,
tapering gradually to the length of nine inches. The flesh, which is of
a deep purple, and exhibits dark rings, preserves its fine color when
boiled, is very tender and sweet, and presents a delicate appearance
when cut in slices.

Being small in its whole habit, it occupies but little space in the
ground, and may be sown closer than other varieties usually are.

Not generally known or much cultivated in this country.


RED GLOBE MANGEL WURZEL.

Betterave Globe Rouge. _Vil._

Root nearly spherical, but tapering to pear-shaped at the base; nearly
one-third produced above ground. Size large; well-grown specimens
measuring seven or eight inches in diameter, and nine or ten inches in
depth. Skin smooth, and of a rich purplish rose-color below ground;
brown above the surface, where exposed to the sun. Flesh white, rarely
circled, with rose-red. Leaves pale green, or yellowish green; the stems
and ribs or nerves sometimes veined with red.

This variety is productive, keeps well, and, like the Yellow Globe, is
well adapted to hard and shallow soils. It is usually cultivated for
agricultural purposes, although the yield is comparatively less than
that of the last named.

In moist soils, the Yellow Globe succeeds best; and, as its quality is
considered superior, it is now more generally cultivated than the Red.


WHITE GLOBE MANGEL WURZEL.

A sub-variety of the Yellow and Red Globe, which, in form and manner of
growth, it much resembles. Skin above ground, green; below, white.
Leaves green. Flesh white and sugary; but, like the foregoing sorts, not
fine grained, or suited for table use.

Productive, easily harvested, excellent and profitable for farm
purposes, and remarkably well adapted for cultivation in hard, shallow
soil.


WHITE SUGAR.

White Silesian. Betterave Blanche. _Vil._

[Illustration: White Sugar Beet.]

Root fusiform, sixteen inches in length, six or seven inches in its
greatest diameter, contracted towards the crown, thickest just below the
surface of the soil, but nearly retaining its size for half the depth,
and thence tapering regularly to a point. Skin white, washed with green
or rose-red at the crown. Flesh white, crisp, and very sugary. Leaves
green; the leaf-stems clear green, or green stained with light red,
according to the variety.

The White Sugar Beet is quite extensively grown in this country, and is
employed almost exclusively as feed for stock; although the young roots
are sweet, tender, and well flavored, and in all respects superior for
the table to many garden varieties. In France, it is largely cultivated
for the manufacture of sugar and for distillation.

Of the two sub-varieties, some cultivators prefer the Green-top; others,
the Rose-colored or Red-top. The latter is the larger, more productive,
and the better keeper; but the former is the more sugary. It is,
however, very difficult to preserve the varieties in a pure state; much
of the seed usually sown containing, in some degree, a mixture of both.

It is cultivated in all respects as the Long Red Mangel Wurzel, and the
yield per acre varies from twenty to thirty tons.


WHITE TURNIP-ROOTED.

A variety of the Early Turnip-rooted Blood, with green leaves and white
flesh; the size and form of the root, and season of maturity, being
nearly the same. Quality tender, sweet, and well flavored; but, on
account of its color, not so marketable as the last named.


WYATT'S DARK CRIMSON.

Whyte's Dark Crimson. Rouge de Whyte. _Vil._

Root sixteen inches long, five inches in diameter, fusiform, and
somewhat angular in consequence of broad and shallow longitudinal
furrows or depressions. Crown conical, brownish. Skin smooth,
slate-black. Flesh very deep purplish-red, circled and rayed with yet
deeper shades of red, very fine-grained, and remarkably sugary. Leaves
deep red, shaded with brownish-red: those of the centre, erect; those
of the outside, spreading or horizontal.

The variety is not early, but of fine quality; keeps remarkably well,
and is particularly recommended for cultivation for winter and spring
use. Much esteemed in England.


YELLOW CASTELNAUDARY. _Trans._ _Vil._

Root produced within the earth, broadest at the crown, where its
diameter is nearly three inches, and tapering gradually to a point; the
length being about eight inches. Skin orange-yellow. Flesh clear yellow,
with paler zones or rings. Leaves spreading, those on the outside being
on stems about four inches in length; the inner ones are shorter,
numerous, of a dark-green color, and rather waved on the edges: the
leaf-stems are green, rather than yellow.

An excellent table-beet, being tender, yet firm, and very sweet when
boiled, although its color is not so agreeable to the eye.


YELLOW GLOBE MANGEL WURZEL.

Betterave Jaune Globe. _Vil._

[Illustration: Yellow Globe Mangel Wurzel.]

This is a globular-formed beet, measuring about ten inches in diameter,
and weighing ten or twelve pounds; about one-half of the root growing
above ground. Skin yellow, where it is covered by the soil; and
yellowish-brown above the surface, where exposed to light and air. Flesh
white, zoned or marked with yellow, close-grained and sugary. Leaves not
large or numerous, rather erect, green; the stems and ribs paler, and
sometimes yellowish.

The Yellow Globe is one of the most productive of all the varieties;
and, though not adapted to table use, is particularly excellent for
stock of all descriptions, as the roots are not only remarkably sugary,
but contain a considerable portion of albumen. It retains its soundness
and freshness till the season has far advanced, does not sprout so early
in spring as many others, and is especially adapted for cultivation in
hard, shallow soil.

The yield varies from thirty to forty tons per acre, according to soil,
season, and culture; although crops are recorded of fifty tons and
upwards.

Sow from the last of April to the last of May; but early sowings succeed
best. If sown in drills, they should be made twenty inches apart, and
the plants should be thinned to ten inches apart in the drills; if sown
on ridges, sow in double rows, making the ridges three feet and a half,
and the rows sixteen inches apart. On account of its globular form, the
crop can be harvested with great facility by the use of a common plough.


YELLOW TURNIP-ROOTED.

A sub-variety of the Blood Turnip-rooted, differing principally in
color, but to some extent also in its form, which is less compressed.
Leaves large, yellowish-green; the leaf-stems and nerves yellow. Flesh
yellow, comparatively close-grained, sweet and tender.

Not much cultivated on account of its color; the red varieties being
preferred for table use.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CARROT.

Daucus carota.

The Carrot, in its cultivated state, is a half-hardy biennial. It is
indigenous to some parts of Great Britain, generally growing in chalky
or sandy soil, and to some extent has become naturalized in this
country; being found in gravelly pastures and mowing fields, and
occasionally by roadsides, in loose places, where the surface has been
disturbed or removed. In its native state, the root is small, slender,
and fibrous, or woody, of no value, and even of questionable properties
as an article of food.

_Soil, Sowing, and Culture._--The Carrot flourishes best in a good,
light, well-enriched loam. Where there is a choice of situations, heavy
and wet soils should be avoided; and, where extremes are alternatives,
preference should be given to the light and dry. If possible, the ground
should be stirred to the depth of twelve or fifteen inches,
incorporating a liberal application of well-digested compost, and well
pulverizing the soil in the operation. The surface should next be
levelled, cleared as much as possible of stones and hard lumps of earth,
and made mellow and friable; in which state, if the ground contains
sufficient moisture to color the surface when it is stirred, it will be
ready for the seed. This may be sown from the first of April to the 20th
of May; but early sowings succeed best. The drills should be made an
inch in depth; and for the smaller, garden varieties, about ten inches
apart. The larger sorts are grown in drills about fourteen inches apart;
the plants in the rows being thinned to five or six inches asunder.

_Harvesting._--The roots attain their full size by the autumn of the
first year; and, as they are not perfectly hardy, should be dug and
housed before the ground is frozen. When large quantities are raised for
stock, they are generally placed in bulk in the cellar, without packing;
but the finer sorts, when intended for the table, are usually packed in
earth or sand, in order to retain their freshness and flavor. With
ordinary precaution, they will remain sound and fresh until May or June.

_Seed._--To raise seed, select good-sized, smooth, and symmetrical
roots; and as early in spring as the frost is out of the ground, and the
weather settled, transplant to rows three feet apart, and fifteen inches
apart in the rows, sinking the crowns just below a level with the
surface of the ground. The seed-stalks are from four to six feet in
height, with numerous branches. The flowers appear in June and July; are
white; and are produced at the extremities of the branches, in umbels,
or flat, circular groups or clusters, from two to five inches in
diameter. The seed ripens in August; but, as all the heads do not ripen
at once, they should be cut off as they successively mature. The stiff,
pointed hairs or bristles with which the seeds are thickly covered, and
which cause them to adhere together, should be removed either by
threshing or by rubbing between the hands; clearing them more or less
perfectly, according to the manner of sowing. If sown by a machine, the
seeds should not only be free from broken fragments of the stems of the
plant, but the surface should be made as smooth as possible. For
hand-sowing, the condition of the seed is less essential; though, when
clean, it can be distributed in the drill more evenly and with greater
facility.

The seeds of the several varieties differ little in size, form, or
color, and are not generally distinguishable from each other. They will
keep well two years; and if preserved from dampness, and placed in a
cool situation, a large percentage will vegetate when three years old.

In the vegetable garden, an ounce of seed is allowed for one hundred and
fifty feet of drill; and, for field culture, about two pounds for an
acre.

An ounce contains twenty-four thousand seeds.

_Use._--Though not relished by all palates, carrots are extensively
employed for culinary purposes, and are generally considered healthful
and nutritious. They form an important ingredient in soups, stews, and
French dishes of various descriptions; and by many are much esteemed,
when simply boiled, and served with meats or fish.

"Carrots may be given to every species of stock, and form in all cases a
palatable and nourishing food. They are usually given in their raw
state, though they may be steamed or boiled in the same manner as other
roots.

"Horses and dairy-cows are the live-stock to which they are most
frequently given. They are found in an eminent degree to give color and
flavor to butter; and, when this is the end desired, no species of
green-feeding is better suited to the dairy. To horses they may be given
with cut straw and hay; and, thus given, form a food which will sustain
them on hard work. They afford excellent feeding for swine, and quickly
fatten them. When boiled, they will be eaten by poultry; and, mixed with
any farinaceous substance, form an excellent food for them. They are
also used for distillation, affording a good spirit."

The varieties are as follow:--


ALTRINGHAM. _Law._

Altringham. Long Red Altringham. _Vil._

The Altrincham Carrot measures about fourteen inches in length, by two
inches in diameter. It retains its thickness for nearly two-thirds its
length: but the surface is seldom regular or smooth; the genuine variety
being generally characterized by numerous crosswise elevations, and
corresponding depressions. Neck small and conical, rising one or two
inches above the surface of the soil. Skin nearly bright-red; the root
having a semi-transparent appearance. Flesh bright and lively, crisp and
breaking in its texture; and the heart, in proportion to the size of the
root, is smaller than that of the Long Orange. Leaves long, but not
large or very numerous.

According to Lawson, it is easily distinguished from the Long Orange by
the roots growing more above ground, by its more convex or rounded
shoulders, and by its tapering more irregularly, and terminating more
abruptly. It is, however, exceedingly difficult to procure the variety
in its purity, as it is remarkably liable to sport, although the roots
grown for seed be selected with the greatest care.

It is a good field-carrot, but less productive than the Long Orange and
some others; mild and well flavored for the table, and one of the best
sorts for cultivation for market.

Thompson states that "it derives its name from a place called
Altrincham, in Cheshire, Eng., where it is supposed to have originated.
In seedsmen's lists it is frequently, but erroneously, called the
Altringham."


EARLY FRAME.

Early Forcing Horn. Earliest Short Forcing Horn. Early Short Scarlet.

[Illustration: Early Frame.]

Root grooved or furrowed at the crown, roundish, or somewhat globular;
rather more than two inches in diameter, nearly the same in depth, and
tapering suddenly to a very slender tap-root. Skin red, or
reddish-orange; brown or greenish where it comes to the surface of the
ground. Foliage small and finely cut or divided, not so large or
luxuriant as that of the Early Horn.

The Early Frame is the earliest of all varieties, and is especially
adapted for cultivation under glass, both on account of its earliness,
and the shortness and small size of its roots. It is also one of the
best sorts for the table, being very delicate, fine-grained, mild, and
remarkably well flavored.

Where space is limited, it may be grown in rows six inches apart,
thinned to three inches apart in the rows; or sown broadcast, and the
young plants thinned to three inches apart in each direction.


EARLY HALF-LONG SCARLET.

Half-long Red. _Vil._

Root slender and tapering, measuring seven or eight inches in length,
and two inches in its greatest diameter. Crown hollow. Skin red below
the surface of the ground, green or brown above. Flesh reddish-orange,
fine-grained, mild, and well flavored. Foliage similar to that of the
Early Frame, but not abundant.

The variety is remarkably productive; in good soil and favorable
seasons, often yielding an amount per acre approaching that of the Long
Orange. Season intermediate between the early garden and late field
sorts.


EARLY HORN.

Early Scarlet Horn. Early Short Dutch. Dutch Horn.

[Illustration: Early Horn Carrot.]

Root six inches in length, two inches and a half in diameter, nearly
cylindrical, and tapering abruptly to a very slender tap-root. Skin
orange-red, but green or brown where it comes to the surface of the
ground. Flesh deep orange-yellow, fine-grained, and of superior flavor
and delicacy. The crown of the root is hollow, and the foliage short and
small.

The variety is very early, and as a table-carrot much esteemed, both on
account of the smallness of its heart and the tenderness of its fibre.
As the roots are very short, it is well adapted for shallow soils; and
on poor, thin land will often yield a greater product per acre than the
Long Orange or the White Belgian, when sown under like circumstances.

Sow in rows one foot apart, and thin to four inches in the rows.


FLANDER'S LARGE PALE SCARLET. _Vil._

Flander's Pale Red.

Root produced within the earth, fourteen or fifteen inches long, three
or four inches in diameter at the broadest part, fusiform, not very
symmetrical, but often quite crooked and angular. The crown is flat,
very large, and nearly covered by the insertion of the leaves. Flesh
reddish-yellow, and rather coarse-grained. Foliage large and vigorous.

The roots are formed early and with great certainty. It is also very
productive, of large size, keeps remarkably well; and, though of coarse
texture, one of the best sorts for cultivation for farm-purposes.

It originated in Flanders, and is comparatively an old variety, but is
little disseminated, and not grown to any extent, in this country.


LONG ORANGE.

Root long, thickest at or near the crown, and tapering regularly to a
point. Size very variable, being much affected by soil, season, and
cultivation: well-grown specimens measure fifteen inches in length, and
three inches in diameter at the crown. Skin smooth, of a reddish-orange
color. Flesh comparatively close-grained, succulent, and tender, of a
light-reddish vermilion or orange color, the heart lighter, and large in
proportion to the size of the root. Foliage not abundant, but healthy
and vigorous, and collected into a comparatively small neck. The roots
are usually produced entirely within the earth.

If pulled while very young and small, they are mild, fine-grained, and
good for table use; but, when full grown, the texture is coarser, and
the flavor stronger and less agreeable.

The Long Orange is more cultivated in this country for agricultural
purposes than all other varieties. With respect to its value for stock,
its great productiveness, and its keeping properties, it is considered
the best of all the sorts for field culture. A well-enriched soil will
yield from six hundred to eight hundred bushels per acre. The seed is
usually sown in drills, about fourteen inches apart, but sometimes on
ridges, eighteen or twenty inches apart, formed by turning two furrows
together; the ridges yielding the largest roots, and the drills the
greatest quantity.

Two pounds of seed are usually allowed to an acre; but, if sown by a
well-regulated machine, about one-half this quantity will be sufficient.


LONG RED BELGIAN.

Yellow Belgian. Yellow Green-top Belgian.

[Illustration: Long Red Belgian Carrot.]

Root very long, fusiform, contracted a little towards the crown, but
nearly of uniform thickness from the top down half the length. Size
large; when grown in deep soil, often measuring twenty inches in length,
and nearly three inches in diameter. The crown rises four or five inches
above the surface of the ground, and is of a green color; below the
surface, the skin is reddish-yellow. Flesh orange-red.

This variety, like the White, originated in Belgium. In Europe it is
much esteemed by agriculturists, and is preferred to the White Belgian,
as it is not only nearly as productive, but has none of its defects.


LONG YELLOW.

Long Lemon.

Root fusiform, three inches in diameter at the crown, and from, twelve
to fourteen inches in depth. Skin pale yellow, or lemon-color, under
ground; but greenish on the top, or crown, which rises a little above
the surface of the soil. Flesh yellow, the heart paler, and, like that
of the Long Orange, of large size. While young, the roots are delicate,
mild, and well flavored; but, when full grown, valuable only for stock.

The Long Lemon is easily harvested, and is very productive, yielding
nearly the same quantity to the acre as the Long Orange; which variety
it much resembles in its general character, and with which it is
frequently, to a greater or less extent, intermixed.


LONG SURREY.

Long Red. James's Scarlet.

This variety much resembles the Long Orange: the roots, however, are
more slender, the heart is smaller, and the color deeper.

"It is popular in some parts of England, and is extensively grown over
the Continent."


LONG WHITE.

Common White.

Root produced entirely below ground, regularly fusiform, fifteen inches
long, by about three inches in its largest diameter. Skin white, stained
with russet-brown. Flesh white, and generally considered sweeter than
that of the colored varieties.

The Common White has been but little cultivated since the introduction
of the White Belgian; a variety much more productive, though perhaps not
superior either in flavor, or fineness of texture.


NEW INTERMEDIATE.

[Illustration: New Intermediate.]

An English variety, comparatively of recent introduction. Root broadest
at the crown, and thence tapering very regularly to a point. Size full
medium; well-grown specimens measuring nearly three inches in diameter
at the broadest part, and about one foot in length. Skin bright
orange-red. Flesh orange-yellow, fine-grained, sweet, well flavored,
and, while young, excellent for table use.

Very hardy, and also very productive; yielding, according to the best
English authority, a greater weight per acre than any other
yellow-fleshed variety.


PURPLE OR BLOOD RED.

Violette. _Vil._

Root fusiform, and very slender, fourteen inches in length, by two
inches and a half in diameter at the top or broadest part. Skin deep
purple, varying to some extent in depth of shade, but generally very
dark. Flesh purple at the outer part of the root, and yellow at the
centre or heart; fine grained, sugary, and comparatively well flavored.

Not much cultivated for the table, on account of the brown color it
imparts to soups or other dishes of which it may be an ingredient. It is
also inclined to run to seed the year it is sown. It has, however, the
reputation of flourishing better in wet, heavy soil, than any other
variety.


SHORT WHITE.

Blanche des Vosges. _Vil._

Root obtusely conical, seven or eight inches long, by about four inches
in diameter at the crown, which is large, flat, greenish, and level with
the surface of the ground. Skin white, tinted with amber, smooth and
fine. Flesh yellowish-white, remarkably solid, and fine in texture;
sweet and well flavored. Foliage rather finely divided, and as vigorous
as the Long Orange.

The Short White yields well, retains its qualities during winter, and is
well adapted for cultivation in soils that are hard and shallow.


STUDLEY.

Long Red Brunswick.

Root fusiform, very long, and regular; the crown level with the surface
of the soil. In good cultivation, the roots attain a length of sixteen
inches, and a diameter of nearly two inches. Color bright
reddish-orange, like the Altrincham.

An excellent table-carrot, but flourishes well only in deep, mellow
soil.


WHITE BELGIAN.

Green-top White.

Root very long, fusiform, eighteen to twenty inches in length, and four
or five inches in diameter. In the genuine variety, the crown rises five
or six inches from the surface of the ground; and, with the exception of
a slight contraction towards the top, the full diameter is retained for
nearly one-half of the entire length. Skin green above, white below
ground. Flesh white, tending to citron-yellow at the centre or heart of
the root; somewhat coarse in texture. Foliage rather large and vigorous.

The White Belgian Carrot is remarkable for its productiveness,
surpassing in this respect all other varieties, and exceeding that of
the Long Orange by nearly one-fourth. It can be harvested with great
facility, and gives a good return even on poor soils.

The variety is not considered of any value as a table esculent, and is
grown almost exclusively for feeding stock; for which purpose, it is,
however, esteemed less valuable than the yellow-fleshed sorts, because
less nutritious, and more liable to decay during winter.

Since its introduction, it has somewhat deteriorated; and, as now grown,
differs to some extent from the description given above. The roots are
smaller, seldom rise more than two or three inches above the soil, and
taper directly from the crown to the point. A judicious selection of
roots for seed, continued for a few seasons, would undoubtedly restore
the variety to its primitive form and dimensions.

The same amount of seed will be required as of the Long Orange: and the
general method of culture should be the same; with the exception, that,
in thinning out the plants, the White Belgian should have more space.


WHITE BELGIAN HORN.

Transparent White. _Vil._

Root seven or eight inches in length, and two inches in its greatest
diameter, tapering regularly from the crown to the point. Skin fine,
clear white. Flesh very white, and almost transparent, mild, tender, and
delicate.

A French variety, remarkable for the peculiar, pure white color of its
skin and flesh.

       *       *       *       *       *

TURNIP-ROOTED CHERVIL.


PARSNIP CHERVIL.

Chaerophyllum bulbosum.

[Illustration: Turnip-rooted Chervil.]

A hardy, biennial plant, from the south of Europe. The root is fusiform,
four or five inches long, and nearly an inch and a half in diameter;
skin, grayish-black; flesh, white. The leaves are compound, the leaflets
very deeply cut, and the divisions of the upper leaves very narrow and
slender. The flowers are white, and terminate the top of the plant in
umbels, or large, circular, flat, spreading bunches. The seeds are long,
pointed, furrowed, concave on one side, of a brownish color, and retain
their power of germination but one year. An ounce contains sixty-five
hundred seeds.

_Soil and Cultivation._--The seeds may be sown in drills, in October or
April, in the manner of sowing the seeds of the common carrot:
preference to be given to rich, mellow soil. The roots will attain their
full size by the following August or September, when they should be
harvested. With a little care to prevent sprouting, they may be
preserved until April.

_Seed._--The roots intended for seed should be set in the open ground in
autumn or in spring. The seeds will ripen in August, and should be sown
within a month or two of the time of ripening; or, if kept till spring,
should be packed in earth or sand: for, when these precautions are
neglected, they will often remain dormant in the ground throughout the
year.

_Use._--The Tuberous-rooted Chervil promises to be a valuable esculent
root. M. Vilmorin considered it worthy to be classed with the potato,
though not equally productive. On his authority, upwards of six tons
have been produced on an acre; an amount which he states may be greatly
increased by a judicious selection of the best roots for seed.

The roots, which are eaten boiled, are of a gray color, and nearly of
the size and form of an Early Horn Carrot. The flesh is white,
farinaceous, and of a flavor intermediate between that of a chestnut and
a potato.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHINESE POTATO, OR JAPANESE YAM.

Dioscorea batatas.

Stem twelve feet or more in length, of a creeping or climbing habit;
leaves heart-shaped, though sometimes halberd-formed; flowers small, in
clusters, white. "The root is of a pale russet color, oblong, regularly
rounded, club-shaped, exceedingly tender, easily broken, and differs
from nearly all vertical roots in being largest at the lower end."

[Illustration: Chinese Potato, or Japanese Yam.]

_Propagation and Cultivation._--The Chinese Potato requires a very deep,
light, rather sandy, and tolerably rich soil; and this should be
thoroughly stirred to the depth of at least two feet. No fresh manure
should be used, but fine, well-decomposed compost applied, and deeply as
well as very thoroughly incorporated with the soil; avoiding however, if
possible, its direct contact with the growing roots. It is propagated
either by small roots; by the top or neck of the large roots, cut off to
the length of five or six inches; or by the small bulbs, or tubers,
which the plants produce in considerable numbers on the stem, in the
axils of the leaves. These should be planted the last of April, or as
soon as the ground is in good working condition. Lay out the land in
raised ridges two feet and a half or three feet asunder; and on the
summit set the bulbs, or tubers, with the point or shoot upwards, eight
or ten inches apart; and cover about an inch deep. Cultivate in the
usual manner during the summer; and late in autumn, after the tops are
dead, and just before the closing-up of the ground, take up the roots,
dry them a short time in the sun, and store them in the cellar for use.
The roots are perfectly hardy, and will sustain no injury from the
coldest winter, if left unprotected in the open ground. During the
second season, the growth of the old root is not continued, but
gradually decays as the new roots are formed. A well-grown root will
measure about two feet in length, and two inches and a half at its
broadest diameter.

_Use._--The flesh is remarkably white, and very mucilaginous in its
crude state. The roots are eaten either boiled or roasted, and require
rather more than half the time for cooking that is usually given to the
boiling or roasting of the common potato. When cooked, they possess a
rice-like taste and consistency, are quite farinaceous, and
unquestionably nutritive and valuable for food.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHUFA, OR EARTH ALMOND.


EDIBLE CYPERUS. NUT RUSH.

Cyperus esculentus.

A perennial plant, from the south of Europe. The roots are long and
fibrous, and produce at their extremities numerous small, rounded or
oblong, jointed, pale-brown tubers, of the size of a filbert. The flesh
of these roots, or tubers, is of a yellowish color, tender, and of a
pleasant, sweet, and nut-like flavor. The leaves are rush-like, about
eighteen inches high, a little rough, and sharply pointed. The
flower-stalks are nearly of the same height as the leaves,
three-cornered, hard, and leafless, with the exception of five or six
leaflike bracts at the top, from the midst of which are produced the
spikelets of flowers, which are of a pale-yellow color.

_Propagation and Culture._--It is propagated by planting the tubers in
April or May, two inches deep, in drills two feet apart, and six inches
apart in the drills. They will be ready for harvesting in October. In
warm climates, the plant, when once introduced into the garden, spreads
with great rapidity, and is exterminated with much difficulty. In the
Northern and Middle States, the tubers remaining in the open ground are
almost invariably destroyed by the winter.

_Use._--It is cultivated for its small, almond-like tubers, which, when
dried, have somewhat the taste of the almond, and keep a long period.
They are eaten either raw or roasted.

"The plant grows spontaneously in the light, humid soils of Spain; and
is cultivated in Germany and the south of France. The tubers are chiefly
employed for making an orgeat,--a species of drink much used in Spain,
Cuba, and other hot climates where it is known. When mashed to a
flour,--which is white, sweet, and very agreeable to the taste,--it
imparts to water the color and richness of milk."--_Hort._

       *       *       *       *       *


GERMAN RAMPION.


TREE PRIMROSE. EVENING PRIMROSE.

OEnothera biennis.

The German Rampion, or Evening Primrose, common in this country to
gravelly pastures and roadsides, is a hardy biennial plant, and, when in
full perfection, measures three or four feet in height, with long, flat,
pointed leaves, and large, yellow, fragrant flowers. The seed-pods are
oblong, four-sided; the seeds are small, angular, of a brown color, and
retain their germinative properties three years.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--The seeds should be sown annually, in April,
in a rich and shady situation; for if grown in a dry, sunny exposure,
and sown very early in the season, the plants are inclined to run to
flower during the summer: which renders the roots worthless; for they
then become hard and fibrous. Sow in drills an inch deep, and fourteen
inches apart; thin to six or eight inches in the rows; cultivate in the
usual form; and, in September, the roots will be ready for use. For
winter use, take up the roots before freezing weather, and pack in sand.
For spring use, they may be taken directly from the ground.

_To raise Seed._--Two or three plants, left in the ground through the
winter, will yield an abundant supply of seeds the following summer.

_Use._--The root is the only part used. This, when full grown, is
generally from ten to twelve inches long, fusiform, occasionally with a
few strong fibres, whitish on the outside, and white within. The thick,
outer covering separates readily, and should be removed when the root is
eaten in its crude state. It possesses a nutty flavor; but is inferior
to the true Rampion, having a slight pungency. If required as a raw
salad, it should be eaten while young. When the roots have attained
their full size, they are usually dressed in the manner of Skirret and
Scorzonera.

       *       *       *       *       *

JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE.

Helianthus tuberosus.

The Jerusalem Artichoke is a hardy perennial. In its manner of growth
and flowering, it much resembles the common sunflower; of which, as its
scientific term suggests, it is really a species. Stem six to eight feet
high, very rough, and much branched; leaves alternate, large, rough,
heart-shaped at the base, pointed at the ends, and indented on the
borders; flowers large, yellow,--produced on the top of the plant, at
the extremities of the branches.

_Soil, Propagation, and Culture._--"It thrives best in a light, mellow
soil, made rich by the application of old, decomposed manure; but the
roots will flourish well if planted in any corner of the garden less
suited for other descriptions of vegetables. To obtain fine roots,
however, the soil should be trenched fifteen or eighteen inches in
depth.

"It is propagated by planting the small tubers, or offsets: the large
tubers may also be cut or divided into several pieces, each having one
eye, as practised with the potato. In April, or early in May, lay out
the rows three feet apart, drop the tubers one foot apart in the rows,
and cover three inches deep. As the plants come up, hoe the ground
between the rows from time to time; and draw a little earth around their
stems, to support them, and to afford the roots a thicker covering."

_Taking the Crop._--The new tubers will be suitable for use in the
autumn. In digging, great care should be taken to remove the small as
well as the full-grown; for those not taken from the ground will remain
fresh and sound during the winter, and send up in the spring new plants,
which, in turn, will increase so rapidly, as to encumber the ground, and
become troublesome. In localities where the crop has once been
cultivated, though no plants be allowed to grow for the production of
fresh tubers, yet the young shoots will continue to make their
appearance from time to time for many years.

_Use._--"The roots, or tubers, are the parts of the plant eaten. These
are boiled in water till they become tender; when, after being peeled,
and stewed with butter and a little wine, they will be as pleasant as
the real Artichoke, which they nearly resemble both in taste and
flavor."

M'Intosh says that the tubers may be used in every way as the potato;
and are suited to persons in delicate health, when debarred from the use
of most other vegetables.

_Varieties._--For a long period, there was but a single variety
cultivated, or even known. Recent experiments in the use of seeds as a
means of propagation have developed new kinds, varying greatly in their
size, form, and color, possessing little of the watery and insipid
character of the heretofore grown Jerusalem Artichoke, and nearly or
quite equalling the potato in flavor and excellence.


COMMON WHITE.

Tubers large, and often irregular in form; skin and flesh white; quality
watery, and somewhat insipid. It is unfit for boiling, but is sometimes
served baked or roasted. It makes a very crisp and well-flavored
pickle.


PURPLE-SKINNED.

A French variety, produced from seed. Tubers purplish rose-color; flesh
dryer when cooked, and finer flavored, than that of the foregoing.


RED-SKINNED.

Like the Purple-skinned, produced from seed. Skin red. Between this and
the last named there are various intermediate sorts, differing in shades
of color, as well as in size, form, and quality.


YELLOW-SKINNED. _Law._

The tubers of this variety are of a yellowish color, and are generally
smaller, and even more irregularly shaped, than those of the Common
White. They are, however, superior in quality, and of a more agreeable
taste when cooked.

       *       *       *       *       *

KOHL RABI.

TURNIP CABBAGE.

Brassica caulo-rapa.

[Illustration: Green Kohl Rabi.]

The Kohl Rabi is a vegetable intermediate between the cabbage and the
turnip. The stem, just above the surface of the ground, swells into a
round, fleshy bulb, in form not unlike a turnip. On the top and about
the surface of this bulb are put forth its leaves, which are similar to
those of the Swede turnips; being either lobed or entire on the borders,
according to the variety. The seeds are produced the second year; after
the ripening of which, the bulb perishes.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--Mr. Thompson's directions are as follows:
"Kohl Rabi may be sown thinly, broadcast, or in drills four inches
apart, in April, May, or June. When the young plants are an inch or two
in height, they may be transplanted into any good, well-enriched piece
of ground, planting them eight inches apart, in rows fifteen inches
asunder, and not deeper in the ground than they were in the seed-bed.
Water should be given till they take fresh root, and subsequently in dry
weather as required; for though the plants suffer little from droughts,
yet the tenderness of the produce is greatly impaired by an insufficient
supply of moisture. With the exception of stirring the ground and
weeding, no further culture is required. The crop will be fit for use
when the bulbs are of the size of an early Dutch turnip: when allowed to
grow much larger, they are only fit for cattle. Of field varieties, the
bulbs sometimes attain an immense size; weighing, in some cases,
fourteen pounds."

_Seed._--Take up a few plants entire in autumn; preserve them during
winter in the manner of cabbages or turnips; and transplant to the open
ground in April, two feet apart in each direction. The seeds are not
distinguishable from those of the Swede or Ruta-baga Turnip, and retain
their vitality from five to seven years.

_Use._--The part chiefly used is the turnip-looking bulb, formed by the
swelling of the stem. This is dressed and eaten with sauce or with meat,
as turnips usually are. While young, the flesh is tender and delicate,
possessing the combined flavor of the cabbage and turnip.

They are said to keep better than any other bulb, and to be sweeter and
more nutritious than the cabbage or white turnip. "In the north of
France, they are extensively grown for feeding cattle,--a purpose for
which they seem admirably adapted, as, from having a taste similar to
the leaves of others of the species, they are found not to impart any of
that peculiar, disagreeable taste to the milk, which it acquires when
cows are fed on turnips."

_Varieties._--These are as follow:--


ARTICHOKE-LEAVED. _Thomp._ _Vil._

Cut-leaved.

Of German origin, deriving its name from the resemblance of the leaves
to those of the Artichoke. Bulb small, and not smooth or symmetrical.
The leaves are beautifully cut, and are very ornamental; but the bulb is
comparatively of little value. Not much cultivated.


EARLY DWARF WHITE. _Vil._

Bulb white, smaller than that of the Common White, and supported close
to the ground. The leaves are also smaller, and less numerous.

It is earlier, and finer in texture, than the last named; and, while
young, excellent for the table.

Transplant in rows fifteen inches apart, and ten inches asunder in the
rows.


EARLY PURPLE VIENNA. _Thomp._ _Vil._

This corresponds with the Early White Vienna, except in color, which, in
this variety, is a beautiful purple, with a fine glaucous bloom. The
leaf-stems are very slender, and the leaves smooth, and few in number.

These two Vienna sorts are by far the best for table use. When taken
young, and properly dressed, they form an excellent substitute for
turnips, especially in dry seasons, when a crop of the latter may fail
or become of inferior quality.


EARLY WHITE VIENNA. _Thomp._

Dwarf, small, early; bulb handsome, firm, glossy, white, or very
pale-green. The leaves are few, small, with slender stems, the bases of
which are dilated, and thin where they spring from different parts on
the surface of the bulb. The flesh is white, tender, and succulent,
whilst the bulb is young, or till it attains the size of an early white
Dutch turnip; and at or under this size it should be used.

Set the plants in rows fifteen inches apart, and ten inches from plant
to plant in the lines.


GREEN.

Similar to, if not identical with, the Common White. The bulbs are
pale-green, attain a very large size, and the variety is hardy and
productive. Not suited to garden culture, but chiefly grown for
farm-purposes.


PURPLE. _Thomp._ _Vil._

This variety differs little from the White, except in color; the bulb
being purple, and the leaf-stems and nerves also tinged with purple.
Like the White, it attains a large size, and is only adapted for field
culture; the flesh being too coarse and strong-flavored for table use.


WHITE. _Thomp._ _Vil._

Bulb large,--when full grown, measuring seven or eight inches in
diameter, and weighing from eight to ten pounds; leaves rather large and
numerous; skin very pale, or whitish-green; stem about six inches high.
Hardy, very late, and chiefly employed for farm-purposes.

The variety should be cultivated in rows eighteen inches apart, and the
plants should stand one foot apart in the rows.

       *       *       *       *       *

OXALIS, TUBEROUS-ROOTED.--_Law._

Tuberous-rooted Wood-sorrel. Oca. Oxalis crenata.

Of the Tuberous-rooted Oxalis, there are two varieties, as follow:--


WHITE-ROOTED.

Oca blanca.

Stem two feet in length, branching, prostrate or trailing, the ends of
the shoots erect; leaves trifoliate, yellowish-green, the leaflets
inversely heart-shaped; flowers rather large, yellow,--the petals
crenate or notched on the borders, and striped at their base with
purple. The seeds are matured only in long and very favorable seasons.
In its native state, the plant is perennial; but is cultivated and
treated, like the common potato, as an annual.

_Cultivation._--The tubers should be started in a hot-bed in March, and
transplanted to the open ground in May, or as soon as the occurrence of
settled warm weather. They thrive best in dry, light, and medium fertile
soils, in warm situations; and should be planted in hills two feet and a
half apart, or in drills two feet and a half apart, setting the plants
or tubers an inch and a half deep, and fifteen or eighteen inches apart
in the drills; treating, in all respects, as potatoes.

The tubers form late in the season; are white, roundish, or oblong,
pointed at the union with the plant, and vary in size according to soil,
locality, and season; seldom, however, exceeding an inch in diameter, or
weighing above four ounces. The yield is comparatively small.

_Use._--The tubers are used as potatoes. When cooked, the flesh is
yellow, very dry and mealy, of the flavor of the potato, with a very
slight acidity. The tender, succulent stalks and foliage are used as
salad.


OXALIS, RED TUBEROUS-ROOTED.

Oca colorada.

Plant similar in habit to the White Tuberous-rooted; but the branches,
as well as the under surface of the leaves, are more or less stained
with red. Tubers larger than those of the last named, roundish, tapering
towards the connection with the plant, and furnished with numerous eyes
in the manner of the common potato; skin smooth, purplish-red; flesh
often three-colored,--the outer portion of the tuber carmine-red, the
central part marbled, and the intermediate portion yellow,--the colors,
when the root is divided transversely, appearing in concentric zones, or
rings. The flesh contains but little farinaceous matter, and possesses a
certain degree of acidity, which, to many palates, is not agreeable.

Propagated, and in all respects cultivated, like the White. Either of
the varieties may also be grown from cuttings, which root readily.

According to a statement from the London Horticultural Society's
Journal, the acidity may be converted into a sugary flavor by exposing
the tubers to the action of the sun for eight or ten days,--a phenomenon
which is analogous to what takes place in the ripening of most fruits.
When treated in this form, the tubers lose all trace of acidity, and
become as floury as the best descriptions of potatoes. If the action of
the sun is continued for a long period, the tubers become of the
consistence and sweet taste of figs. Mr. Thompson states that the
disagreeable acid taste may also be removed by changing the water when
they are three-quarters boiled.

The plants are tender, and are generally destroyed early in autumn by
frost. The tubers must be taken up before freezing weather, packed in
sand, and placed in a dry, warm cellar for the winter.

DEPPE'S OXALIS. _Thomp._ _Vil._

Oxalis Deppei.

A perennial plant from Mexico, very distinct from the tuberous-rooted
species before described. Stalk about one foot in height, smooth and
branching; leaves four together, the leaflets wedge-shaped, pale
yellowish-green, the upper surface marked by two brownish lines or
stains in the form of two sides of a triangle; flowers terminal, of a
carmine-rose or pink-red color, stained with green at the base of the
petals. "The roots are fleshy, tapering, white, and semi-transparent,
and furnished on the top of the crown with a mass of scaly bulbs,
sometimes amounting to fifty in number, by means of which the plant
can be easily propagated. When well grown, the roots are about four
inches in length, and from one inch to one inch and a half in
thickness."--_Thomp._

_Soil and Culture._--"This Oxalis requires a light, rich soil, mixed
with decayed vegetable matter; and it prefers a southern aspect,
provided the soil is not too dry.

"It may be raised from seed; but is generally propagated by planting the
bulbs, which should be set the last of April or beginning of May, or
when all danger of frost is over, six inches apart, in rows one foot
asunder. The bulbs should be only just covered with soil; for thus they
occupy a position, with regard to the surface, similar to that in which
they are produced: and this seems indispensable, if fine roots are to be
obtained.

"The stems have been observed to spring up from a considerable depth;
but, in this case, tap-roots were not formed. During summer, the soil
must be kept moist in dry weather; otherwise, when rain falls
abundantly, the sudden accession of water to the roots occasions their
splitting. The plants should be allowed to grow as long as there is no
danger from frost; but, previous to this occurring, they should either
be taken up or protected. If protected from frost by frames or
otherwise, the roots will continue to increase in size till near
November. When taken up, the roots should be divested of the numerous
bulbs formed on their crowns, and then stored up for use in a cool, dry
place, but secure from frost. A similar situation will be proper for the
small bulbs; or they may be kept in dry sand till the season of
planting."--_Thomp._

The plant has been cultivated with the most complete success, with no
especial preparation of the soil; merely planting the bulbs in shallow
drills, the ground being dug and manured as for other kitchen-garden
crops.

_Use._--In a communication to the "Gardener's Chronicle," Prof. Morren
gives the uses of the plant as follow:--

"The uses of the Oxalis are many. The young leaves are dressed like
sorrel in soup, or as a vegetable. They have a fresh and agreeable acid,
especially in spring. The flowers are excellent in salad, alone, or
mixed with corn salad, endive of both kinds, red cabbage, beet-root, and
even with the petals of the dahlia, which are delicious when thus
employed. When served at table, the flowers, with their pink corolla,
green calyx, yellow stripes, and small stamens, produce a fine effect.
The roots are gently boiled with salt and water, after having been
washed and slightly peeled. They are then eaten like asparagus in the
Flemish fashion, with melted butter and the yolk of eggs. They are also
served up like scorzonera and endive, with white sauce; and form, in
whatever way they are dressed, a tender, succulent dish, easy to digest,
agreeing with the most delicate stomach. The analogy of the root with
salep indicates that its effect should be excellent on all
constitutions."

"The bright rose-colored flowers being very ornamental, the plant is
sometimes employed as an edging for walks."--_Thomp._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PARSNIP.

Pastinaca sativa.

The Parsnip is a hardy biennial, indigenous to Great Britain and some
parts of the south of Europe, and, to a considerable extent, naturalized
in this country. In its native state, the root is small and fibrous, and
possesses little of the fineness of texture, and delicacy of flavor,
which characterize the Parsnip in its cultivated state.

The roots are fusiform, often much elongated, sometimes turbinate, and
attain their full size during the first year. The flowers and seeds are
produced the second year; the plant then measuring five or six feet in
height, with a grooved or furrowed, hollow, branching stem. The flowers
are yellow, in large spreading umbels five or six inches in diameter.
The seeds ripen in July and August; are nearly circular; about
one-fourth of an inch in diameter; flat, thin, very light, membranous on
the borders, and of a pale yellowish-brown or yellowish-green color.
They vary but little in size, form, or color, in the different
varieties; and retain their vitality but two years. About six thousand
seeds are contained in one ounce.

_Propagation, Soil, and Cultivation._--It is always propagated from seed
sown annually.

_Soil._--The soil should be mellow, deep, and of a rich vegetable
texture. "If in moderate condition by the manuring of the previous crop,
it will be better than applying manure at sowing. Should it be necessary
to do so, let the manure be in the most thorough state of decomposition;
or, if otherwise, incorporate it with the soil, as far from the surface
as possible. The Parsnip will grow in a stronger soil than the Carrot;
and succeeds comparatively well when grown in sand, or even in peat, if
well manured."

_Preparation of the Ground, and Sowing._--"The seed should be sown as
early in spring as the ground is in good working condition. As most of
the varieties have long fusiform roots, ordinary ploughing will not stir
the soil to a sufficient depth for their greatest perfection; and, as
the amount of the crop mainly depends on the length of the roots, it is
of the first importance to provide for this fact by making the ground
fine and friable above and below, to the depth of at least fifteen
inches: eighteen or twenty would be better. When the soil has thus been
thoroughly pulverized, level off the surface, and rake it fine and
smooth, and sow the seed in drills fourteen inches apart and an inch
and a half deep; allowing half an ounce of seed for one hundred feet of
drill, and from five to six pounds to the acre. When the young plants
are two or three inches high, thin them out to about six inches in the
rows; and, as they transplant readily, any vacant space can be filled by
resetting the surplus plants. Keep the earth between the rows loose, and
free from weeds, and also the spaces in the rows, until the leaves cover
the ground; after which, little further care will be required. The roots
will attain a good size by the middle of September, from which time a
few may be drawn for present use; but the Parsnip is far best at full
maturity, which is indicated by the decay of the leaf in October."

_Harvesting._--The Parsnip sustains no injury when left in the open
ground during winter; and it is a common practice to take up in the fall
a certain quantity of roots to meet a limited demand in the winter
months, allowing the rest to remain in the ground until spring. The
roots thus treated are considered to have a finer flavor; that is to
say, are better when recently taken from the ground.

In taking up the crop in autumn, which should be done just previous to
the closing-up of the ground, be careful to remove the soil to a
sufficient depth, so as not to injure the roots. The thrust of the spade
that easily lifts a Carrot without essential injury, will, if applied to
the Parsnip, break the roots of nine in ten at scarcely half their
length from the surface of the ground. As the roots keep much fresher,
and retain their flavor much better, when taken up entire, the best
method is to throw out a trench beside the rows, to the depth of the
roots, when they can be easily, as well as perfectly, removed. They
should be dug in pleasant weather, and laid on the ground exposed to the
sun for a few hours to dry; "and when all the earth is rubbed off them,
and their leaves cut off to within an inch of their crowns, they may be
stowed away in sand, dry earth, or in any dry, light material most
convenient." When thus packed, they will keep well in almost any
location, either in the cellar or storehouse.

If the roots which have remained in the ground during winter be taken up
in spring, and the tops removed as before directed, they may be packed
in sand or earth, and will remain fresh and in good condition for use
until May or June.

_To raise Seed._--In April, thin out the roots, that have been in the
ground during the winter, to about eighteen inches apart; or, at the
same season, select a few good-sized and symmetrical roots from those
harvested in the fall, and set them eighteen inches apart, with the
crowns just below the surface of the ground. They will send up a stalk
to the height and in the manner before described, and the seeds will
ripen in August. The central umbel of seeds is always the largest, and
is considered much the best.

_Use._--"The Parsnip is considered as a wholesome and nutritious article
of food, and is served at table in various styles in connection with
salted meats and fish. The roots, aside from this manner of using, form
what may be called an excellent side-dish; when, after being boiled, not
too soft, they are dipped in thin batter of flour and butter or the
white of eggs, and afterwards fried brown."

They contain a considerable portion of sugar, and are considered more
nutritive than carrots or turnips. The roots form a common ingredient in
soups; and are sometimes used for making bread, and also a kind of wine
said to resemble Malmsey of Madeira.

Aside from the value of the Parsnip as a table vegetable, it is one of
the most economical roots for cultivation for farm purposes, as it not
only produces an abundant and almost certain crop, but furnishes very
nourishing food particularly adapted to and relished by dairy-stock.

_Varieties._--The varieties, which are not numerous, are as follow:--


COMMON, OR DUTCH. _Trans._

Swelling Parsnip. Long Smooth Dutch.

The leaves of this kind are strong and numerous; generally about two
feet long or high. The roots are from twenty to thirty inches in length,
and from three to four inches in diameter at the shoulder, regularly
tapering to the end, occasionally producing a few strong fangs. The
crown is short and narrow, elevated, and contracting gradually from the
shoulder, which is generally below the surface of the ground.

Seeds from America, Holland, and Germany, sown in the garden of the
London Horticultural Society, all proved alike; though some were
superior to others in the size of their roots, owing, it was thought,
both to a careful selection of seed-roots and to the age of the seeds.
It was found that new seeds uniformly produced the largest roots.


EARLY SHORT-HORN. _M'Int._

A recently introduced variety, similar to the Turnip-rooted, but
shorter. Very delicate and fine-flavored.


GUERNSEY. _Trans._

Panais Long, of the French.

The leaves of this kind grow much stronger and somewhat taller than
those of the Common Parsnip. The leaflets are also broader. The only
distinguishable difference in the roots is, that those of the Guernsey
Parsnip are the larger and more perfect, being sometimes three feet
long. Roots produced from seed obtained from Guernsey were evidently
much superior to those which were grown from seed raised in other
localities: from which it would appear that the Guernsey Parsnip is only
an improved variety of the Common, arising from soil and cultivation in
that island. Dr. M'Culloch states that, in Guernsey, its roots grow to
the length of four feet. In its flavor, it differs little from the
Common Dutch Parsnip.


HOLLOW-CROWNED. _Trans._

Long Jersey. Hollow-crowned Guernsey. Hollow-headed.

In this variety, the leaves are shorter and not so numerous as those of
the Common Parsnip. The roots are oblong, about eighteen inches in
length, and four inches in diameter at the shoulder, more swollen at the
top, and not tapering gradually, but ending somewhat abruptly with a
small tap-root. The crown is short, and quite sunk into the shoulder, so
as to form a hollow ring around the insertion of the stalks of the
leaves; and grows mostly below the surface of the ground.

It is a good sort for general cultivation, especially as it does not
require so deep a soil as either the Common, or Guernsey. There is
little difference in the flavor or general qualities of the three
varieties.


SIAM, OR YELLOW. _Thomp._

Panais de Siam.

This is said to be more tender and richer in flavor than any of the
other varieties. It is mentioned by Dr. Neill in the "Encyclopaedia
Britannica," and is described by M. Noisette as being yellowish in
color, and in form intermediate between the Guernsey and Turnip-rooted
Parsnips. He also states that it is the most esteemed. It does not,
however, appear to be known at the present day in this country.


TURNIP-ROOTED. _Trans._

Panais Rond, of the French.

[Illustration: Turnip-rooted Parsnip.]

The leaves of this sort are few, and do not exceed twelve to sixteen
inches in length. The roots are from four to six inches in diameter,
tunnel-shaped, tapering very abruptly, with a strong tap-root; the whole
being from twelve to fifteen inches in length. The rind is rougher than
either of the other sorts; the shoulder very broad, growing above the
surface of the soil; convex, with a small, short crown. It is much the
earliest of the parsnips; and, if left in the ground, is liable to rot
in the crown. The leaves also decay much sooner than those of most other
sorts.

It is particularly adapted to hard and shallow soils; and, from its
coming into use much earlier than any other kind, very desirable. In
flavor, it is mild and pleasant, though less sugary than the long-rooted
kinds. The flesh, when dressed, is more yellow than that of any other
variety.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE POTATO.

Solanum tuberosum.

The Potato is a native of Central or Tropical America. In its wild or
natural state, as found growing on the mountains of Mexico or South
America, the tubers rarely exceed an inch in diameter, and are
comparatively unpalatable. During the last half-century, its cultivation
within the United States has greatly increased; and it is now considered
the most important of all esculent roots, and next to the cereals in
value as an article of human subsistence.

_Soil._--The soils best suited to the Potato are of the dryer and
lighter descriptions; pasture lands, or new land, with the turf freshly
turned, producing the most abundant as well as the most certain crops.
On land of a stiff, clayey texture, or in wet soils, they are not only
extremely liable to disease, but the quality is usually very inferior.
"On soils which have been long cropped and heavily manured, they rarely
succeed well; and hence garden ground, in most cases, does not produce
tubers of so good quality as those obtained from the fields."

_Fertilizers._--"In good garden soil, the less manure that is used, the
better flavored will be the produce; and it will also be much less
affected by the disease. Therefore, whilst the malady prevails, or
symptoms of it still remain, it is not advisable to apply much manure.

"Amongst the fertilizers that are employed, may be enumerated, in
addition to barnyard and stable manure, leaves, leaf-mould,
peat-charcoal, and other carbonaceous substances, lime, gypsum, or
plaster, and bone-dust.

"Wood-ashes are useful in supplying potash and other inorganic
substances required by the plant; and they may be advantageously applied
where the soil contains a large amount of decayed vegetable matter. The
same remark will also apply to lime, which is useful in destroying slugs
and other vermin, which attack the tubers. Plaster, bone-dust, and
superphosphate of lime, are best for humid soils. They induce earliness;
and where this is an object, as it must be so long as the disease
continues, they may be applied with considerable advantage."--_Thomp._

_Propagation._--"This is almost universally from tubers; the seed being
seldom sown, except for the production of new varieties. With many it is
a doubtful question, whether the tubers cut, or planted whole, yield the
greater return. From experiments made in the garden of the London
Horticultural Society at Chiswick, it was found, on the mean of two
plantations,--one made early in the season, and the other about one
month later,--that the produce from cut sets exceeded that from whole
tubers by nearly one ton per acre. In the latter planting, the produce
from whole tubers was somewhat greater than that from single eyes: but,
in the early plantation, the cut sets gave nearly two tons per acre more
produce than the whole tubers; the weight of potatoes planted being
deducted in every case.

"Another important consideration is, whether small tubers or large ones
should be employed for making sets; for if, by using the former, an
equally good crop could be obtained, a considerable saving in the
expense of sets would be effected. Large tubers, however, are
preferable, for the following reasons: In all plants, large buds tend
to produce large shoots; and small or weak buds, the reverse. Now, the
eyes of potatoes are true buds, and in small tubers they are
comparatively weak: they consequently produce weak shoots, and the crop
from such is inferior to that obtained from plants originating from
larger tubers, furnished with stronger eyes; and this conclusion has
been justified by the results of actual experiments.

"The part of the Potato employed for planting is not a matter of
indifference. It was found, by an experiment made in the garden of the
Horticultural Society, that sets taken from the points of the tubers,
and planted early in the season, yielded at the rate of upwards of three
tons per acre more produce than was obtained from employing the opposite
end of the tubers. In a plantation made a month afterwards, the
difference was much less, but still in favor of the point, or top end,
of the Potato."--_Thomp._

With regard to the quantity of seed per acre, great diversity of opinion
exists among cultivators. Much, of course, depends on the variety, as
some sorts not only have more numerous eyes, but more luxuriant and
stronger plants, than others. Of such varieties, a much less quantity
will be required than of those of an opposite character. From a series
of experiments carefully made for the purpose of ascertaining the amount
of seed most profitable for an acre, it was found that from six to eight
bushels, if planted in hills, answered better than more: for, when too
much seed was used, there were many small tubers; and where the tubers
had been divided into very small parts, or single eyes, the plants were
more feeble, and the yield less in number and weight, though usually of
larger size.

_Methods of Planting and Cultivation._--Potatoes are usually planted
either in hills or ridges; the former method being the more common in
this country. If planted in hills, they should be made from three feet
to three and a half apart; the distance to be regulated by the habit of
the variety under cultivation. If in ridges or drills, they may be made
from two and a half to three feet apart; although some of the earlier
and smaller kinds may be successfully grown at eighteen or twenty
inches.

"Of sets formed by the division of an average-sized tuber into four
parts, three may be allowed a hill; or, if planted in drills, the sets
may be placed from seven to twelve inches asunder,--the distance to be
regulated by the habit or size of the plant. On light, warm land, the
sets should be covered about four inches in depth; but in wet, cold
soil, three inches will be sufficient.

"As soon as the plants are fairly above the surface, hoeing and
surface-stirring should be commenced. The earth should gradually be
drawn about the hills, or along the ridges, at each successive hoeing,
and every encouragement given to the side-roots to extend themselves:
for nearly at their extremities the tubers are formed; so that deeply
stirring the ground between the hills or ridges tends to their
extension. This latter treatment, however, must not be carried beyond a
certain stage in the growth of the plant, or after the tubers have
reached a considerable size, as the extremities of the roots might be
seriously injured. Some varieties of potatoes produce their tubers at a
much greater distance from the stem than others. These are chiefly to be
found among the later sorts. Most of the early kinds produce theirs
close to the stem, or at the extremity of very short runners; seldom
more than nine inches from the stalk of the plant."

_Forcing._--This should be commenced from three to four weeks before the
season for planting in the open ground. The earliest varieties should be
chosen for the purpose, selecting whole tubers of medium size, and
placing them close together, in a single layer, among half-decayed
leaves or very light loam, on the surface of a moderate hot-bed.

"When the shoots have attained the height of two or three inches, and
the weather has become sufficiently mild, they should be carefully taken
out, and divided into sets; in the process of cutting up the tubers,
avoiding as much as possible doing injury to the small fibrous roots,
and also to the growing shoots. These sets should then be planted out in
hills or drills, in the usual manner and at the usual depth; if
possible, leaving the upper portion of the young shoot just above the
surface of the ground. Some care is requisite in planting out the sets,
particularly in covering; for, if the soil is applied too rudely, the
sprouts, which separate very easily from the tubers, are exceedingly
liable to be broken off, and the set destroyed for early use. If severe
cold or frosty weather occurs, the plants should be protected by straw,
or any convenient, light material, placed along the drills or on the
hills."

_Taking the Crop, and Method of Preservation._--"The early varieties
should be dug for use as they attain a suitable size; which, in warm
exposure, will be about the beginning of July; and thence till the
middle of August, in less favorable places. The practice of partially
removing the soil from about the roots, and gathering the largest
tubers, leaving the smaller ones, with the expectation that they will
attain a larger size, is a mode of proceeding which seldom realizes the
hopes of the cultivator; for the Potato, if once disturbed at the roots,
seldom recovers the check.

"When no apprehension is felt on account of disease, a week's delay in
commencing on the crop will be found of great importance both to the
bulk and quality; for just previous to the decay of the tops, if
pleasant weather prevails and the ground is sufficiently moist, the
tubers increase in size with great rapidity.

"Late varieties usually constitute the great portion of the main crop,
and are those which require most care in taking up and storing. So long
as the plants continue green, the Potato should be allowed to remain in
the ground; as this is quite indicative that the tubers have not arrived
at full maturity."

In the preservation of potatoes, it is of the first importance that they
be excluded from light. If this is neglected, they become not only
injurious, but actually poisonous; and this is especially the fact when
they are allowed to become of a green color, which they readily will do
on exposure to the light. In a state of complete darkness they should
therefore be placed, the day they are taken out of the ground; and it
were even better that they were stored in rather a damp state, than that
they should be exposed for a day to the light with a view to dry them.
Drying has a bad effect on the skin of the Potato; for, if subjected to
this, the skin and part of the epidermis are made to part with their
natural juices, which ever afterwards renders them incapable of
absorbing moisture, even if presented to them. Fermentation is also an
important evil to be guarded against, as it changes the whole substance
of the Potato, and, so far as seed potatoes are concerned, destroys
their vegetative principle. As security against this, they should be
stored either in barrels or boxes, or in long, narrow ridges, with
partitions of earth between. Potatoes once dried should never be again
moistened until just before using.

"Keeping potatoes has the effect of diminishing the quantity of starch
contained in them. According to Mr. Johnson, those which in October
yielded readily seventeen per cent of starch, gave, in the following
April, only fourteen and a half per cent. The effect of frost is also to
lessen the quantity of starch. It acts chiefly upon the vascular and
albuminous part; but it also converts a portion of the starch into
sugar: hence the sweetish taste of frosted potatoes."--_M'Int._

_Varieties._--Messrs. Peter Lawson and Sons describe one hundred and
seventy-five varieties: and other foreign authors enumerate upwards of
five hundred, describing the habit of the plant; size, form, and color
of the tubers; quality and general excellence; and comparative value for
cultivation.

They are obtained from seeds; the latter being quite small, flat, and
lens-shaped. One hundred and five thousand are contained in an ounce,
and they retain their germinative properties three years.

The process is as follows: "Select some of the largest and best berries,
or balls, when fully ripe, which is denoted by the withering of the
stalk; and separate the seeds from the pulp, and dry them thoroughly in
the sun. These should be sown in the following spring, and the produce
taken up in October. The tubers will then have nearly attained the size
of small plums. The best of these should be selected, and the product of
each plant carefully and separately preserved. In the month of April
following, they should be planted at a distance from one another of from
fifteen to eighteen inches; and, when they rise about two inches from
the ground, they should be earthed up slightly with the hoe,--an
operation which may be repeated during the season. When they have
arrived at maturity, they are to be taken up, keeping the product of
each stalk by itself; which product is again to be planted the ensuing
spring. A judgment of the properties of the varieties will then have
been formed, and those are to be reserved for cultivation which are
approved of. It will be found, that, whatever had been the character of
the parent stock, the seeds will produce numerous varieties, some white,
some dark, in color, with tubers of different forms, round, oblong, and
kidney-shaped, and varying greatly in the dryness, color, and
farinaceous character, of the flesh."--_Low._


ASH-LEAVED EARLY.

Stem nearly two feet in height, erect, with long, smooth, shining, and
drooping foliage; flowers very seldom produced; tubers white, roundish,
rough-skinned; flesh white, of medium quality. The variety is healthy,
and remarkably early; well suited to open culture, but not adapted for
growing under glass, on account of its tall habit.


ASH-LEAVED KIDNEY.

One of the earliest of the garden varieties, well adapted for forcing
under glass or for starting in a hot-bed, and subsequent cultivation in
the open ground. The plant is of spreading habit, and about eighteen
inches in height; leaves small, recurved; tubers of medium size,
kidney-shaped, white; flesh white, dry, and well flavored. Very healthy.
Introduced.


BISCUIT. _Law._

Plant two feet and a half high, spreading; leaves rather rough, large,
and of a pale-green color; flowers whitish; tubers rather small, round,
smooth, and of a light-brownish color. A very healthy variety, mealy,
well flavored, and quite productive. The plants do not decay, nor do the
tubers attain full maturity, until nearly the close of the season: the
latter are, however, of good quality, and in perfection for the table
soon after being harvested.


BLACK CHENANGO.

Black Mercer.

Plant vigorous, and generally of healthy habit; tubers nearly of the
form of the Lady's Finger, but of larger size; skin very deep purple, or
nearly black; flesh purple, both in its crude state and when cooked;
quality good, usually dry, and of good flavor.

The Black Chenango is moderately productive, and withstands disease
better than almost any other potato; but its dark color is
objectionable. Compared with many of the recent varieties, it has little
merit, and is not a profitable sort for extensive cultivation.


BUCKEYE.

A Western variety; grown also to a considerable extent in some parts of
the Middle States. "It is a handsome, round potato; white throughout,
except a little bright pink at the bottom of the eye. It is very
early,--ripening as early as the Chenango; attains a good marketable
size as soon as the Dykeman; cooks very dry and light; and is fine
flavored, particularly when first matured. It throws up a very thick,
vigorous, and luxuriant vine; grows compactly in the hill, and to a
large size, yielding abundantly."

For planting for early use, it is a promising variety: but for a late or
medium crop, upon strong, rich ground, it is said to grow so rapidly,
and to so great a size, that many of the tubers are liable to be
hollow-hearted; which considerably impairs their value for table use.


CALICO.

Similar to the Pink-eyed; varying little except in color, which is
mostly red, with occasional spots and splashes of white. It is in no
respect superior to the last-named variety in quality, and cannot be
considered of much value for agricultural purposes or for the table.


CALIFORNIA RED.

A bright-red potato from California. Tubers variable in form, from long
to nearly round, rather smooth; eyes slightly depressed.

It is one of the most productive of all the varieties; but, on account
of its extreme liability to disease, cannot be recommended for general
cultivation.


CARTER.

A medium-sized, roundish, flattened, white potato, once esteemed the
finest of all varieties, but at present nearly or quite superseded by
the Jackson White, of which it is supposed to be the parent. Eyes rather
numerous, and deeply sunk; flesh very white, remarkably dry,
farinaceous, and well flavored. Originated about thirty years ago, in
Berkshire County, Mass., by Mr. John Carter.


CHURCHILL.

A variety said to have originated in Maine, and often sold in the market
for the "State of Maine;" which it somewhat resembles in size, form, and
color. Flesh yellow. Not a desirable sort. It is much inferior to the
"State of Maine;" and, in many places, the latter variety has been
condemned in consequence of the Churchill having been ignorantly
cultivated in its stead.


CRISTY.

An early sort, of good quality, but rather unproductive. Shape somewhat
long, though often nearly round; color white and purple, striped, and
blended together. It is of no value as an agricultural variety; and, for
table use, cannot be considered superior to many other varieties equally
healthy and more prolific.


CUPS.

Introduced. Plant upright, stocky, surviving till frost; flowers pale
purple; tubers pink or reddish, large, oblong, often irregular; flesh
dry and farinaceous. Very healthy and productive, but better suited for
agricultural purposes than for the table.


DANVERS SEEDLING.

Danvers Red.

Plant healthy and vigorous. The large, full-grown tubers are long; and
the smaller, undeveloped ones, nearly round. Color light red, with faint
streaks of white; eyes moderately sunk; quality fair.

This variety originated in Danvers, Essex County, Mass.; and, when first
introduced, was not only of good size and quality, but remarkably
productive. It has, however, much deteriorated; and is now, both as
respects quality and yield, scarcely above an average. At one period, it
had the reputation of being one of the best varieties for keeping, and
of entirely withstanding the attacks of the potato disease.


DAVIS'S SEEDLING.

This variety originated in the town of Sterling, Mass.; and was early
disseminated through the influence of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society, at whose exhibitions it attracted much attention on account of
its size and beauty. For general cultivation, it is probably one of the
most profitable sorts known, as it yields abundantly, even with ordinary
attention. Under a high state of cultivation, seven hills have produced
a bushel of potatoes.

The tubers are of good size, red, nearly round, though sometimes more or
less flattened. Eyes deeply sunk, and not very numerous; flesh nearly
white, slightly tinged with pink beneath the skin when cooked; quality
good, being dry, farinaceous, and well flavored. It requires the full
season for its complete perfection, and resists disease better than most
varieties. As a winter potato, or for extensive cultivation for market,
it is one of the best of all varieties; and commends itself to the
farmer, both as respects quality and yield, as being greatly superior to
the Peach-blow, Pink-eye, Vermont White, and many similar varieties,
which so abound in city markets.


DYKEMAN.

Plant of medium strength and vigor, rarely producing seed or blossoms;
tubers large, roundish, often oblong; color white, clouded at the
stem-end and about the eyes (which are moderately sunk and rather
numerous) with purple; flesh white, or yellowish-white, its quality
greatly affected by season, and the soil in which the variety may be
cultivated. In certain descriptions of rather strong, clayey land, the
yield is often remarkably great, and the quality much above medium. In
such land, if warm and sheltered, the tubers attain a very large size
quite early in the season, and find a ready sale in the market at
greatly remunerative prices. Under other conditions, it frequently
proves small, waxy, and inferior in quality, and profitless to the
cultivator. Notwithstanding these defects, its size, earliness, and
productiveness render it worthy of trial.


EARLY BLUE.

Tubers of medium size, roundish, of a bright purple or bluish color;
eyes moderately deep; flesh, when cooked, white, or yellowish-white,
mealy, and well flavored.

This old and familiar variety is one of the earliest of the garden
potatoes, of fine quality, and one of the best for forcing for early
crops. It retains its freshness and flavor till late in the spring; is
of comparatively healthy habit; and, though but moderately productive,
is worthy more general cultivation.


EARLY COCKNEY.

Plant of medium strength and vigor, recumbent, rarely blossoming, and
usually ripening and decaying early in the season, or before the
occurrence of frost; tubers white, large, roundish, rough; flesh
yellowish-white, or nearly white, dry, farinaceous, and of good flavor;
hardy, moderately productive, and recommended as a desirable
intermediate variety for the garden or for field culture. Introduced.


EARLY MANLY.

Plant medium or small, rarely blossoming, and decaying early in the
season; tubers of medium size, white, roundish; flesh yellowish-white,
dry, mealy, and mild flavored. It yields well, and is a good variety for
early garden culture. Introduced.


FLOUR-BALL.

Plant reclining, of rather slender habit, rarely blossoming; tubers of
medium size, white, round, the skin quite rough or netted; flesh white,
dry, farinaceous, and mild flavored. It yields abundantly, and is a good
sort for the garden; but would prove less profitable for growing for the
market than many other varieties of larger size.


FLUKE KIDNEY. _Cot. Gard._

Plant vigorous, with luxuriant, deep-green foliage; continuing its
growth till late in the season, or until destroyed by frost. The tuber
is remarkable for its singular shape, of a flattened oval, frequently
measuring eight or nine inches in length by nearly three inches in
width. The peel is thin, and remarkably free from eyes; the surface,
very smooth and even; the flesh is very dry, mealy, and farinaceous,
exceedingly well flavored, and, in general excellence, surpassed by few,
if any, of the late varieties. It is also healthy, hardy, and very
productive; but is much better towards spring than when used soon after
being harvested.

The variety originated near Manchester, Eng., about the year 1844; and
appears to be a cross or hybrid between the Lapstone Kidney and
Pink-eye.

In this country, the variety has never reached the degree of excellence
it appears to have attained in England. With us the yield has been
small, and it has suffered greatly from disease. The flesh is also
yellow when cooked, and quite strong flavored. Not recommended for
cultivation.


FORTY-FOLD.

An English variety. Plant healthy, ripening about the middle of
September, rarely producing seed or blossoms; tubers white, of medium
size, round; skin rough or netted; flesh white, comparatively dry, and
well flavored. It yields abundantly; is a good kind for forcing; and,
though the plants remain green until frost, the tubers attain a
suitable size for use quite early in the season. An English sort, known
as Taylor's Forty-fold, is quite distinct; the tubers being oval, much
flattened, and of a reddish color.


GARNET CHILI.

Stem not long or tall, rather erect, sturdy, and branching; flowers
abundant, pale purplish-white, and usually abortive; tubers red, or
garnet-colored, very large, roundish, and comparatively smooth and
regular; flesh white, dry, mealy, and, the size of the tuber considered,
remarkably well flavored. The variety is healthy, yields abundantly, is
greatly superior to the Peach-blow and kindred sorts for table use, and
might be profitably grown for farm-purposes. The plants survive till
destroyed by frost.


GILLYFLOWER.

Tubers large, oval, or oblong, flattened, white, and comparatively
smooth; flesh white, dry, and of fair quality. The plants are healthy,
and the variety is very productive: but it is inferior to many others
for table use; though its uniform good size, and its fair form, and
whiteness, make it attractive and salable in the market. It is similar
to, if not identical with, the St. Helena and the Laplander.


GREEN-TOP.

Plant strong and vigorous; flowers dull white, generally abortive;
tubers quite large, white, roundish, often irregular; eyes deep-set;
flesh white, comparatively dry, and well flavored. The variety is
productive, and of healthy, hardy habit; not early; the plants
continuing green till destroyed by frost. Introduced.


HILL'S EARLY.

An old variety, very little, if at all, earlier than the White Chenango.
Quality not much above mediocrity; its chief recommendation being its
earliness. Skin and flesh yellowish-white; eyes rather deeply sunk; size
medium; form roundish; moderately productive. It does not ordinarily
cook dry and mealy; and, though desirable as an early potato for a
limited space in the garden, cannot be recommended for general
cultivation.


IRISH CUPS.

Tubers nearly round, yellowish-white; eyes deep-set; flesh yellow, and
strong flavored when cooked. Unfit for table use.

Aside from the difference in form, the variety somewhat resembles the
Rohan.


JACKSON WHITE.

This comparatively new but very excellent variety originated in Maine;
and is supposed to be a seedling from the celebrated Carter, which it
much resembles. Tubers yellowish-white, varying in size from medium to
large; form somewhat irregular, but generally roundish, though sometimes
oblong and a little flattened; eyes rather numerous, and deeply sunk;
flesh perfectly white when cooked, remarkably dry, mealy, farinaceous,
and well flavored.

The variety unquestionably attains its greatest perfection when grown in
Maine, or the northern sections of Vermont and New Hampshire; but is
nevertheless of good quality when raised in the warmer localities of New
England and the Middle States. It is earlier than the Davis Seedling;
comparatively free from disease; a good keeper; commands the highest
market-price; and, every thing considered, must be classed as one of the
best, and recommended for general cultivation.

The plants are very erect, the flowers nearly white; and the balls, or
berries, are produced in remarkable abundance.


JENNY LIND.

Rhode-Island Seedling.

A variety of comparatively recent introduction. Plant very strong and
vigorous; tubers of extraordinary size when grown in strong soils, long
and somewhat irregular in form, thickly set on the surface with small
knobs, or protuberances, above which the eyes are placed in rather deep
basins, or depressions; color red and white intermixed, in some
specimens mostly red, while in others white is the prevailing color;
flesh yellow when cooked, and quite coarse, but esteemed by many as of
good quality for table use.

One of the largest of all the varieties, remarkably productive, quite
free from disease, keeps well, and, as an agricultural potato, rivals
the Rohan. Requires the full season. It sports more than any potato;
being exceedingly variable in size, form, and color.


LADY'S FINGER.

Ruffort Kidney. _Law._

Stem from one foot and a half to two feet high, of straggling habit of
growth; leaves smooth, and of a light-green color; blossoms rarely if
ever produced; tubers white, smooth, long, and slender, and of nearly
the same diameter throughout; eyes very numerous, and slightly
depressed.

A very old variety, of pretty appearance, long cultivated, and much
esteemed as a baking potato; its peculiar form being remarkably well
adapted for the purpose. It is, however, very liable to disease; and as
many of the recently introduced seedlings are quite as good for baking,
as well as far more hardy and productive, it cannot now be considered as
a variety to be recommended for general culture.


LAPSTONE KIDNEY. _M'Int._

Nichol's Early.

A variety of English origin. M'Intosh describes it as being "decidedly
the best kidney potato grown, and an excellent cropper. Tubers sometimes
seven inches in length, and three inches in breadth. It is longer in
coming through the ground in spring than most other varieties, and the
stems at first appear weakly; but they soon lose this appearance, and
grow most vigorously. It is a first-rate potato in August and September;
and will keep in excellent condition till May following, without losing
either its mealiness or flavor."


LONG RED.

Form long, often somewhat flattened,--its general appearance being not
unlike that of the Jenny Lind, though of smaller size; color red; flesh
marbled or clouded with red while crude, but, when cooked, becoming
nearly white. The stem-end is often soggy, and unfit for use; and the
numerous prongs and knobs which are often put forth on the sides of the
tubers greatly impair their value for the table.

A few years since, this variety was exceedingly abundant in the market,
and was esteemed one of the best sorts for use late in spring and early
in summer. It was also remarkably healthy and very productive, and was
considered one of the most valuable kinds for general cultivation. It
has somewhat improved in quality by age, although not now to be classed
as a potato of first quality. The Jenny Lind and other varieties are now
rapidly superseding it in most localities.


MEXICAN.

A very handsome white variety, long and smooth, like the St. Helena, but
not quite so large; eyes very slightly depressed. It is of poor quality,
quite unproductive, rots badly, and not worthy of cultivation.


NOVA-SCOTIA BLUE.

This old variety, at one period, was very extensively cultivated, and
for many years was considered the most profitable of all the sorts for
raising for market or for family use. Form nearly round, the larger
specimens often somewhat flattened; color light blue; eyes moderately
depressed; flesh white, dry, and good. It yields abundantly; but, in
consequence of its great liability to disease, its cultivation is now
nearly abandoned.


OLD KIDNEY.

Tubers kidney-shaped, white; flesh yellow, rather waxy, and of
indifferent flavor.

It is neither very productive, nor very valuable in other respects; and
it is now little cultivated.


PEACH-BLOW.

Tubers similar in form to the Davis Seedling, but rather more smooth and
regular; color red, the eyes not deeply sunk; flesh yellow when cooked,
dry and mealy, but only of medium quality, on account of its
comparatively strong flavor.

It is hardy and quite productive; keeps well; and is extensively
cultivated for market in the northern parts of New England and the State
of New York, as well as in the Canadas. It is common to the markets of
most of the large seaport cities; and, during the winter and spring, is
shipped in large quantities to the interior and more southern sections
of the United States. The Davis Seedling--which is quite as productive,
and much superior in quality for table use--might be profitably grown as
a substitute.


PINK-EYED.

Tubers nearly round; eyes rather large and deep; color mostly white,
with spots and splashes of pink, particularly about the eyes; flesh
yellow.

The Pink-eyed is an old but inferior variety, hardly superior in quality
to the Vermont White. Though quite productive, it is generally esteemed
unworthy of cultivation.


POGGY, OR PORGEE.

Cow-horn.

A dark-colored variety, extensively cultivated in the British Provinces,
particularly in Nova Scotia; and, during the autumn, imported in
considerable quantities into the principal seaports of the United
States. It is of excellent quality, and by some preferred to all others,
especially for baking; for which purpose, on account of its size and
remarkable form, it seems peculiarly adapted. It is moderately
productive, and succeeds well if seed is procured every year or two from
the East; but, if otherwise, it soon deteriorates, even under good
cultivation.

Size above medium; form long, broadest, and somewhat flattened, at the
stem-end, and tapering towards the opposite extremity, which is often
more or less sharply pointed. It is also frequently bent, or curved;
whence the name "Cow-horn," in some localities. Skin smooth; eyes not
depressed; color dark-blue outside, white within when cooked. Not very
hardy; requiring a full season for its complete perfection. Unless where
well known, its color is objectionable; and it is generally less salable
than the white-skinned varieties.


QUARRY.

A large, white, roundish, English potato, not unlike the variety
universally known and cultivated many years since in this country as the
Orange Potato. Plant vigorous, and of strong, stocky habit; flowers
purple, generally abortive; flesh yellowish-white, of fair quality for
table use. A hardy, very productive sort, which might be profitably
grown for marketing and for agricultural purposes. The plants survive
till frost. Not early.


ROHAN.

Tubers very large, in form much resembling the Jenny Lind,--the
full-developed specimens being long, and the smaller or immature tubers
nearly round; eyes numerous and deep-set; color yellowish-white, with
clouds or patches of pink or rose; flesh greenish-white when cooked,
yellowish, watery, and strong flavored. The plant is strong and
vigorous, and continues its growth till destroyed by frost. The flowers
are generally abortive.

Mr. Hyde describes it as a variety famous in history, but infamous as a
table potato, and fit only for stock. It formerly gave an immense yield,
but now produces only moderate crops; and its cultivation is nearly
abandoned.


SHAW'S EARLY. _M'Int._

An English variety, much employed for forcing, and extensively
cultivated in the vicinity of London for early marketing. It is, for an
early sort, a large, beautiful, oblong, white-skinned potato. Its only
fault is its hollow eyes. It is very productive.


STATE OF MAINE.

This variety, as implied by its name, is of Maine origin, and was
introduced to general notice six or seven years ago. In form, the tubers
are similar to the White Chenango, being long, smooth, and somewhat
flattened; though the smaller and undeveloped bulbs are often nearly
round. Eyes almost even with the surface, and quite numerous; color
white, like the Jackson White. When cooked, the flesh is white, very
dry, mealy, and of good flavor.

It is quite early, but more liable to disease than the Davis Seedling
and some other varieties. In Maine it is grown in great perfection,
nearly equalling the Jackson White and Carter as a table potato. On
light soil, it is only moderately productive; but on strong land, in
high cultivation, yields abundantly.


ST. HELENA.

Laplander.

An old and very productive variety. Plant erect, and of a bushy habit,
about two feet and a half in height; foliage light green; flowers pale
reddish-purple. The tubers are of an oblong form, and remarkably large;
specimens having been produced measuring ten inches in length. Eyes
numerous, but not deeply set; skin white and smooth; flesh white when
cooked, mealy, and of fair quality. It is a very healthy variety, and
not easily affected by disease; but belongs to that class of late field
potatoes, the foliage of which does not in ordinary seasons decay until
injured by frost, and the tubers of which generally require to be kept
some time before they are fit for using to the greatest advantage.


TAYLOR'S FORTY-FOLD. _Law._

Forty-fold.

Plant about one foot and a half high, slender, and spreading in habit;
foliage light green; flowers very rarely produced; tubers oval, much
flattened, and of medium size; skin rough, and of a dull, reddish color.
This variety is very dry and starchy, well flavored, and suffers
comparatively little from disease. It is also very productive, and a
good early sort for the garden; but not well adapted for field culture,
or for cultivation for agricultural purposes.


TOLON.

Plant quite low and dwarf, decaying with the season; flowers
lilac-purple, large and handsome, generally abortive; tubers of medium
size, roundish, of a pink or reddish color; flesh yellow, dry, but not
of so mild a flavor as many of the more recent kinds. Moderately
productive. Introduced.


VERMONT WHITE.

A very fair and good-sized but poor variety, grown to a considerable
extent in the northern and more interior portions of New England. Color
white outside; but the flesh, when cooked, is yellow, soft, not dry, and
strong flavored. It is a strong grower, and very productive, but rots
badly. It commands only a low price in the market, on account of its
very inferior quality; and cannot be recommended for general
cultivation.


VETO, OR ABINGTON BLUE.

Tubers long, resembling in form those of the Long Red, and, like that
variety, often watery at the stem-end after being cooked; color blue or
purplish; flesh white; quality fair as a table potato.

This variety originally was remarkably productive, and at one period was
in very general cultivation; but now is rarely planted, as it is
extremely liable to disease, and rots badly.


WHITE CHENANGO.

Chenango. Mercer, of New York.

An old and familiar variety; at one period almost everywhere known, and
generally acknowledged as the best of all varieties. As a potato for
early planting, whether for family use or for the market, it was a
general favorite; but, within a few years past, it has not only greatly
deteriorated in quality and productiveness, but has been peculiarly
liable to disease and premature decay of the plants. When well grown,
the tubers are of good size, rather long, slightly flattened, and
comparatively smooth; eyes slightly sunk; color white, with blotches of
purple,--before cooking, somewhat purple under the skin; flesh, when
cooked, often stained with pale purple; in its crude state, zoned with
bright purple. Quality good; dry, mealy, and well flavored.

The variety is considerably affected by the soil in which it may be
cultivated; in some localities, being much more colored than in others.
It is now rapidly giving place to new seedling varieties, quite as good
in quality, and more healthy and productive.


WHITE CUPS.

Tubers long and flattened, somewhat irregular; eyes deeply sunk; skin
yellowish; flesh white.

It is a very handsome variety, of Maine origin, but is only moderately
productive. It is also of ordinary quality, rots easily, and will
probably never become popular.


WHITE MOUNTAIN.

Tubers large, long, white, smooth, uniformly fair and perfect. Appears
to be nearly identical with the St. Helena and Laplander. It is very
productive, and a good agricultural variety; but, for table use, can be
considered only of second quality.


WORCESTER SEEDLING.

Dover. Riley.

Tubers of a pinkish-white color, and similar in form to the Jackson
White. Eyes deep-set; flesh white, more so than that of the Davis
Seedling. It keeps well, and is an excellent variety for cultivation for
family use, but less profitable than many others for the market. Stalks
upright; blossoms pinkish, but not abundant.

In quality, this comparatively old and well-known variety is nearly or
quite equal to the Carter; and, besides, is much more productive. As a
garden potato, it deserves general cultivation. Requires the full
season.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE RADISH.

Raphanus sativus.

The Radish is a hardy annual plant, originally from China. The roots
vary greatly in form; some being round or ovoid, some turbinate, and
others fusiform, or long, slender, and tapering. When in flower, the
plant rises from three to four feet in height, with an erect, smooth,
and branching stem. The flowers are quite large, and, in the different
kinds, vary in color from clear white to various shades of purple. The
seed-pods are long, smooth, somewhat vesiculate, and terminate in a
short spur, or beak. The seeds are round, often irregularly flattened or
compressed: those of the smaller or spring and summer varieties being of
a grayish-red color; and those of the winter or larger-rooted sorts, of
a yellowish-red. An ounce contains from three thousand three hundred to
three thousand six hundred seeds, and they retain their vitality five
years.

_Soil, Propagation, and Cultivation._--All the varieties thrive best in
a light, rich, sandy loam; dry for early spring sowings, moister for the
summer.

Like all annuals, the Radish is propagated by seeds, which may be sown
either broadcast or in drills; but the latter method is preferable, as
allowing the roots to be drawn regularly, with less waste. For the
spindle-rooted kinds, mark out the drills half an inch deep, and five or
six inches apart; for the small, turnip-rooted kinds, three-quarters of
an inch deep, and six inches asunder. As the plants advance in growth,
thin them so as to leave the spindle-rooted an inch apart, and the
larger-growing sorts proportionally farther.

"_For raising early Radishes without a Hot-bed._--Sow in the open ground
the last of March or early in April, arch the bed over with hoops or
pliant rods, and cover constantly at night and during cold days with
garden-matting. In moderate days, turn up the covering at the side next
the sun; and, if the weather is very fine and mild, remove it entirely."

_Open Culture._--Sow in spring as soon as the ground can be worked. If
space is limited, radishes may be sown with onions or lettuce. When
grown with the former, they are said to be less affected by the maggot.
For a succession, a small sowing should be made each fortnight until
midsummer, as the early-sown plants are liable to become rank, and unfit
for use, as they increase in size.

Radishes usually suffer from the drought and heat incident to the
summer; and, when grown at this season, are generally fibrous and very
pungent. To secure the requisite shade and moisture, they are sometimes
sown in beds of asparagus, that the branching stems may afford shade for
the young radishes, and render them more crisp and tender. A good
criterion by which to judge of the quality of a Radish is to break it
asunder by bending it at right angles. If the parts divide squarely and
freely, it is fit for use.

_Production and Quantity of Seed._--To raise seed of the spring or
summer Radishes, the best method is to transplant; which should be done
in May, as the roots are then in their greatest perfection. Take them up
in moist weather; select plants with the shortest tops and the smoothest
and best-formed roots; and set them, apart from all other varieties, in
rows two feet and a half distant, inserting each root wholly into the
ground, down to the leaves. With proper watering, they will soon strike,
and shoot up in branching stalks, producing abundance of seeds, ripening
in autumn.

One ounce and a half of seed will sow a bed five feet in width and
twelve feet in length. Ten pounds are required for seeding an acre.

The excellence of a Radish consists in its being succulent, mild, crisp,
and tender; but, as these qualities are secured only by rapid growth,
the plants should be frequently and copiously watered in dry weather.
The varieties are divided into two classes; viz., Spring or Summer, and
Autumn or Winter, Radishes.


SPRING OR SUMMER RADISHES.

These varieties are all comparatively hardy, and may be sown in the open
ground as early in spring as the soil is in good working condition. The
earliest spring Radishes are grown as follows: "In January, February, or
March, make a hot-bed three feet and a half wide, and of a length
proportionate to the supply required. Put upon the surface of the dung
six inches of well-pulverized earth; sow the seeds broadcast, or in
drills five inches apart; and cover half an inch deep with fine mould.
When the plants have come up, admit the air every day in mild or
tolerably good weather by tilting the upper end of the light, or
sometimes the front, one, two, or three inches high, that the Radishes
may not draw up long, pale, and weak. If they have risen very thick,
thin them, while young, to about one inch apart. Be careful to cover the
sashes at night with garden mats, woollen carpeting, or like material.
Water with tepid water, at noon, on sunny days. If the heat of the bed
declines much, apply a moderate lining of warm dung or stable-litter to
the sides, which, by gently renewing the heat, will soon forward the
Radishes for pulling. Remember, as they advance in growth, to give more
copious admissions of air daily, either by lifting the lights in front
several inches, or, in fine, mild days, by drawing the lights mostly
off; but be careful to draw them on early, before the sun has much
declined and the air become cool."


EARLY BLACK.

Noir Hatif. _Vil._

Bulb nearly spherical, slightly elongated or tapering, nearly of the
size and form of the Gray Turnip-rooted; skin dull black, rough, and
wrinkled; flesh white, solid, crisp, and piquant; leaves of the size of
those of the Gray Turnip-rooted. Season intermediate between that of the
last named and the Black Spanish.


EARLY LONG PURPLE.

Rave Violette Hative. _Vil._

A sub-variety of the Long Purple, earlier and of smaller size.


EARLY PURPLE TURNIP-ROOTED.

A few days earlier than the Scarlet Turnip-rooted. Size, form, and
flavor nearly the same.


EARLY SCARLET TURNIP-ROOTED.

Rond Rose Hatif. _Vil._

Bulb spherical, or a little flattened,--often bursting or cracking
longitudinally before attaining its full dimensions; skin deep scarlet;
flesh rose-colored, crisp, mild, and pleasant; neck small; leaves few in
number, and of smaller size than those of the common Scarlet
Turnip-rooted. Season quite early,--two or three days in advance of the
last named.

As a variety for forcing, it is considered one of the best; but the
small size of the leaves renders it inconvenient for bunching, and it is
consequently less cultivated for the market than many other sorts.

Extensively grown in the vicinity of Paris.

EARLY WHITE TURNIP-ROOTED.

Rond Blanc Hatif. _Vil._

Skin and flesh white; form similar to that of the Scarlet Turnip-rooted.
It is, however, of smaller size, and somewhat earlier. An excellent
sort, and much cultivated.


GRAY OLIVE-SHAPED.

Form similar to the Scarlet Olive-shaped. Skin gray; flesh white, crisp,
and well flavored.


GRAY TURNIP-ROOTED.

Gray Summer. Round Brown. _Trans._

The form of this variety may be called round, though it is somewhat
irregular in shape. It grows large, and often becomes hollow. It should,
therefore, be used while young, or when not more than an inch or an inch
and a half in diameter. The outside coat is mottled with greenish-brown,
wrinkled, and often marked with transverse white lines. The flesh is
mild, not so solid as that of many varieties, and of a greenish-white
color. The leaves are similar to those of the Yellow Turnip-rooted,
growing long and upright, with green footstalks. Half early, and a good
variety for summer use.

LONG PURPLE. _Thomp._

Root long, a large portion growing above ground; skin deep purple; flesh
white, and of good flavor.

The seed-leaves, which are quite large, are used as a small salad. The
variety is early, and good for forcing. When the green tops are required
for salading, the seeds should be sown in drills, as mustard or cress.

LONG SALMON. _Trans._

Long Scarlet Salmon.

This variety has been considered synonymous with the Long Scarlet; but
it is really a distinct sort. The neck of the root rises about an inch
above the ground, like that of the Scarlet, but it is of a paler red;
and this color gradually becomes lighter towards the middle, where it is
a pale-pink or salmon color. From the middle, the color grows paler
downwards, and the extremity of the root is almost white. In shape and
size, this Radish differs nothing from the Scarlet; nor does it appear
to be earlier, or to possess any qualities superior to the Scarlet
Radish, the beauty of which, when well grown, exceeds that of any other
Long Radish.


LONG SCARLET. _Thomp._

Early Scarlet Short-top. Early Frame.

[Illustration: Long Scarlet Radish.]

Root long, a considerable portion growing above the surface of the
ground,--outside, of a beautiful, deep-pink color, becoming paler
towards the lower extremity; flesh white, transparent, crisp, and of
good flavor, having less pungency than that of the Scarlet Turnip;
leaves small, but larger than those of the last-named variety.

When of suitable size for use, the root measures seven or eight inches
in length, and five-eighths or three-fourths of an inch in diameter at
its largest part.

The Long Scarlet Radish, with its sub-varieties, is more generally
cultivated for market in the Eastern, Middle, and Western States, than
any other, or perhaps even more than all other sorts. It is very
extensively grown about London, and is everywhere prized, not only for
its fine qualities, but for its rich, bright color. It is also one of
the hardiest of the Radishes; and is raised readily in any common frame,
if planted as early as February.


OLIVE-SHAPED SCARLET.

Oblong Rose-colored. _Thomp._

[Illustration: Olive Scarlet Radish.]

Bulb an inch and a half deep, three-fourths of an inch in diameter,
oblong, somewhat in the form of an olive, terminating in a very slim
tap-root; skin fine scarlet; neck small; leaves not very numerous, and
of small size; flesh rose-colored, tender, and excellent. Early, and
well adapted for forcing and for the general crop.


PURPLE TURNIP-ROOTED.

This is a variety of the Scarlet Turnip-rooted; the size, form, color,
and quality being nearly the same. The skin is purple. It is considered
a few days earlier than the last named.


SCARLET TURNIP-ROOTED.

Crimson Turnip-rooted.

[Illustration: Scarlet Turnip-Rooted.]

Bulb spherical; when in its greatest perfection, measuring about an inch
in diameter; skin fine, deep scarlet; flesh white, sometimes stained
with red; leaves rather large and numerous.

The variety is early, and deserves more general cultivation, not only on
account of its rich color, but for the crisp and tender properties of
its flesh. It is much esteemed in England, and is grown extensively for
the London market.


SMALL, EARLY, YELLOW TURNIP-ROOTED.

Bulb of the size and form of the Scarlet Turnip-rooted; skin smooth,
yellow; flesh white, fine-grained, crisp, and rather pungent; foliage
similar to that of the scarlet variety; season ten or fifteen days
later.


WHITE, CROOKED.

Tortillee Du Mans. _Vil._

Root very long; when suitable for use, measuring twelve inches and
upwards in length, and an inch in diameter, nearly cylindrical, often
irregular, and sometimes assuming a spiral or cork-screw form; skin
white and smooth; flesh white, not so firm as that of most varieties,
and considerably pungent; leaves very large.


WHITE TURNIP-ROOTED.

Bulb of the form and size of the Scarlet Turnip-rooted; skin white;
flesh white and semi-transparent. It possesses less piquancy than the
Scarlet, but is some days later.

YELLOW TURNIP-ROOTED. _Trans._

Yellow Summer.

Bulb nearly spherical, but tapering slightly towards the tap-root, which
is very slender. It grows large,--to full four inches in diameter, when
old; but should be eaten young, when about an inch in diameter. The
flesh is mild, crisp, solid, and quite white. The skin is of a
yellowish-brown color; and the leaves grow long and upright, with green
footstalks.

Half early, and well adapted for summer cultivation.


LONG WHITE.

White Italian. Naples. White Transparent.

Root long and slender, nearly of the size and form of the Long Scarlet;
skin white,--when exposed to the light, tinged with green; flesh white,
crisp, and mild.

It is deserving of cultivation, not only on account of its excellent
qualities, but as forming an agreeable contrast at table when served
with the red varieties.


LONG WHITE PURPLE-TOP.

A sub-variety of the Long White; the portion of the root exposed to the
light being tinged with purple. In size and form, it differs little from
the Long Scarlet.

NEW LONDON PARTICULAR.

Wood's Frame.

This is but a sub-variety of the Long Scarlet; the difference between
the sorts being immaterial. The color of the New London Particular is
more brilliant, and extends farther down the root. It is also said to be
somewhat earlier.


OBLONG BROWN. _Trans._

The Oblong Brown Radish has a pear-shaped bulb, with an elongated
tap-root. It does not grow particularly large; and, being hardier than
most varieties, is well adapted for use late in the season. The outside
is rough and brown, marked with white circles; the flesh is piquant,
firm, hard, and white; the leaves are dark green, and rather spread over
the ground; the footstalks are stained with purple.


AUTUMN AND WINTER RADISHES.

These varieties may be sown from the 20th of July to the 10th of August;
the soil being previously made rich, light, and friable. Thin out the
young plants from four to six inches apart; and, in the absence of rain,
water freely. During September and October, the table may be supplied
directly from the garden. For winter use, the roots should be harvested
before freezing weather, and packed in earth or sand, out of danger from
frost. Before being used, they should be immersed for a short time in
cold water.

_To raise Seed._--Seeds of the Winter Radishes are raised by allowing
the plants to remain where they were sown. As fast as they ripen, cut
the stems; or gather the principal branches, and spread them in an open,
airy situation, towards the sun, that the pods, which are quite tough in
their texture, may become so dry and brittle as to break readily, and
give out their seeds freely.

_Use._--All the kinds are used as salad, and are served in all the forms
of the spring and summer radishes.

_Varieties._--


BLACK SPANISH. _Trans._

Bulb ovoid, or rather regularly pear-shaped, with a long tap-root. At
first the root is slender, and somewhat cylindrical in form: but it
swells as it advances in age, and finally attains a large size;
measuring eight or ten inches in length, and three or four inches in
diameter. The outside is rough, and nearly black; the flesh is pungent,
firm, solid, and white; the leaves are long, and inclined to grow
horizontally; the leaf-stems are purple. It is one of the latest, as
well as one of the hardiest, of the radishes; and is considered an
excellent sort for winter use.


LARGE PURPLE WINTER. _Trans._

Purple Spanish.

The Large Purple Winter Radish is a beautiful variety, derived, without
doubt, from the Black Spanish; and may therefore be properly called the
Purple Spanish. In shape and character, it much resembles the Black
Spanish: but the outside, when cleaned, is of a beautiful purple, though
it appears black when first drawn from the earth; and the coat, when cut
through, shows the purple very finely. The footstalks of the leaves
have a much deeper tinge of purple than those of the other kinds.


LONG BLACK WINTER.

A sub-variety of the Black Spanish. Root long and tapering. With the
exception of its smaller size, much resembling a Long Orange Carrot.


LONG-LEAVED WHITE CHINESE. _Vil._

Root fusiform, sometimes inversely turbinate, about five inches in
length, and an inch in diameter; skin white, and of fine texture; flesh
fine-grained, crisp, and though somewhat pungent, yet milder flavored
than that of the Black Spanish; leaves large, differing from most other
varieties in not being lobed, or in being nearly entire on the borders.
Its season is nearly the same as that of the Rose-colored Chinese. The
plants produce but few seeds.


PURPLE CHINESE.

A sub-variety of the Scarlet, with little variation except in color; the
size, quality, and manner of growth, being nearly the same.


ROSE-COLORED CHINESE. _Vil._

Scarlet Chinese Winter.

Bulb rather elongated, somewhat cylindrical, contracted abruptly to a
long, slender tap-root; size full medium,--average specimens measuring
about five inches in length, and two inches in diameter at the broadest
part; skin comparatively fine, and of a bright rose-color; flesh firm,
and rather piquant; leaves large,--the leaf-stems washed with rose-red.
Season between that of the Gray Summer and that of the Black Spanish.


WINTER WHITE SPANISH.

Autumn White. Blanc d'Augsbourg. _Vil._

Root somewhat fusiform, retaining its diameter for two-thirds the
length, sharply conical at the base, and, when well grown, measuring
seven or eight inches in length by nearly three inches in its fullest
diameter; skin white, slightly wrinkled, sometimes tinged with purple
where exposed to the sun; flesh white, solid, and pungent, though milder
than that of the Black Spanish. It succeeds best, and is of the best
quality, when grown in light sandy soil. Season intermediate.

       *       *       *       *       *

RAMPION.

Campanula rapunculus.

The Rampion is a biennial plant, indigenous to the south of Europe, and
occasionally found in a wild state in England. The roots are white,
fusiform, fleshy, and, in common with the other parts of the plant,
abound in a milky juice; the lower or root leaves are oval, lanceolate,
and waved on the borders; the upper leaves are long, narrow, and
pointed. Stem eighteen inches or two feet in height, branching; flowers
blue, sometimes white, disposed in small, loose clusters about the top
of the plant, on the ends of the branches. The seeds are oval, brownish,
and exceedingly small; upwards of nine hundred thousand being contained
in an ounce. They retain their germinative property five years.

The plant flowers in July of the second year, and the seeds ripen in
autumn. There is but one variety.

_Soil and Cultivation._--"Rampion prefers a rich, free, and rather light
soil, in a shady situation. It is raised from seed, which should be sown
where the plants are to remain, as they do not bear transplanting well.
The sowing may be made in April, May, or the beginning of June: but
sometimes plants from very early sowings are liable to run up to seed;
and, when this is the case, the roots become tough, and unfit for use.
The ground should be well dug, and raked as fine as possible. The seed
may then be sown either broadcast or in drills, six inches apart, and
about one-fourth of an inch deep. As the seeds are very small, it is
advisable to mix them with fifteen or twenty times their bulk of fine
sand, in order to secure their even distribution in the drills, and to
prevent the plants from coming up too closely. The seed should only be
very slightly covered with fine earth; and the seed-bed ought to be
frequently watered with a fine-rosed watering-pot till the plants come
up, which will be in about a fortnight.

"When the young plants are about one inch high, they should be thinned
out to four inches apart. After this, no further care is necessary than
to water frequently, and to keep the ground free of weeds."--_Thomp._

_Taking the Crop._--The roots will be fit for use from October till
April. They may be taken from the ground for immediate use; or a
quantity may be taken up in autumn, before the closing-up of the
ground, and packed in sand, for use during the winter.

_To raise Seed._--Leave or transplant some of the best yearling plants,
and they will produce an abundance of seed in autumn.

_Use._--The roots have a pleasant, nut-like flavor; and are generally
eaten in their crude state as a salad. "The leaves, as well as the
roots, are occasionally used in winter salads."

       *       *       *       *       *

RUTA-BAGA, OR SWEDE TURNIP.

Russian Turnip. French Turnip. Brassica campestris Ruta-baga. _De Cand._

The Ruta-baga, or Swede Turnip, is supposed by De Candolle to be
analogous to the Kohl Rabi; the root being developed into a large,
fleshy bulb, instead of the stem. In its natural state, the root is
small and slender; and the stem smooth and branching,--not much
exceeding two feet in height.

The bulbs, or roots, are fully developed during the first year. The
plant flowers, and produces its seeds, the second year, and then
perishes. Although considered hardy,--not being affected by even severe
frosts,--none of the varieties will withstand the winters of the
Northern or Middle States in the open ground. The crop should therefore
be harvested in October or November, and stored for the winter, out of
danger from freezing. Most of the sorts now cultivated retain their
freshness and solidity till spring, and some even into the summer;
requiring no particular care in their preservation, other than that
usually given to the carrot or the potato.

_Soil and Cultivation._--All the varieties succeed best in a deep,
well-enriched, mellow soil; which, previous to planting, should be very
deeply ploughed, and thoroughly pulverized by harrowing or otherwise.
Some practise ridging, and others sow in simple drills. The ridges are
usually formed by turning two furrows against each other; and, being
thus made, are about two feet apart. If sown in simple drills, the
surface should be raked smooth, and the drills made from sixteen to
eighteen inches apart; the distance to be regulated by the strength of
the soil.

_Seed and Sowing._--About one pound of seed is usually allowed to an
acre. Where the rows are comparatively close, rather more than this
quantity will be required; while three-fourths of a pound will be amply
sufficient, if sown on ridges, or where the drills are eighteen inches
apart. The sowing may be made from the middle of May to the 25th of
July; the latter time being considered sufficiently early for growing
for the table, and by some even for stock. Early sowings will
unquestionably give the greatest product; while the later-grown bulbs,
though of smaller dimensions, will prove of quite as good quality for
the table.

_To raise Seeds._--Select the smoothest and most symmetrical bulbs, and
transplant them in April, two feet asunder, sinking the crowns to a
level with the surface of the ground.

The seeds are very similar to those of the common garden and field
turnip, and will keep from five to eight years.

_Varieties._--The varieties are as follow:--


ASHCROFT.

Bulb of medium size, ovoid, very smooth and symmetrical; neck very
short, or wanting. Above ground, the skin is purple; below the surface,
yellow. Flesh yellow, very solid, fine-grained, and of excellent flavor.
It forms its bulb quickly and regularly; keeps in fresh and sound
condition until May or June; and well deserves cultivation, either for
agricultural purposes or for the table.


COMMON PURPLE-TOP YELLOW.

[Illustration: Common Purple-Top Yellow.]

An old and long-cultivated sort, from which, in connection with the
Green-top, have originated most of the more recent and improved
yellow-fleshed varieties. Form regularly egg-shaped, smooth, but usually
sending out a few small, straggling roots at its base, near the
tap-root; neck short; size rather large,--usually measuring six or seven
inches in depth, and four or five inches in its largest diameter; skin
purple above ground,--below the surface, yellow; flesh yellow, of close,
firm texture, and of good quality. It is very hardy; forms its bulb
promptly and uniformly; and in rich, deep soils, yields abundantly. For
thin and light soils, some of the other varieties should be selected.


EARLY STUBBLE.

Bulb round, smooth, and regular. The skin, where exposed to light and
air, is of a brownish-green; but, where covered by the soil, yellow. The
flesh is firm, and well flavored.

The Early Stubble is recommended as forming its bulbs quickly and
uniformly, and as being well adapted for late sowing. It yields
abundantly; keeps well; is a good sort for the table; and, in some
localities, is preferred to the Common Yellow for cultivation for farm
purposes.


GREEN-TOP YELLOW.

In form and foliage, this variety resembles the Common Purple-top; but
usually attains a larger size when grown in similar situations. Skin,
above the surface of the soil, green; below ground, yellow. The flesh is
solid, sweet, and well flavored, but inferior to that of the Purple-top.
It keeps well, is of fair quality for the table, and, on account of its
great productiveness, one of the best of all varieties for growing for
feeding stock.


GREEN-TOP WHITE.

Bulb turbinate, smooth, and symmetrical. The skin above ground is of a
fine, clear, pea-green; often browned or mellowed where exposed to the
direct influence of the sun: below the surface of the ground, it is
uniformly white. The flesh is also white, comparatively solid, very
sweet, and of fair quality for table use. It differs from the Purple-top
White, not only in color, but in size and quality; the bulbs being
larger, and the flesh not quite so firm or well flavored.

The Green-top White is productive; continues its growth till the season
has far advanced; is little affected by severe weather; and, when sown
in good soil, will yield an agricultural crop of twenty-five or thirty
tons to an acre.


LAING'S IMPROVED PURPLE-TOP. _Law. and Gen. Farmer._

This variety differs from most, if not all, of the varieties of Swedish
turnips, in having entire cabbage-like leaves, which, by their
horizontal growth, often nearly cover the surface of the ground. In
form, hardiness, and quality, it is fully equal to any of the other
sorts. Growing late in the autumn, it is not well adapted to a climate
where the winter commences early. It has little or no tendency to run to
seed in the fall; and even in the spring, when set out for seed, it is a
fortnight later in commencing this function than other varieties of
Ruta-bagas. It requires good land, in high condition; and, under such
circumstances, will yield abundantly, and is worthy of cultivation. The
bulb, when well grown, has an almost spherical form; a fine, smooth
skin, purple above ground, yellow below, with yellow, solid, and
well-flavored flesh.


PURPLE-TOP WHITE.

Bulb oblong, tapering toward the lower extremity, five or six inches in
diameter, seven or eight inches in depth, and less smooth and regular
than many of the yellow-fleshed varieties. The skin is of a clear rich
purple, where it comes to air and light, but, below the ground, pure
white; flesh white, very solid and fine-grained, sugary, and well
flavored.

The variety is hardy, productive, keeps remarkably well, is good for
table use, and may be profitably grown for agricultural purposes.
Upwards of twenty-eight tons, or nine hundred and sixty bushels, have
been raised from an acre.


RIVER'S.

Root regularly turbinate, or fusiform, of full medium size, smooth, and
with few small or fibrous roots; neck two inches long; skin, above
ground, green, washed with purplish-red where most exposed to the
sun,--below ground, yellow; flesh yellow, firm, sweet, and well
flavored. Esteemed one of the best, either for stock or the table. Keeps
fresh till May or June.


SKIRVING'S PURPLE-TOP.

Skirving's Improved Purple-top. Skirving's Liverpool. Southold Turnip,
of some localities.

Bulb ovoid, or regularly turbinate, and rather deeper in proportion to
its diameter than the common Purple-top Yellow; surface remarkably
smooth and even, with few fibrous roots, and seldom deformed by larger
accidental roots, although, in unfavorable soils or seasons, a few
coarse roots are put forth in the vicinity of the tap-root; size full
medium,--five to seven inches in length, and four or five inches in
diameter. Sometimes, when sown early in good soil, and harvested late,
the average will considerably exceed these dimensions. Neck short, but,
when grown in poor soil, comparatively long; skin, above ground, fine,
deep purple,--below ground, yellow,--the colors often richly blending
together at the surface; flesh yellow, of solid texture, sweet, and well
flavored.

This variety was originated by Mr. William Skirving, of Liverpool, Eng.
In this country it has been widely disseminated, and is now more
generally cultivated for table use and for stock than any other of the
Swede varieties. The plants seldom fail to form good-sized bulbs. It is
a good keeper; is of more than average quality for the table; and long
experience has proved it one of the best sorts for cultivation on land
that is naturally shallow and in poor condition. On soils in a high
state of cultivation, upwards of nine hundred bushels have been obtained
from an acre.

In sowing, allow twenty inches between the rows, and thin to ten or
twelve inches in the rows.


SWEET GERMAN.

[Illustration: Sweet German.]

Bulb four or five inches in diameter, six or seven inches in depth,
turbinate, sometimes nearly fusiform. In good soil and favorable
seasons, it is comparatively smooth and regular; but, under opposite
conditions, often branched and uneven. Neck two or three inches in
length; skin greenish-brown above ground, white beneath; flesh pure
white, of extraordinary solidity, very sweet, mild, and well flavored.

It retains its solidity and freshness till spring, and often at
midsummer has no appearance of sponginess or decay. As a table variety,
it must be classed as one of the best, and is recommended for general
cultivation.


WHITE FRENCH.

Long White French.

[Illustration: White French.]

The roots of this variety are produced entirely within the earth. They
are invariably fusiform; and, if well grown, measure four or five inches
in diameter, and from eight to ten inches in length. Foliage not
abundant, spreading; skin white; flesh white, solid, mild, sweet, and
delicate. It is not so productive as some other varieties, and is
therefore not so well adapted to field culture; but for table use it is
surpassed by few, if any, of its class.

A rough-leaved, fusiform-rooted variety of the common garden-turnip: is
known by the name of "White French" in many localities; but, according
to the most reliable authority, that name has not only long been used in
connection with, but properly belongs to, the white turnip above
described.

       *       *       *       *       *

SALSIFY, OR OYSTER-PLANT.

Leek-leaved Salsify. Vegetable Oyster. Purple Goat's Beard. Tragopogon
porrifolius.

The Salsify is a hardy biennial plant, and is principally cultivated for
its roots, the flavor of which resembles that of the oyster; whence the
popular name.

The leaves are long and grass-like, or leek-like; the roots are long and
tapering, white within and without, and, when grown in good soil,
measure twelve or fourteen inches in length, and rather more than an
inch in diameter at the crown.

_Soil and Cultivation._--The Oyster-plant succeeds best in a light,
well-enriched, mellow soil; which, previous to sowing the seeds, should
be stirred to the depth of twelve or fifteen inches. The seeds should be
sown annually, in the same manner and at the same time as the seeds of
the carrot and parsnip. Make the drills fourteen inches apart; cover the
seeds an inch and a half in depth; and thin, while the plants are young,
to four or five inches asunder.

Early sowings succeed best; as the seeds, which are generally more or
less imperfect, vegetate much better when the earth is moist than when
dry and parched, as it is liable to become when the season is more
advanced. Cultivate in the usual manner during the summer; and, by the
last of September or beginning of October, the roots will have attained
their full growth, and be ready for use. The plants will sustain no
injury during the winter, though left entirely unprotected in the open
ground; and the table may be supplied directly from the garden, whenever
the frost will admit of their removal. A portion of the crop should,
however, be taken up in autumn, and stored in the cellar, like other
roots; or, which is perhaps preferable, packed in earth or sand. Roots
remaining in the ground may be drawn for use till April, or until the
plants have begun to send up their stalks for flowering.

_Seeds,--production and quantity._--For the production of seeds, allow a
few plants to remain during the winter in the open ground where they
were sown. They will blossom in June and July. When fully developed, the
stem is about three feet in height, cylindrical, and branching. The
flowers are large, of a very rich violet-purple, and expand only by day
and in comparatively sunny weather. As the flowers are put forth in
gradual succession, so the heads of seeds are ripened at intervals, and
should be cut as they assume a brownish color.

The seeds are brownish,--lighter or darker as they are less or more
perfectly matured,--long and slender, furrowed and rough on the sides,
tapering to a long, smooth point at the top, often somewhat bent or
curved, and measure about five-eighths of an inch in length. They will
keep four years.

An ounce contains three thousand two hundred seeds, and will sow a row
eighty feet in length. Some cultivators put this amount of seed into a
drill of sixty feet; but if the seed is of average quality, and the
season ordinarily favorable, one ounce of seed will produce an abundance
of plants for eighty or a hundred feet.

_Use._--The roots are prepared in various forms; but, when simply boiled
in the manner of beets and carrots, the flavor is sweet and delicate.
The young flower-stalks, if cut in the spring of the second year and
dressed like asparagus, resemble it in taste, and make an excellent
dish.

The roots are sometimes thinly sliced, and, with the addition of
vinegar, salt, and pepper, served as a salad. They are also recommended
as being remedial or alleviating in cases of consumptive tendency.

There is but one species or variety now cultivated.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCOLYMUS.

Spanish Scolymus. Spanish Oyster-plant. Scolymus Hispanicus.


In its natural state, this is a perennial plant; but, when cultivated,
it is generally treated as an annual or as a biennial. The roots are
nearly white, fleshy, long, and tapering in their general form, and, if
well grown, measure twelve or fifteen inches in length, and an inch in
diameter at the crown. When cut or bruised, or where the fibrous roots
are broken or rubbed off, there exudes a thick, somewhat viscous fluid,
nearly flavorless, and of a milk-white color. The leaf is large, often
measuring a foot or more in length, and three inches in diameter,
somewhat variegated with green and white, deeply lobed; the lobes or
divisions toothed, and the teeth terminating in sharp spines, in the
manner of the leaves of many species of thistles. When in flower, the
plant is about three feet in height. The flowers, which are put forth
singly, are of an orange-yellow, and measure an inch and a half in
diameter. The seeds are flat, and very thin, membranous on the borders,
of a yellowish color, and retain their vitality three years. An ounce
contains nearly four thousand seeds.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Any good garden loam is adapted to the growth
of the Scolymus. It should be well and deeply stirred as for other
deep-growing root crops. The seeds should be sown from the middle of
April to the 10th of May, in drills an inch deep, and fourteen inches
asunder. Thin the young plants to five inches distant in the rows; and,
during the summer, treat the growing crop as parsnips or carrots.

_Use._--It is cultivated exclusively for its roots, which are usually
taken up in September or October, and served at table, and preserved
during the winter, in the same manner as the Salsify, or Oyster-plant.
They have a pleasant, delicate flavor; and are considered to be not only
healthful, but remarkably nutritious.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCORZONERA.

Black Oyster-plant. Black Salsify. Scorzonera Hispanica.


This is a hardy perennial plant, introduced from the south of Europe,
where it is indigenous. The root is tapering, and comparatively
slender,--when well developed, measuring about a foot in length, and an
inch in diameter near the crown, or at the broadest part; skin
grayish-black, coarse, somewhat reticulated, resembling the roots of
some species of trees; flesh white; leaves long, ovate, broadest near
the end, and tapering sharply to the stem. They are also more or less
distinctly ribbed, and have a few remote teeth, or serratures, at the
extremities. When in flower, the plant measures about four feet in
height; the stalk being nearly cylindrical, slightly grooved or
furrowed, smooth, and branched towards the top. The flowers are large,
terminal, yellow; the seeds are whitish, longer than broad, taper
towards the top, and retain their vitality two years. An ounce contains
about two thousand five hundred seeds.

_Soil and Culture._--Though a perennial, it is generally cultivated as
an annual or biennial, in the manner of the carrot or parsnip. Thompson
says, "It succeeds best in a light, deep, free soil and an open
situation. It is raised from seed, which may be sown in drills one foot
apart, covering with soil to the depth of half an inch. As it is apt to
run to seed the same year in which it is sown, and consequently to
become tough and woody," the planting should not be made too early,
particularly in the warmer sections of the country. A second sowing may
be made about four weeks from the first, "as a precautionary measure, in
case the plants of the first sowing should run. The young plants, when
three or four inches high, should be thinned out to eight inches asunder
in the rows. Towards the middle or last of September, the roots will
have attained sufficient size to be drawn for immediate use: others will
come in for use in October and November. In the latter month, they will
be in perfection; and, before the closing-up of the ground, a quantity
may be taken up, and stored in sand for the winter. When the ground is
open, the roots may be drawn from time to time, as required for
immediate use. About the middle of April, the roots remaining in the
ground will begin to run to flower; after which they soon become hard,
woody, and unfit for the table. Before this takes place, however, they
may be taken up, and stored in sand, where they may be kept for use till
May or June."

_To raise Seed._--Allow a few well-grown plants to remain in the ground
during winter; or select a few good-sized roots from those harvested in
autumn, and reset them in April, about eighteen inches apart, covering
them to the crowns. The seed will ripen at the close of the summer or
early in autumn. Seed saved from plants of the growth of two seasons is
considered best; that produced from yearling plants being greatly
inferior.

_Use._--It is cultivated exclusively for its roots; no other portion of
the plant being employed in domestic economy. The flesh of these is
white, tender, sugary, and well flavored. They are boiled in the manner
of the parsnip, and served plain at the table; or they may be cooked in
all the forms of salsify or scolymus. Before cooking, the outer, coarse
rind should be scraped off, and the roots soaked for a few hours in cold
water for the purpose of extracting their bitter flavor.

       *       *       *       *       *

SKIRRET.

Crummock, of the Scotch. Sium sisarum.


Skirret is a hardy perennial, and is cultivated for its roots, which are
produced in groups, or bunches, joined together at the crown or neck of
the plant. They are oblong, fleshy, of a russet-brown color without,
white within, very sugary, and, when well grown, measure six or eight
inches in length, and nearly an inch in diameter.

The leaves of the first year are pinnate, with seven or nine oblong,
finely toothed leaflets. When fully developed, the plant measures from
three to five feet in height; the stem being marked with fine, parallel,
longitudinal grooves, or lines. The flowers are small, white, and are
produced in umbels at the extremities of the branches. The seeds, eight
thousand of which are contained in an ounce, are oblong, of a
greenish-gray color, and closely resemble those of the common caraway.
They will keep but two years; and, even when newly grown, sometimes
remain in the ground four or five weeks before vegetating.

_Soil and Culture._--Skirret succeeds best in light, mellow soil, and is
propagated by suckers, or seeds. The best method is to sow the seeds
annually, as, when grown from slips, or suckers, the roots are liable to
be dry and woody; the seeds, on the contrary, producing roots more
tender, and in greater perfection.

Sow the seeds in April, in drills one foot apart, and about an inch in
depth; thin to five or six inches; and, in September, some of the roots
will be sufficiently grown for use. Those required for winter should be
drawn before the closing-up of the ground, and packed in sand.

_To propagate by Slips, or Suckers._--In the spring, remove the required
number of young shoots, or sprouts, from the side of the roots that have
remained in the ground during winter, not taking any portion of the old
root in connection with the slips; and set them in rows ten inches
asunder, and six inches apart in the rows. They will soon strike, and
produce roots of suitable size for use in August or September.

_To raise Seeds._--The plants that have remained in the ground during
the winter, if not disturbed, will send up stalks as before described,
and ripen their seeds at the close of the summer. Two or three plants
will yield all the seeds ordinarily required for a single garden.

_Use._--The roots were formerly much esteemed, but are now neglected for
those greatly inferior. When cooked and served as salsify or scorzonera,
they are the whitest and sweetest of esculent roots, and afford a
considerable portion of nourishment.

There are no varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

SWEET POTATO.

Spanish Potato. Carolina Potato. Convolvulus batatus. Ipomoea batatas.


The Sweet Potato is indigenous to both the East and West Indies. Where
its growth is natural, the plant is perennial; but, in cultivation, it
is always treated as an annual. The stem is running or climbing, round
and slender; the leaves are heart-shaped and smooth, with irregular,
angular lobes; the flowers, which are produced in small groups of three
or four, are large, bell-shaped, and of a violet or purple color; the
seeds are black, triangular, and retain their vitality two or three
years,--twenty-three hundred are contained in an ounce.

The plants rarely blossom in the Northern or Middle States, and the
perfect ripening of the seeds is of still more rare occurrence. The
latter are, however, never employed in ordinary culture; and are sown
only for the production of new varieties, as is sometimes practised with
the common potato.

_Soil, Planting, and Cultivation._--In warm climates, the Sweet Potato
is cultivated in much the same manner as the common potato is treated at
the North. It succeeds best in light, warm, mellow soil, which should be
deeply stirred and well enriched. The slips, or sprouts, may be set on
ridges four feet apart, and fifteen inches from plant to plant; or in
hills four or five feet apart in each direction, three plants being
allowed to a hill. During the summer, give the vines ordinary culture;
and late in September, or early in October, the tubers will have
attained their growth, and be ready for harvesting. The slips, or
sprouts, are generally obtained by setting the tubers in a hot-bed in
March or April, and breaking off or separating the sprouts from the
tubers as fast as they reach four or five inches in height or attain a
suitable size for transplanting. In favorable seasons, the plucking may
be repeated three or four times. In setting out the slips, the lower
part should be sunk from one-third to one-half the entire length; and,
if very dry weather occurs, water should be moderately applied.

_Keeping._--The essentials for the preservation of Sweet Potatoes are
dryness and a warm and even temperature. Where these conditions are not
supplied, the tubers speedily decay. By packing in dry sand, and storing
in a warm, dry room, they are sometimes preserved in the Northern States
until the time of starting the plants in spring.

_Varieties._--Though numerous other varieties, less marked and
distinctive, are described by different authors, and are catalogued by
gardeners and seedsmen, the principal are as follow:--


KENTUCKY EARLY RED. _Murray._

Red Nansemond.

Tubers red, or purplish-red, of medium size; flesh yellow, dry, sweet,
and of good quality. A very prolific, hardy variety; recommended as the
best red Sweet Potato for Northern culture.


LARGE WHITE.

Patate-blanche of the French.

Tubers from six to ten inches in length,--thickest at the middle, where
they measure from two to nearly three inches in diameter; weight from
six ounces to a pound and upwards; skin dusky white; flesh nearly white,
but with a shade of yellow. Not so fine-grained or so sweet as the
Yellow or Purple, but quite farinaceous and well flavored.

It requires a long season in order to its full development; but, being
remarkably hardy, it will succeed well in any of the Middle States, and
attain a fair size in the warmer sections of New England.


NANSEMOND.

Yellow Nansemond.

A variety said to have originated in Nansemond County, Va.; whence the
name. Tubers large, yellow, swollen at the middle, and tapering to the
ends; flesh yellow, dry, unctuous, sweet, and well flavored.

It is early fit for the table; matures in short seasons; is very
productive; succeeds well in almost any tillable soil; and, having been
long acclimated, is one of the best sorts for cultivation at the
North,--very good crops having been obtained in Maine and the Canadas.



PURPLE-SKINNED.

New-Orleans Purple. Patate violette. _Vil._

Tubers swollen at the middle, and tapering in each direction to a
point,--measuring, when well grown, from seven to nine inches in length,
and from two to three inches in diameter; skin smooth, reddish-purple;
flesh fine-grained, sugary, and of excellent quality. The plants attain
a remarkable length, and the tubers are rarely united about the neck as
in most other varieties.

The Purple-skinned is early and productive, but keeps badly. It would
probably succeed much better in cool climates than either the White or
the Yellow. It is much grown in the vicinity of Paris.


RED-SKINNED, OR AMERICAN RED.

Tubers fusiform, long, and comparatively slender,--the length often
exceeding twelve inches, and the diameter rarely above two inches;
weight from three to ten ounces; skin purplish-red, smooth and shining;
flesh yellow, very fine-grained, unctuous, sugary, and farinaceous;
plant long and slender.

This variety is early, quite hardy, very productive, and excellent, but
does not keep so well as the yellow or white sorts. It is well adapted
for cultivation in the cooler sections of the United States; where, in
favorable seasons, the crop has proved as certain, and the yield nearly
as abundant, as that of the common potato.


ROSE-COLORED. _Vil._

Tubers somewhat ovoid, or egg-shaped, often grooved, or furrowed, and of
extraordinary size. Well-grown specimens will measure eight or nine
inches in length, and four inches or more in diameter; frequently
weighing two and a half, and sometimes greatly exceeding three pounds.
Skin rose-colored, shaded or variegated with yellow; flesh sweet, of a
pleasant, nut-like flavor, but less soft or unctuous than that of the
other varieties.

It is hardy, remarkably productive, and, its excellent keeping
properties considered, one of the best sorts for cultivation.


YELLOW-SKINNED.

Yellow Carolina.

Tubers from six to ten inches in length, thickest at the middle, where
they measure from two to three inches in diameter, and pointed at the
extremities; weight varying from four to twelve ounces and upwards; skin
smooth, yellow; flesh yellow, fine-grained, unctuous, and remarkably
sugary,--surpassing, in this last respect, nearly all other varieties.
Not so early as the Red-skinned or the Purple.

When grown in the Southern States, it yields well; perfectly matures its
crop; and, in color and flavor, the tubers will accord with the
description above given. When grown in the Middle States, or in the
warmer parts of New England, it decreases in size; the tubers become
longer and more slender; the color, externally and internally, becomes
much paler, or nearly white; and the flesh, to a great extent, loses
the fine, dry, and sugary qualities which it possesses when grown in
warm climates.

       *       *       *       *       *

TUBEROUS-ROOTED CHICKLING VETCH.

Tuberous-rooted Pea. Eatable-rooted Pea. Lathyrus tuberosus.

Perennial; stem about six feet high,--climbing, slender, four-sided,
smooth, and of a clear green color; flowers rather large, in bunches, of
a fine carmine rose-color, and somewhat fragrant; pod smooth; seeds
rather large, oblong, a little angular, of a brown color, spotted with
black; root spreading, furnished with numerous blackish, irregularly
shaped tubers, which are generally from an ounce to three ounces in
weight.

The roots are very farinaceous, and, when cooked, are highly esteemed.
In taste, they somewhat resemble roasted chestnuts. Where the roots are
uninjured by the winter, the plant increases rapidly, and is liable to
become a troublesome inmate of the garden.

       *       *       *       *       *

TUBEROUS-ROOTED TROPAEOLUM. _Thomp._

Ysano. Tropaeolum tuberosum.

This is a perennial plant from Peru, and deserves mention as a recently
introduced esculent. It produces an abundance of handsome yellow and red
tubers, about the size of small pears; the taste of which is not,
however, very agreeable. On this account, a particular mode of treatment
has been adopted in Bolivia, where, according to M. Decaisne, they are
treated in the following manner:--

The tubers designated "Ysano," at La Paz, require to be prepared before
they are edible. Indeed, when prepared like potatoes, and immediately
after being taken up, their taste is very disagreeable. But a mode of
making them palatable was discovered in Bolivia; and the Ysano has there
become, if not a common vegetable, at least one which is quite edible.
The means of making them so consists in freezing them after they have
been cooked, and they are eaten when frozen. In this state it is said
that they constitute an agreeable dish, and that scarcely a day passes
at La Paz without two lines of dealers being engaged in selling the
Ysano, which they protect from the action of the sun by enveloping it in
a woollen cloth, and straw. Large quantities are eaten sopped in
treacle, and taken as refreshment during the heat of the day.

_Propagation and Culture._--The plant may be propagated by pieces of the
tubers, in the same manner as potatoes; an eye being preserved on each
piece. The sets should be planted in April or May, according to the
season, about four feet apart, in light, rich soil. The stems may be
allowed to trail along the ground, or pea-sticks may be placed for their
support. In dry soils and seasons, the former method should be adopted;
in those which are moist, the latter. The tubers are taken up in
October, when the leaves begin to decay, and stored in sand.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE TURNIP.

English Turnip. Brassica rapa.

The common Turnip is a hardy, biennial plant, indigenous to Great
Britain, France, and other parts of Europe. The roots of all the
varieties attain their full size during the first year. The radical
leaves are hairy and rough, and are usually lobed, or lyrate; but, in
some of the sorts, nearly spatulate, with the borders almost entire.
The flowers are produced in May and June of the second year, and the
seeds ripen in July; the flower-stalk rises three feet or more in
height, with numerous branches; the leaves are clasping, and much
smoother and more glaucous than the radical leaves of the growth of the
previous year; the flowers are yellow, and are produced in long, loose,
upright, terminal spikes; the seeds are small, round, black, or
reddish-brown, and are very similar, in size, form, and color, in the
different varieties,--ten thousand are contained in an ounce, and they
retain their vitality from five to seven years.

_Propagation and Culture._--All the sorts are propagated by seeds; which
should be sown where the plants are to remain, as they do not generally
succeed well when transplanted. Sowings for early use may be made the
last of April, or beginning of May; but as the bulbs are seldom produced
in perfection in the early part of the season, or under the influence of
extreme heat, the sowing should be confined to a limited space in the
garden. The seeds may be sown broadcast or in drills: if sown in drills,
they should be made about fourteen inches apart, and half an inch in
depth. The young plants should be thinned to five or six inches asunder.
For a succession, a few seeds may be sown, at intervals of a fortnight,
until the last week in July; from which time, until the 10th of August,
the principal sowing is usually made for the winter's supply. In the
Middle States, and the warmer portion of New England, if the season is
favorable, a good crop will be obtained from seed sown as late as the
last week in August.

_Harvesting._--Turnips for the table may be drawn directly from the
garden or field until November, but must be harvested before severe
freezing weather; for, though comparatively very hardy, few of the
varieties will survive the winters of the Northern States in the open
ground.

_Seed._--As the various kinds readily hybridize, or intermix, only one
variety should be cultivated in the same neighborhood for seed. Select
the best-formed bulbs, and transplant them out in April, in rows two
feet apart, and one foot apart in the rows, just covering the crowns
with earth, or leaving the young shoots level with the surface of the
ground.

An ounce of seed will sow eight rods of land, and a pound will be
sufficient for an acre.

_Varieties._--The varieties are numerous, as follow:--


ALTRINCHAM. _Law._

Yellow Altrincham. Altringham.

This is a yellow-fleshed, field variety, of rather less than average
size. The bulb, however, is of a fine, globular shape, with a
light-green top, very small neck and tap-root, and possessed of
considerable solidity.


BORDER IMPERIAL.

Border Imperial Purple-top Yellow.

Bulb five or six inches in diameter, nearly spherical, sometimes
flattened, and usually very smooth and symmetrical; skin yellow, the
upper surface of a bright purple; flesh yellow, firm, and sugary; leaves
large.

The variety is of English origin, and is recommended for its earliness
and great productiveness.


CHIVAS'S ORANGE JELLY. _Thomp._

Bulb of a handsome, round form, with a small top; the skin is pale
orange; and the flesh yellow, juicy, sweet, and tender. It has very
little fibre; so that, when boiled, it almost acquires the consistence
of a jelly. It originated in Cheshire, Eng.


COW-HORN.

Long Early White Vertus. _Vil._

[Illustration: Cow-horn Turnip.]

Root produced much above ground, nearly cylindrical, rounded at the end,
ten or twelve inches in length, nearly three inches in diameter, and
weighing from one and a half to two pounds. The skin is smooth and
shining,--white below the surface of the ground, and green at the top;
the flesh is white, tender, and sugary. Early, very productive, and
remarkable for its regular form and good quality. As a field-turnip, it
is one of the best; and, when pulled young, good for table use. During
winter, the roots often become dry and spongy.


DALES'S HYBRID. _Law._

This variety is of English origin, and is said to be a hybrid from the
Green-top Swede and the common White Globe. Its prevailing traits are,
however, those of the White Globe; inasmuch as its roots are similar in
form and texture.

Foliage strong and luxuriant; root large, oblong, pale yellow; the upper
surface light green; neck and tap-root small. The form of the bulb,
though generally oblong, is sometimes nearly globular; but its more
material characteristics, large size, and luxuriance of growth, are
uniformly the same. Its reputation as a turnip of very superior quality
has not been sustained in this country.


EARLY FLAT DUTCH.

Early White Dutch. White Dutch.

An old and well-known early garden variety; bulb round, very much
flattened, and produced mostly within the earth; skin white, somewhat
washed with green at the insertion of the leaves, which are of medium
size. Before the bulb has attained its full dimensions, the flesh is
fine-grained, tender, and sweet; but when ripe, especially in dry
seasons, it often becomes spongy and juiceless: in which condition, it
is of no value for the table; and, even for stock, is comparatively
worthless. Average specimens measure about four inches in diameter, and
two inches and a half in depth.


EARLY YELLOW DUTCH.

Yellow Dutch.

This variety has a small, globular root, of a pale-yellow color
throughout. It somewhat resembles the Yellow Malta, and is a good garden
variety. The portion of the bulb above ground, and exposed to the sun,
is washed with green. It is of medium size, early, tender, rather
close-grained, and sugary; better suited for use in summer and autumn
than for winter. By some, the variety is esteemed the best of the yellow
garden turnips.


FINLAND. _Law._

Yellow Finland.

[Illustration: Finland Turnip.]

This is a beautiful, medium-sized turnip, of a bright yellow throughout,
even to the neck; somewhat similar to a firm Yellow Malta, but of finer
color. The under part of the bulb is singularly depressed: from this
depression issues a small, mousetail-like root. It is somewhat
earlier, and also hardier, than the Yellow Malta.

The flesh is tender, close-grained, and of a sweet, sugary flavor; the
leaves are small, and few in number; bulb about two inches in thickness
by four inches in diameter, weighing eight or ten ounces. An excellent
garden variety.


FRENEUSE.

Root produced within the earth,--long, tapering, and rather symmetrical;
size small,--average specimens measuring five or six inches in length,
an inch and a half in diameter at the crown, and weighing eight or ten
ounces; skin white, or yellowish-white; flesh white, dry, very firm, and
sugary; leaves small, deep green, spreading. Half early, and one of the
best of the dry-fleshed varieties.


GOLDEN BALL. _M'Int._ _Vil._

Yellow Globe.

[Illustration: Golden Ball.]

Bulb produced mostly within the earth, nearly globular, and very smooth
and symmetrical; skin bright yellow below ground, greenish above; leaves
comparatively small, spreading; flesh pale yellow, sweet, and well
flavored, but not so fine-grained as that of many other varieties. It is
a good table turnip; and with the Robertson's Golden Stone, which it
greatly resembles, the most valuable for cultivation, where large-sized
garden turnips are required. Its size is about that of the last named.
Average specimens measure four inches in diameter, nearly the same in
depth, and weigh from twelve to fourteen ounces.


GREEN GLOBE. _Law._

Green-top White Globe.

Roots of a fine, globular shape, with a small neck and tap-root; very
white below, and green above, the surface of the ground; of medium size,
hardy, and firm in texture, but scarcely so much so as the Green Round;
than which it arrives at maturity rather earlier. It is somewhat larger
than the White Norfolk; has large, deep-green foliage; grows strongly;
and produces extraordinary crops: but it soon becomes spongy, and often
decays in autumn or early in winter.

A sub-variety, of larger size and with softer flesh, is known by the
name of Hungarian Green-top Globe.


GREEN NORFOLK. _Law._

Green-top Norfolk. Green Round.

A sub-variety of the White Norfolk, of nearly the same form and size;
the bulb differing principally in the color of the top, which is green.

The Norfolk turnips are all of a peculiar flattish form; rather hollowed
towards their neck, as also on their under side. When grown to a large
size, they become more or less irregular, or somewhat angular. The
Green-top variety possesses these characters in a less degree than the
White-top; and is generally round, flattened, but not much hollowed, on
the upper or under surface. It is hardier than the White or Red
varieties.


GREEN TANKARD. _Law._

Roots more than half above ground; oblong, or tankard-shaped; of a
greenish color, except on the under surface, which is white; flesh white
and sweet, but of coarse texture.

The term "Tankard" is applied to such common field turnips as are of an
oblong shape, and the roots of which, in general, grow much above the
surface of the ground. Such oblong varieties, however, as approach
nearest to a round or globular form, are sometimes termed "Decanter," or
"Decanter-shaped turnips."

In good soils, the Green Tankard sometimes attains a weight of eight or
ten pounds. As a garden variety, it is of little value.


GREEN-TOP FLAT.

Similar in size, form, and quality to the common Purple-top Flat; skin,
above ground, green.

Long grown in New England for feeding stock; and, in its young state,
often used as a table turnip. Now very little cultivated.


GREEN-TOP YELLOW ABERDEEN. _Law._

Green-top Yellow Bullock.

An old and esteemed variety, similar in size and form to the Purple-top
Yellow Aberdeen: the color of the top is bright green.


LINCOLNSHIRE RED GLOBE.

This variety is remarkable for its large, deep-green, luxuriant foliage.
Bulb very large, roundish; skin, below ground, white,--above the
surface, purple; flesh white, firm, and, when young, well flavored, and
adapted to table use. It yields abundantly; is uniformly fair, and free
from small roots; an average keeper; and deserving of cultivation,
especially for agricultural purposes.


LONG BLACK.

Except in the form of its roots, this variety much resembles the Round
Black. It possesses the same peculiar, piquant, radish-like flavor; and
is served at table in the same manner.


LONG WHITE MALTESE.

Long White Clairfontaine. _Vil._

Roots eight or nine inches in length, an inch and a half in diameter,
somewhat fusiform, and very smooth and symmetrical. The crown rises two
or three inches above the surface of the ground, and is of a green
color, except where exposed to the sun, when it often becomes purple or
reddish-brown. Below the surface of the soil, the skin is of a dull or
dirty white. Flesh white, moderately fine, tender, and of a sugary
flavor. Half early.

The variety has some resemblance to the Cow-horn; but is smaller, and
the flesh not so white.


PETROSOWOODSKS.

Bulb of medium size, flattened,--comparatively smooth and regular;
tap-root very slender, issuing from a basin; skin blackish-purple above
and below ground, sometimes changing to yellow about the tap-root of
large or overgrown bulbs; flesh yellow, fine-grained, and tender, if
grown in cool weather, but liable to be fibrous and strong-flavored when
grown during the summer months. The variety is early, and must be
classed as a garden rather than as a field turnip.


POMERANIAN GLOBE.

Bulb globular, remarkably smooth and regular; the neck is small, and the
skin white, smooth, and glossy; the flesh is white, close-grained,
tender, and sweet; the leaves are large, and of a dark-green color, with
paler or whitish nerves. Half early.

When in perfection, the bulbs measure three and a half or four inches in
diameter, about the same in depth, and weigh from fourteen to eighteen
ounces. If sown early in good soil, and allowed the full season for
development, the roots sometimes attain a weight of eight or ten pounds.
It is generally cultivated as a field turnip, but is also sown as a
garden variety; the roots being of good quality for the table, if pulled
when about half grown.


PRESTON, OR LIVERPOOL YELLOW. _Law._

An early sort, somewhat resembling the Yellow Malta: the bulbs attain a
larger size, the foliage is stronger, and the basin, or depression,
about the tap-root less deeply sunk.


PURPLE-TOP FLAT.

Red-top Flat.

Bulb round, flattened, nearly one-half growing above ground; neck and
tap-root small; skin reddish-purple where exposed to light and air, and
white below the surface of the soil; flesh very white, close-grained
while young, and of a sugary but often bitter taste. During winter, it
usually becomes dry and spongy. Average specimens measure two and a half
inches in depth, four or five inches in diameter, and weigh from sixteen
to twenty ounces.

This old and well-known variety, at one period, was the principal field
as well as garden turnip of the Northern and Middle States. It is now,
however, very little cultivated; being superseded by the Strap-leaved
and other more desirable sorts.


PURPLE-TOP STRAP-LEAVED.

[Illustration: Purple-top Strap-leaved Turnip.]

Bulb very flat, smooth, and regular in form, produced almost entirely
above ground; tap-root slender; leaves few, upright, broad, rounded at
the ends, and tapering to the neck, which is very small; skin above,
clear, bright purple,--below, pure white, often finely clouded or shaded
at the union of the colors; flesh clear white, firm, solid, sugary,
mild, and remarkably well-flavored; size medium,--measuring about two
inches and a half in depth by four or five inches in diameter, and
weighing from ten to twelve ounces. Field-grown roots, with the benefit
of a long season and rich soil, attain much greater dimensions; often,
however, greatly deteriorating in quality as they increase over the
average size.

This variety is unquestionably one of the best of the flat turnips,
either for the garden or field. It is early, hardy, very prolific, will
thrive in almost any description of soil, is of excellent quality, and
rarely fails to yield a good crop. It is the best of all the flat
turnips for sowing among corn or potatoes, or upon small patches of the
garden from which early pease or beans have been harvested.


PURPLE-TOP YELLOW ABERDEEN.

Purple-top Aberdeen. Purple-top Yellow Bullock.

Bulb globular, reddish-purple above, and deep yellow below; tap-root
very small; leaves deep green, comparatively short, and inclined to grow
horizontally.

In rich soil and long seasons, the bulbs sometimes attain a weight of
eight or ten pounds; but specimens of average size measure about four
inches in depth, nearly five inches in diameter, and weigh from sixteen
to twenty ounces. The flesh is pale yellow, tender, sugary, and nearly
equal to that of the Swedes in solidity. The variety is very hardy, and,
although generally grown for farm purposes, is really superior to many
sorts cultivated exclusively for table use.


RED GLOBE. _Law._

An old, medium-sized, globular turnip, well suited for cultivation in
light soil and on exposed or elevated situations. Skin red, where
exposed to the sun,--below ground, white; flesh white, and finer in
texture than that of the White Globe. It is not suited for table use;
and is generally field-grown, and fed to stock.


RED NORFOLK.

Red-top Norfolk. Red Round.

This is a sub-variety of the White Norfolk, the size and form being
nearly the same. Skin washed, or clouded with red where exposed to the
light. It is firmer in texture, and more regular in its form, than the
last named; and, if there be any difference in size, this is the smaller
variety.


RED TANKARD.

Bulb produced partially above ground, pyriform, eight or nine inches in
depth, four or five inches in diameter, and weighing about three pounds;
below ground, the skin is white,--above, purple or violet; flesh white,
rather firm, sugary, and well flavored; foliage large.

It is recommended for its earliness and productiveness, but must be
considered a field rather than a table variety.


ROBERTSON'S GOLDEN STONE. _M'Int._ _Vil._

An excellent, half-early variety; form nearly globular; color deep
orange throughout, sometimes tinged with green on the top; size above
medium,--average specimens measuring nearly four inches in depth, four
inches in diameter, and weighing from sixteen to eighteen ounces; flesh
firm, and well flavored.

The Robertson's Golden Stone is remarkably hardy, keeps well, and is one
of the best of the Yellows for autumn or winter use.


ROUND BLACK. _Law._

Leaves few, small, and comparatively smooth; bulb produced almost or
altogether under ground, of an irregular, roundish form, often divided,
or terminating in thick branches at its lower extremity; skin black, and
very tough; flesh white.

The variety is extensively cultivated in some parts of Europe, and is
much esteemed for its peculiar, piquant, somewhat radish-like flavor. It
is sometimes served in its crude state as a salad.


SIX WEEKS. _Law._

Autumn Stubble. Early Dwarf.

Bulb produced much above ground, rather large, and of an irregular,
globular form. It soon arrives at maturity; but, on account of its
natural softness of texture, should always be sown late, and used before
severe frosts. As descriptive of its earliness, it has received the
above names; being suited for very late sowing, after the removal of
early crops; or for making up blanks in turnip-fields, where the first
sowing may have partially failed.

It is well flavored, but soon becomes dry and spongy, and is unsuitable
for use during winter. Skin white below the surface of the ground,
greenish above. Field-grown specimens sometimes weigh three pounds and
upwards.


SMALL LONG YELLOW.

Leaves very small, and spreading; root generally entirely under ground,
small, and of an oblong or carrot shape, terminating abruptly at the
point; skin pale yellow; flesh yellow, firm, dry, and sugary, with some
degree of piquancy. It is a good variety for the table, and also a good
keeper.


SNOW-BALL.

Navet Boule de Neige. _Vil._

The bulb of this variety is nearly spherical, very smooth and regular;
size medium,--the average dimensions being four inches in diameter, four
and a half in depth, and the weight about a pound. The neck is small,
and the skin white. The flesh of the young bulbs is white, fine-grained,
tender, and sugary; but, if overgrown or long kept, it is liable to
become dry and spongy.

The variety is early, and, though classed by seedsmen as a garden
turnip, is well adapted for field culture; as it not only yields
abundantly, but succeeds well when sown late in the season on land from
which early crops have been harvested.


STONE GLOBE.

Bulb globular, and regularly formed, growing mostly beneath the surface
of the ground. It belongs to the White-globe varieties, and is
considered the hardiest and the best suited for winter use of any of its
class. The leaves are larger, stronger, and deeper colored, than any of
the White-globe sorts.

Skin and flesh white; texture moderately close; flavor sweet, and its
keeping properties good; size rather large.


TELTOW, OR SMALL BERLIN.

Teltau.

This is said to be the smallest of turnips; its leaves not exceeding in
number those of the radish. The root is fusiform or spindle-shaped, not
very regular, and produced entirely under ground; skin dusky white;
flesh dry, dull white, very fine-grained, piquant, and sugary; leaves
erect, yellowish-green. Early. The roots measure three inches long by
about an inch and three-fourths at their largest diameter, and weigh
from three to four ounces.

The Teltow Turnip is much esteemed on account of its excellent
qualities, and is one of the best early garden varieties.

According to Loudon, it is in high repute in France, Germany, and
Holland; and is grown in the sandy fields around Berlin, and also near
Altona, whence it is imported to the London market. It is, or was, grown
in immense quantities in the neighborhood of Moscow.

The peculiar flavor is in the outer rind. When used, it should not be
peeled. It bears transplanting well; and may be set in rows one foot
apart, and nine inches apart in the rows.


WAITE'S HYBRID ECLIPSE.

A recent variety, of English origin, introduced by Mr. John G. Waite, a
seed-merchant of London. As figured and described, it is of large size,
very richly colored, and remarkably smooth and symmetrical. At the
crown, it is broad and round-shouldered, and measures about six inches
in diameter; which size is nearly retained to a depth of eight or nine
inches, when it contracts in a conical form to a tap-root. Color of
upper portion, clear purple, richly clouded, and contrasting finely with
the yellow on the lower part. It is represented as a turnip of excellent
quality, and as being very productive.

When cultivated in this country, it has generally fallen short of the
excellence it is represented as attaining in England. It is apparently
not adapted to the dry and warm summers of the United States.


WHITE GLOBE. _Law._

Common Field Globe.

Root globular; skin smooth, perfectly white; flesh also white; neck and
tap-root small. Although this description embraces the principal
characters of the White Globe, there is considerable variety in the
turnips to which this name is applied, arising from the degree of care
and attention bestowed by growers in selecting their seed-roots; and the
shape is often not a little affected by the soil in which they are
grown. Thus Globes of any kind, and particularly those of this variety,
when grown on a very superior, rich soil, may be said to be forced
beyond their natural size, and thereby acquire somewhat of a monstrous
or overgrown appearance; losing, in a great measure, their natural
symmetry.

This variety is better adapted to field culture than to the garden, as
it is altogether too coarse in texture for table use. It is a poor
keeper, and, in unfavorable seasons, sometimes decays before the time of
harvesting. Specimens have been grown weighing fifteen and even eighteen
pounds.


WHITE NORFOLK.

White Round.

A large English variety, somewhat irregular in form, but usually more or
less compressed, and sometimes pyriform; the upper portion of the root
being produced four or five inches above ground. Specimens sometimes
measure ten or twelve inches in diameter. The leaves are large, and
rather numerous; the skin white below the surface, and often white
above, but sometimes washed with green; flesh white and coarse-grained,
but sweet. Very late.

It is but a sub-variety of the Common Flat Turnip, and oftentimes
attains a most extraordinary size. For the garden, it possesses no
value. It is grown exclusively as an agricultural or field turnip; but
is very liable to rot; soon becomes spongy; and can only be classed as
third-rate, even for feeding stock.


WHITE STONE.

Early Stone. White Garden Stone.

This common and well-known garden turnip somewhat resembles the White
Dutch; but has stronger foliage, is rounder in form, and finer in
texture. A carefully selected and improved variety of this is known by
the name of Mouse-tail Turnip; and, in addition, some catalogues contain
varieties under the name of Red-topped Mouse-tail, &c.

Skin and flesh white; size full medium, measuring three and a half to
four inches in depth by four and a half or five inches in diameter.


WHITE TANKARD.

Navet Gras d'Alsace. _Vil._

Bulb pyriform, cylindrical at the crown, which, like that of the Red
Tankard, rises two or three inches from the ground; skin white in the
earth, green above; flesh white, tender, sweet, rather firm, and
close-grained. Early.

Vilmorin mentions two varieties; one having entire leaves, the other
with lyrate or lobed leaves; giving preference, however, to the one with
entire leaves.

Like most of the Tankards, the variety seems better adapted to
agricultural than to horticultural purposes.


WHITE-TOP FLAT.

Bulb similar in size and form to the Green-top Flat; leaves few and
small; skin uniformly white; flesh white, firm, sugary, and well
flavored. As a table variety, it is superior to the Purple-top Flat or
the Green-top.


WHITE-TOP STRAP-LEAVED.

This is a sub-variety of the Purple-top Strap-leaved; differing little,
except in color. The leaves are erect, few and small, somewhat
lanceolate, and nearly entire on the borders; the bulb is of medium
size, much flattened, green above ground, white below, and remarkably
smooth and regular in form; tap-root very small; the flesh is white,
very fine-grained, saccharine, mild, and excellent.

Early, productive, and recommended as one of the best varieties for
field or garden culture.

The Strap-leaved Turnips appear to be peculiarly adapted to the climate
of the Northern States, and are greatly superior in all respects to the
Common White and Purple-top Flat varieties. Though of comparatively
recent introduction, they have been widely disseminated; and, wherever
grown, are highly esteemed.


YELLOW MALTA. _M'Int._

Maltese. Golden Maltese.

A beautiful, very symmetrical, small-bulbed, early variety, slightly
flattened above, somewhat concave about, the tap-root, which, as well as
the neck, is remarkably small; skin very smooth, bright orange-yellow;
foliage small, and not abundant,--on which account the plants may be
grown quite close to each other; flesh pale-yellow, fine-grained, and
well flavored. It is a good garden variety, and one of the best of the
Yellows for summer use. Average bulbs measure two inches in depth, four
inches in diameter, and weigh about ten ounces.


YELLOW SCARISBRICK.

Bulb flattened, smooth, and regular; neck small; skin pale
yellow,--above ground, green; flesh yellowish-white, tender, and sweet;
leaves of medium size, very pale-green. Season late. Well-grown
specimens measure four inches in diameter, and about three inches in
depth.


YELLOW STONE.

Very similar to the Golden Ball or Yellow Globe. Compared with these
varieties, the bulb of the Yellow Stone is produced more above ground,
and the upper surface is more colored with green. One of the best of
garden turnips.


YELLOW TANKARD. _Vil._

Root somewhat fusiform, or of a long, irregular, tankard shape; the
crown rising just above the ground. Average specimens measure seven or
eight inches in length, three inches and a half in diameter, and weigh
about twenty-four ounces. Skin yellowish-white below ground, green
above; flesh pale yellow, firm, and sugary; leaves large. It is esteemed
for the solidity of its flesh, and for its earliness and productiveness.
A good variety for either field or garden.




CHAPTER II.

ALLIACEOUS PLANTS.

The Cive. Garlic. Leek. Onion. Rocambole. Shallot. Welsh Onion.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CIVE.

Chive. Allium schoenoprasum.

The Cive is a hardy, bulbous-rooted, perennial plant, indigenous to
France and Great Britain. The leaves, which are produced in tufts, are
seven or eight inches in length, erect and cylindrical, or awl-shaped.
The bulbs are white, oval, and of small size; usually measuring about
half an inch in diameter. The flower-stalk rises to the height of the
leaves, and produces, at its extremity, a globular group of purplish,
barren flowers.

_Propagation and Culture._--As the plant seldom, if ever, produces
seeds, it is always propagated by a division of the roots, or bulbs.
These are produced in compact groups, or bunches, seven or eight inches
in diameter. "One of these groups may be divided into a dozen or more
parts, each of which will, in a short time, form a cluster equal in size
to the original. They should be planted in spring or autumn, in rows
eighteen inches apart, and twelve or fifteen inches asunder in the rows.
All the cultivation they require is to be kept free from weeds; and they
will thrive in any common garden soil. A planting will last many years;
but it is well to renew it every third or fourth year."

_Use._--The young leaves are the parts of the plant used; but, whether
used or not, to keep them in a fresh and tender condition, the plants
should be frequently shorn to the ground. They possess the flavor
peculiar to the Onion family; and are principally used in flavoring
soups, and as an ingredient in spring salads. The leaves and bulbs are
sometimes taken together, and eaten crude, as a substitute for young
onions. In omelets, the Cive is considered almost indispensable.

There are no varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMON GARLIC.

Allium sativum.

This is a perennial plant, from the south of Europe. The root is
composed of from ten to fifteen small bulbs, called "cloves," which are
enclosed in a thin, white, semi-transparent skin, or pellicle. The
leaves are long and narrow. The flower-stem is cylindrical, about
eighteen inches in height, and terminates in an umbel, or group, of
pale-pink flowers, intermixed with small bulbs. The seeds are black,
and, in form, irregular; but are seldom employed for propagation; the
cloves, or small bulbs, succeeding better.

_Planting and Cultivation._--Garlic thrives best in a light,
well-enriched soil; and the bulbs should be planted in April or May, an
inch deep, in rows or on ridges, fourteen inches apart, and five or six
inches apart in the rows. "All the culture necessary is confined to
keeping the ground free from weeds. When the leaves turn yellow, the
plants may be taken up; and, having been dried in the sun, they should
be tied up in bunches by the stalks, and suspended in a dry, airy room,
for use."--_Thomp._

_Use._--It is cultivated for its bulbs, or cloves, which possess more of
the flavor of the onion than any other alliaceous plant. These are
sometimes employed in soups, stews, and other dishes; and, in some
parts of Europe, are eaten in a crude state with bread. "It is not
cultivated to any considerable extent in this country; its strong
flavor, and the offensive odor it communicates to the breath, causing it
to be sparingly used in our cookery.

"Where attention is paid to culture, the Common Garlic will attain a
size of seven and a half inches in circumference, each bulb; whereas,
when grown negligently and unskilfully, it does not attain half that
size. Twenty ordinary bulbs weigh one pound."--_M'Int._


EARLY ROSE GARLIC.

Early Pink.

This is a sub-variety of the Common Garlic. The pellicle in which the
small bulbs are enclosed is rose-colored; and this is its principal
distinguishing characteristic. It is, however, nearly a fortnight
earlier.

For culinary purposes, it is not considered superior to the Common
Garlic. Propagation and cultivation the same; though, in warm climates,
the bulbs are sometimes planted in autumn.


GREAT-HEADED GARLIC. _Vil._

Allium ampeloprasum.

This species is a hardy perennial, and is remarkable for the size of its
bulbs; which, as in the foregoing species and variety, separate into
smaller bulbs, or cloves. The leaves and stem somewhat resemble those of
the leek; the flowers are rose-colored, and are produced at the
extremity of the stalk, in large, regular, globular heads, or umbels;
the seeds are similar to those of the Common Garlic, but are seldom used
for reproduction; the cloves, or small bulbs, being generally employed
for this purpose. It is used and cultivated as the Common Garlic.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LEEK.

Allium porrum.

The Leek is a hardy biennial, and produces an oblong, tunicated bulb;
from the base of which, rootlets are put forth in great numbers. The
plant, when full grown, much resembles what are commonly known as
"Scallions;" the lower, blanched portion being the part eaten. This
varies in length from four to eight inches, and in diameter from less
than an inch to more than three inches. The leaves are long, narrow,
smooth, and pointed; and spread in opposite directions, somewhat in the
form of a fan. The flower-stem proceeds from the centre of this
collection of leaves, and is about four feet in height. The flowers are
white, with a stripe of red, and are produced in terminal, globular
groups, or umbels; the seeds are black, irregular, but somewhat
triangular in form, and, with the exception of their smaller size, are
similar to those of the onion. About twelve thousand seeds are contained
in an ounce; and they retain their vitality two years.

_Soil, Sowing, and Cultivation._--The Leek is very hardy, and easily
cultivated. It succeeds best in a light but well-enriched soil. When
fine leeks are desired, it can hardly be made too rich. It should also
be thoroughly spaded over, and well pulverized to the depth of at least
twelve inches. The seed should be sown in April, at the bottom of drills
made six or eight inches deep, and eighteen inches asunder. Sow the
seeds thinly, cover half an inch deep, and thin the young plants to nine
inches distant in the drills. As the plants increase in size, draw the
earth gradually into the drills, and around the stems of the leeks,
until the drills are filled. By this process, the bulbs are blanched,
and rendered tender and mild flavored. The seeds are sometimes sown
broadcast, and in July transplanted to trenches, and subsequently
cultivated, as before directed. The plants are also sometimes set on
the surface, and afterwards earthed up to the height of six or eight
inches in the process of cultivation. In October, the leeks will be
suitable for use; and, until the closing-up of the ground, may be drawn
from time to time as required for the table. For winter use, they should
be preserved in earth or sand.

Early leeks may be obtained by sowing the seeds in a hot-bed in February
or March, and transplanting to the open ground in June or July.

_Seed._--To obtain seed, some of the finest plants of the growth of the
previous year should be set out in April, fifteen inches apart, and the
stems sunk to the depth of three or four inches. "The seed ripens in
autumn, and its maturity is known by the heads changing to a brown
color. It is best preserved in the heads; and these should be cut off
with a portion of the stalk a foot in length, tied in bunches, and hung
in a dry, airy situation. In this manner, the seed will retain its
vegetative powers for two or three years: after that time, it is not to
be depended on."--_Thomp._

_Use._--"The whole plant, except the roots, is used in soups and stews.
The white stems, which are blanched by being planted deep for the
purpose, are boiled, served with toasted bread and white sauce, and
eaten like asparagus." It has the flavor, and possesses the general
properties, of the onion.

_Varieties._--


COMMON FLAG. _Vil._

Long Flag.

The stem, or blanched portion, of this variety is about six inches in
depth, and an inch in diameter. The leaves are put forth in opposite
directions, are comparatively erect, and of a glaucous-green color.

The variety is remarkably hardy, and well suited for open culture.


LARGE ROUEN. _Thomp._

Gros de Rouen. _Vil._

[Illustration: Rouen Leek.]

Leaves very dark-green, broad, and of thick substance; stem rather
short, but remarkably thick, sometimes measuring nearly four inches in
diameter. It is now the variety most cultivated near Paris; and, since
its general dissemination, has been much approved by all who have grown
it. It is found to be the best kind for forcing, as it acquires a
sufficient thickness of stem sooner than any other. In England, it is
pronounced one of the best, if not the best, of all varieties.


LITTLE MONTAGNE. _Vil._

Stem very short and slender; foliage deeper green than that of the
Common Flag. It is the smallest of the leeks. Not much cultivated.


LONDON FLAG.

Large Flag. Broad Flag. English Flag. Gros Court. _Vil._

Stem about four inches in length, and nearly an inch and a half in
diameter. The leaves are larger, of a paler color, and softer in their
texture, than those of the Common Flag.

The London-flag Leek is hardy, and of good quality. It is more generally
cultivated in this country than any other variety.


MUSSELBURGH. _Thomp._

Scotch Flag. Edinburgh Improved.

Stem somewhat shorter than that of the London Flag, but of equal
thickness. The swelling at the base has the same form. The leaves are
broad and tall, and spread regularly in a fan-like manner. Their color
is deeper than that of the Long Flag or the Large Rouen, but paler than
the London Flag. Hardy, and of excellent quality. It originated in
England.


PROLIFEROUS LEEK. _Trans._

This is a viviparous variety of the common leek, producing young plants
on its flower-stalk instead of flowers. The leaves are similar to those
of the London Flag; and the plant, in its young state, before it runs to
flower, exactly resembles it. The flower-scape is from two to three feet
high, and supports a compact, irregular, globose umbel, composed of
numerous small bulbs, intermixed with flowers. Some of these bulbs
occasionally produce a second umbel, on scapes of from six to eight
inches in length, but of much smaller dimensions than the principal one.

The variety is cultivated in rows, like other leeks; and the bulbs will
remain sound several months after they have ripened.


SMALL EARLY NETHERLAND. _Thomp._

Small Summer Brabant.

Leaves long, narrow, dark-green; stem small. On this account, it is not
so valuable as many others for a main crop: besides, if sown at the same
time, it is liable to run to seed before winter. A small sowing,
however, may be made with advantage for early use.


YELLOW POITOU. _Thomp._

Jaune du Poitou. _Vil._

A remarkably large variety; the leaves having sometimes measured five
feet in length, and six inches in breadth. They are of a yellowish-green
color. The underground or blanched portion of the stem is
yellowish-white, and is more tender than that of any other variety. On
this account, and also for its large size, it deserves cultivation. The
great length of the leaves makes it important that more space should be
allowed between the plants than is usually allotted to other varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ONION.

Allium cepa.

The Onion is a half-hardy biennial plant: the roots and leaves, however,
are annual; as they usually perish during the first year. The bulbs, for
which the plant is generally cultivated, are biennial, and differ to a
considerable extent in their size, form, and color. The flower-stalk,
which is developed the second year, is from three to four feet in
height, leafless, hollow, swollen just below the middle, and tapers to
the top. The flowers are either white or rose-colored, and are produced
at the extremity of the stalk in a regular, globular group, or umbel.
The seeds ripen in August. They are deep blue-black, somewhat
triangular, and similar in size and form in all the varieties. An ounce
contains about seventy-five hundred seeds, which retain their vitality
two years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--The Onion requires a light, loamy, mellow soil;
and, unlike most kinds of garden or field vegetables, succeeds well when
cultivated on the same land for successive years. With the exception of
the Top and the Potato Onion, all the varieties are raised from seed.
Previous to sowing, the ground should be thoroughly spaded over or
deeply ploughed, and the surface made smooth and even. The seed should
be sown as early in spring as the soil may be in good working condition.
Sow in drills fourteen inches apart, and half an inch in depth. When the
plants are three or four inches high, thin them to two inches asunder;
and, in the process of culture, be careful not to stir the soil too
deeply, or to collect it about the growing bulbs. The onions will ripen
in August, or early in September; and their full maturity will be
indicated by the perfect decay of the leaves, or tops. The bulbs may be
drawn from the drills by the hand, or by the use of a common
garden-rake. After being exposed for a few days to the sun for drying,
they will be ready for storing or the market.

_Preservation._--The essentials for the preservation of the bulbs are a
low temperature, freedom from frost, dryness, and thorough ventilation.

_Seed._--For the production of seed, select the ripest, firmest, and
best-formed bulbs; and, in April, transplant them to lines two feet and
a half or three feet distant, and from nine to twelve inches apart in
the lines, sinking the crowns just below the surface of the ground. As
the plants advance in height, tie them to stakes for support. The seeds
ripen in August: and the heads, or umbels, should be cut off when they
assume a brown color; for then the capsules begin to open, and shed
their seeds. After being threshed out, the seed should be exposed to the
action of the sun until it is thoroughly dried; for, when stored in a
damp state, it is extremely liable to generate heat, and consequently to
lose its vitality.

_Varieties._--Few of the numerous varieties are cultivated to any extent
in this country. Many of the kinds succeed only in warm latitudes, and
others are comparatively unimportant. The Danvers, Large Red,
Silver-skin, and the Yellow seem peculiarly adapted to our soil and
climate. The annual product of these varieties greatly exceeds that of
all the other sorts combined.


BLOOD-RED. _Thomp._

French Blood-red. Dutch Blood-red. St. Thomas.

Bulb middle-sized, or rather large, flattened; skin dull red,--the
coating next within glossy, and very dark red. The internal layers are
palest at the base; and, except at the top, are only colored on their
outsides. Each layer is paler than the one which surrounds it; till the
centre is reached, which is white.

It is a good keeper, but one of the strongest flavored of all varieties.
It imparts to soups, or other dishes of which it may be an ingredient, a
brownish or blackish color.


BROWN PORTUGAL. _Thomp._

Brown Spanish. Cambrai. Oporto.

A medium-sized, roundish, or flattened onion; neck small; skin
yellowish-brown,--next interior layer not tinged with red. It is a
popular variety in some parts of France; and is remarkable for its
productiveness, excellent quality, and keeping properties.


DANVERS.

Danvers Yellow.

[Illustration: Danvers Onion.]

This comparatively recent variety was obtained by selection from the
Common Yellow. It is somewhat above medium size, and inclined to
globular in its form. Average bulbs measure three inches in diameter,
and two inches and three-fourths in depth. The skin is yellowish-brown,
but becomes darker by age, and greenish-brown if long exposed to the
sun; the flesh is similar to that of the Yellow,--white, sugary,
comparatively mild, and well flavored.

The superiority of the Danvers Onion over the last named consists
principally, if not solely, in its greater productiveness. When grown
under like conditions, it yields, on the average, nearly one-fourth
more; and, on this account, the variety is generally employed for field
culture. It is, however, not so good a keeper; and, for shipping
purposes, is decidedly inferior to the Yellow,--its globular form
rendering it more liable to decay, from the heat and dampness incident
to sea voyages.

When cultivated for the market, the land is thoroughly ploughed, and
well enriched with fine decomposed manure. The surface is then harrowed,
and next raked free of stones, and lumps of earth. The seed is sown in
April, usually by machines, in rows fourteen inches apart, and
three-fourths of an inch in depth; three pounds of seed being allowed to
an acre. The crop is treated in the usual form during the summer; and
ripens the last of August, or early in September. When the tops have
entirely withered, the bulbs are raked from the drills, and spread a few
days in the sun for drying; after which they are sorted, and barrelled
for storing or the market. The yield varies from five to eight hundred
bushels per acre.


DEPTFORD. _Thomp._

Brown Deptford.

Very similar to, if not identical with, the English Strasburg. "It
sometimes exactly agrees with the description of that variety: but it
occasionally has a pale-brown skin, without any tinge of red; and, when
this is the case, its flavor is milder than that of the last named."

With the exception of its more globular form, the bulb much resembles
the Yellow Onion of this country.


EARLY SILVER NOCERA.

Early Small Silver Nocera. White Nocera. _Thomp._ Blanc Hatif de Nocera.
_Vil._

This is a very small variety of the Early Silver-skin, with a small,
occasionally roundish, but generally oblate bulb. The skin is white; but
the layers beneath are striped with bright-green lines. The leaves are
very small. Sometimes the bulb has only a single leaf, frequently but
two; and, if there are more than four, the plant has not its true
character.

It is an excellent sort for pickling; and is the smallest and earliest
variety known,--being fifteen or twenty days earlier than the Early
Silver-skin: but it is very liable to increase in size, and to
degenerate. Very little known or cultivated in this country.


EARLY RED WETHERSFIELD.

A sub-variety of the Large Red Wethersfield, and the earliest of the red
onions. Form and color nearly the same as the Large Red; bulb small,
measuring about two inches and a half in diameter, and about an inch and
a half in depth. It is close-grained; mild; a good keeper; forms its
bulbs, with few exceptions, and ripens, the last of July; being three or
four weeks earlier than the Large Red. Cultivated to a limited extent in
various places on the coast of New England, for early consumption at
home, and for shipment to the South and West.

This variety and the Intermediate are very liable to degenerate: they
tend to grow larger and later, approaching the original variety; and can
be preserved in a pure state only by a careful selection of the bulbs
set for seed.


EARLY SILVER-SKIN.

Blanc Hatif. _Vil._

This is a small early variety of the Silver-skin, measuring two inches
and three-fourths in diameter, and an inch and three-fourths in depth.
The neck is small, and the skin silvery-white. It is much esteemed for
its earliness and mild flavor, and is one of the best of all varieties
for pickling. When cultivated for the latter purpose, it should be sown
and treated as directed for the Silver-skin.


FUSIFORM, OR COW-HORN.

Corne de Boeuf. _Vil._

This is a large onion, growing from eight inches to a foot in length. It
tapers rather regularly from the base to the top, and is frequently bent
or curved in the form of a horn; whence the name. Skin copper-red. It is
late, lacks compactness, is very liable to degenerate, decays soon after
being harvested, and must be considered more curious than useful.


INTERMEDIATE RED WETHERSFIELD.

An early variety of the common Large Red. Bulb of medium size,
flattened; neck small; color deep purple.

It is rather pungent, yet milder than the Large Red; keeps well; and is
grown to a considerable extent, in certain localities in New England,
for shipping.


JAMES'S KEEPING.

James's Long Keeping. De James. _Vil._

This is an English hybrid, said to have been originated by a Mr. James,
an extensive market-gardener in Surrey, Eng. The bulb is pyriform, or
pear-shaped; and measures four inches and upwards in depth, and two
inches or more at its broadest diameter. Skin copper-yellow,--the
coating next under it reddish-brown; flavor strong. It is not early, but
is much prized for its long keeping; the bulbs not sprouting so early in
spring as those of most varieties.


LARGE RED.

Wethersfield Large Red.

[Illustration: Wethersfield Large Red Onion.]

Bulb sometimes roundish, but, when pure, comparatively flat. It is of
very large size; and, when grown in favorable soil, often measures five
inches or more in diameter, and three inches in depth. Skin deep
purplish-red; neck of medium size; flesh purplish-white, moderately
fine-grained, and stronger flavored than that of the Yellow and earlier
Red varieties. It is very productive; one of the best to keep; and is
grown to a large extent, in many places on the seacoast of New England,
for shipping to the South and West. It is almost everywhere seen in
vegetable markets; and, with perhaps the exception of the Yellow or
Danvers, is the most prominent of the sorts employed for commercial
purposes. It derives its name from Wethersfield, Conn.; where it is
extensively cultivated, and where it has the reputation of having
originated.

A sub-variety of the foregoing is cultivated in some localities, with
nearly the same variation in form that exists between the Danvers and
Common Yellow. It will probably prove somewhat more productive; but it
is neither better flavored, nor to be preferred for its superior keeping
properties.


MADEIRA.

Large Globe Tripoli. Romain. De Madere Rond. De Belle Garde. _Vil._

This is a roundish, obovate onion, of remarkable size, often measuring
six inches and a half in depth, and six inches in diameter; neck thick
and large; skin reddish-brown,--the layer next within, pale red.

The variety is much prized for its extraordinary size, and for its mild,
sugary flavor. The plants, however, often fail to form good bulbs; and,
even when well matured, the latter are liable to decay soon after being
harvested. It requires a long, warm season for its greatest perfection.
The seed should be sown early, in drills sixteen inches apart; and the
plants should be thinned to eight inches apart in the rows.

Not suited to New England or the cooler sections of the United States.


NEW DEEP BLOOD-RED.

Brunswick Deep Blood-red. Rouge Tres Fonce de Brunswick. _Vil._

Bulb very small, flattened,--two inches and a quarter in diameter, and
an inch and a half in depth; neck small; skin deep violet-red,
approaching black. A half early variety, remarkable for its intense
purplish-red color.


PALE RED.

Rouge Pale, de Niort. _Vil._

Bulb roundish, flattened on the upper side, but not so much so as the
Blood-red, of which this may be considered a variety; size medium, two
inches and a half in diameter, one inch and three-quarters in depth;
neck small; skin copper-red, much paler than that of the Blood-red.
Compared with the last named, it is earlier and of milder flavor. This
and the Blood-red are much esteemed by some for their extreme pungency
and for their diuretic properties.


PARIS STRAW-COLORED.

Jaune des Vertus. _Vil._

A large, somewhat flattened variety, much cultivated about Paris; skin
fine russet-yellow; neck small. It is not early, but very productive,
and of excellent quality.


PEAR-SHAPED.

Bulb pyriform, measuring four inches and a half in depth, and two inches
in diameter at the broadest part; neck small; skin copper-red. It is
quite late, but is of good quality, and keeps well.


POTATO ONION.

Underground Onion.

Bulb flattened, from two and a half to three inches in diameter, and
about two inches in depth; skin copper-yellow; flavor sugary, mild, and
excellent. It does not keep so well as many other varieties; but remains
sound longer, if the leaves are cut two or three inches above the top of
the bulb at the time of harvesting.

The Potato Onion produces no seeds, neither small bulbs upon its stalks,
in the manner of many of the species of the Onion family; but, if a
full-grown bulb be set in spring, a number of bulbs of various sizes
will be formed, beneath the surface of the ground, about the parent
bulb. By means of these it is propagated, and an abundant supply often
secured in localities where the varieties raised from seed frequently
wholly fail, either from the maggot, effects of climate, or other
causes.

Like the other kinds of onions, it requires a rich, deep soil, well
manured, and dry at the bottom. This should be deeply and thoroughly
stirred, and then raised in ridges of moderate height, fifteen inches
apart. In April, select the large bulbs, and set them on the ridges, ten
inches apart, with the crown of the bulbs just below the surface of the
ground. The subsequent culture consists in keeping them clean from
weeds, and gathering a little earth about them from time to time in the
process of cultivation. As soon as the tops are entirely dead, they will
be ready for harvesting.

It is very prolific, yielding from four to six fold. Such of the crop as
may be too small for the table should be preserved during the winter, to
be set in the following spring; planting them out in April, in drills
one foot apart and three inches from each other in the drills, and
sinking the crowns just below the surface of the ground. They attain
their full size by September.


SILVER-SKIN.

White Portugal, of New England.

Bulb of medium size, flattened,--average specimens measuring about three
inches in diameter, and an inch and a half or two inches in thickness;
neck very small; skin silvery-white. After the removal of the outer
envelope, the upper part of the bulb is often veined and clouded with
green, while the portion produced below ground is generally clear white.
Flesh white, fine-grained, sugary, and remarkably mild flavored.

It forms its bulb early and regularly, ripens off well, and is quite
productive; an average yield being about four hundred bushels per acre.
It is a very poor keeper; and this is its most serious objection. It is
always preserved through the winter with much difficulty, and almost
invariably decays if kept from light and exposed to dampness. The best
method for its preservation is to spread the roots in a dry, light, and
airy situation.

The Silver-skin Onion is much esteemed in the middle and southern
sections of the United States, and is cultivated to a considerable
extent in New England. It is well adapted for sowing in August, or the
beginning of September, for early use, and for marketing during the
ensuing spring. Where the winter are mild, the crop, with slight
protection, will sustain no injury in the open ground. In Europe it is
much esteemed, and extensively grown for pickling, as its "white color,
in contrast with the fine green veins, or lines, gives it a very
agreeable appearance. For pickling, the seed should be sown very
thickly, then slightly covered with fine soil, and afterwards rolled. If
the seed is covered more deeply, the bulb, from not being quite on the
surface, has a larger and thicker neck; so that it loses its finely
rounded form, and is, moreover, less compact."

This variety, erroneously known in New England as the "White Portugal,"
is unquestionably the true Silver-skin, as described both by English and
French authors. The application of the term "Silver-skin" to the common
Yellow Onion, as very extensively practised by seedsmen and market-men
in the Eastern States, is neither pertinent nor authorized.


STRASBURG. _M'Int._

Yellow Strasburg. Flanders. Dutch. Essex.

This is the variety most generally cultivated in Great Britain. Its form
varies from flat to globular, or oval; bulb large, three inches wide,
and full two inches in depth; outside coating brown, of firm texture.
Divested of this, the color is reddish-brown, tinged with green. Flavor
comparatively mild. It is a very hardy sort, succeeds in cold
localities, and keeps well.

The Strasburg and Deptford Onions much resemble the common Yellow Onion
of New England; and the difference between the sorts is not great, when
English-grown bulbs of the first-named varieties are compared with the
bulbs of the Yellow Onion, American-grown: but seeds of the Strasburg or
Deptford, raised in England and sown in this country, almost invariably
fail to produce plants that form bulbs so generally or so perfectly as
American-grown seeds of the Yellow Onion.


TOP OR TREE ONION.

Egyptian.

Bulb large, a little flattened; producing, instead of seeds, a number of
small bulbs, or onions, about the size of a filbert, which serve as a
substitute for seeds in propagation. The flesh is coarse; and the bulbs
are very liable to decay during winter, unless kept in a cool and dry
situation. The variety has been considered rather curious than useful.

_Planting and Culture._--"Either the bulbs formed in the ground, or the
small ones upon the stems, may be planted out in April or May. The
former are set one foot apart in each direction, and the stem-bulbs four
inches apart in rows eight inches asunder. Stems that bear heavily
require to be supported. When ripe, the stem-bulbs should be dried, and
kept free from damp in a cool place."


TRIPOLI. _Thomp._

Flat Madeira. De Madere Plat. _Vil._

This is one of the largest varieties. The bulb tapers abruptly from the
middle to the neck, and almost equally so to the base. It is five inches
and upwards in diameter; color light reddish-brown,--beneath the skin,
pale brownish-red, tinged with green.

It requires the whole season, and in some localities is considered
excellent for a late crop. The flesh is soft, and the bulbs soon perish
after being taken from the ground. In its season, it is much esteemed
for its mild and delicate flavor. Like the Madeira Onion, the plants
fail to form bulbs so generally as other varieties. Not adapted to the
climate of the Northern States.


TWO-BLADED. _Thomp._

Double Tige. _Vil._

This variety derives its name from the fact that the small bulbs have
generally but two leaves. The larger ones have more; rarely, however,
exceeding four: but, unless by far the greater portion have only two
leaves, either the seed or the cultivation is at fault.

The bulbs are small, flat, light-brown, very firm, and attain maturity
early; the neck is small, and the top of the bulb is depressed or
hollowed around the stem. It keeps well, and is an excellent variety.


WHITE GLOBE. _Thomp._

[Illustration: White Globe.]

Form nearly ovoid, very regular and symmetrical; skin greenish-yellow,
marked with rose-colored lines,--the pellicle changing to white on
drying. The bulb measures about four inches in depth, and two inches and
three-fourths in its largest diameter. It keeps well, and is an
excellent variety.


YELLOW GLOBE.

Nearly allied to the preceding variety; the size and form being the
same. Skin reddish-yellow. It is hardy, productive, of good flavor,
keeps well, and deserves general cultivation.


WHITE LISBON.

Lisbon. _Thomp._ Early Lisbon. White Florence.

A very large, globular onion, measuring four inches in diameter, and
about four inches in depth; neck comparatively thick; skin smooth, thin,
clear, and white.

It is a late variety; and, although comparatively hardy, requires a
long, warm season for its full development. Under the most favorable
conditions, both with regard to soil and exposure, many of the plants
fail to form a good bulb. On account of its hardiness, it is a good sort
for sowing in the autumn for a supply of young onions for spring salads;
or, if these young bulbs be set in the open ground in April, fine, large
onions will be formed towards the end of summer. The variety is better
suited to the climate of the Middle States than to that of the Northern
and Eastern.


WHITE PORTUGAL, OR SPANISH. _Thomp._

White Spanish. White Reading. Cambridge. Soufre D'Espagne. _Vil._

A very large, flat onion, measuring three inches and upwards in width by
about two inches in depth; skin loose, of a pale-brown or
yellowish-brown, falling off spontaneously, and exhibiting the next
coating, which is greenish-white. It has a small neck, and is
particularly mild flavored. One of the best for early winter use, but
early decays.

Very distinct from the White Portugal of the New-England markets.


YELLOW ONION.

Silver-skin of New England.

[Illustration: Yellow Onion.]

One of the oldest varieties, and, as a market onion, probably better
known and more generally cultivated in this country than any other sort.
The true Yellow Onion has a flattened form and a very small neck. Its
size is rather above medium,--measuring, when well grown, from three
inches to three inches and a half in diameter, and from two inches to
two inches and a half in depth. Skin yellowish-brown, or
copper-yellow,--becoming somewhat deeper by age, or if exposed long to
the sun; flesh white, fine-grained, comparatively mild, sugary, and well
flavored. It keeps well, and is very prolific: few of the plants, in
good soils and seasons, fail to produce good-sized and well-ripened
bulbs. For the vegetable garden, as well as for field culture, it may be
considered a standard sort.

The Danvers Onion, which is but a sub-variety of the common Yellow, may
prove somewhat more profitable for extensive cultivation, on account of
its globular form; but neither in its flavor nor in its keeping
properties can it be said to possess any superiority over the last
named.

The term "Silver-skin," by which this onion is very generally though
erroneously known throughout New England, has created great confusion
between seedsmen and dealers. Much perplexity might be avoided if its
application to the Yellow Onion were entirely abandoned. The genuine
Silver-skin, as its name implies, has a skin of pure, silvery whiteness;
and is, in other respects, very dissimilar to the present variety.

When extensively cultivated for the market, it should be sown and
subsequently treated as directed for the Danvers Onion. The yield per
acre varies from four to six hundred bushels.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCAMBOLE.

Allium scorodoprasum.

This plant is a half-hardy perennial from Denmark, partaking of the
character of both the leek and garlic. Bulbs or cloves similar to those
of the common garlic, with much the same flavor, though somewhat milder;
leaves large; flower-stalk about two feet high, contorted or coiled
towards the top, and producing at its extremity a group of bulbs, or
rocamboles, intermixed with flowers.

_Propagation and Culture._--It is propagated by planting either the
underground bulbs, or the small cloves, or bulbs, that are produced upon
the stem of the plant. These should be set in April, in drills ten
inches apart, and four or five inches asunder in the drills. In the
following August they will have attained their full size, and may be
used immediately; or they may be taken up, spread to dry, tied in
bunches, and housed, for future consumption. All the culture required is
the removal of weeds, and the occasional stirring of the soil.

_Use._--"The cloves, or small bulbs, as well those from the stem as
those beneath the surface of the ground, are used in the manner of
shallots and garlics, and nearly for the same purposes."

There is but one variety.

       *       *       *       *       *

SHALLOT.

Allium Ascalonicum.

The Shallot (sometimes written Eschalot) is a native of Palestine,--the
specific term "Ascalonicum" being derived from Ascalon, a town in Syria:
hence also the popular English name, "Scallion."

The root of the plant is composed of numerous small bulbs, united at
their base; the whole being enclosed in a thin skin, or pellicle,
varying in color in the different varieties. Leaves fistulous, or
hollow, produced in tufts, or groups; flowers reddish, in terminal,
compact, spherical bunches. The plants, however, very seldom blossom.

_Soil._--"The soil best adapted for growing the Shallot is a light,
rich, sandy loam; but, as such soils are scarce, any light, dry soil
that has been cultivated and manured a year or two will answer." In wet
soils, it is liable to be attacked by the maggot; and such location
should, therefore, be avoided.

_Propagation and Culture._--The roots of the Shallot, which are bulbous,
are very readily increased by offsets. The bulbs are oblong, but
somewhat irregular in their form, and seldom attain a large size. As
they increase into clusters, they do not swell like roots that grow
singly.

They are propagated by dividing these clustered roots into separate
offsets, and planting the divisions in April, in very shallow drills one
foot apart; placing them about six inches apart in the drills, and
covering them lightly with earth. Soot mixed with the surface-soil has
been found of much service to prevent the maggot from committing
extensive depredations upon this plant. The only after-culture required
is that of keeping them clean from weeds, and occasionally stirring the
ground.

_Harvesting._--"As soon as the leaves decay, the bulbs will have
attained their growth, and should then be taken up, and spread out in
some dry loft; when, after being thoroughly dried and picked, they may
be put in bags, boxes, or tied in bundles by the stalks. If kept from
frost, they will remain fit for use for several months."

_Use._--The largest of the bulbs are selected, and employed in the same
manner as garlic or onions. "On account of the mildness of its flavor,
when compared with that of other cultivated plants of the Onion family,
it is preferred in cookery as a seasoner in soups and stews. It is also
much used in the raw state: the cloves, or sections of the root, cut up
into small pieces, form an ingredient in French salads; and are also
sprinkled over steaks, chops, &c. The true epicure, however, cuts a
clove or bulb in two, and, by rubbing the inside of the plate, secures
the amount of relish to suit his palate.

"Shallot vinegar is made by putting six cloves, or bulbs, into a quart
bottle of that liquid; and, when sealed down, it will keep for years.
The Shallot also makes an excellent pickle."--_M'Int._

_Varieties._--


COMMON OR SMALL SHALLOT.

Echalote ordinaire. _Vil._

Bulbs about three-fourths of an inch in diameter at the base, elongated,
and enclosed in a reddish-yellow skin, or pellicle; leaves small, ten or
twelve inches high.

This variety is early, keeps well, and is one of the best for
cultivation.


JERSEY. _Vil._

Bulbs of large size, measuring two inches in length, and rather more
than an inch in diameter at the base; grouped like the other varieties,
and enclosed in a light-brown pellicle, as fine in texture as the skin
of an onion, which this Shallot much resembles in form and odor.
Compared with the Common Shallot, it is more round, the neck is smaller,
and it is also more close or compact. Leaves remarkably glaucous, not
tall, but of good substance,--quite distinct in these respects from the
Small or the Large sort. It also sometimes produces seeds; which is,
perhaps, a recommendation, as these, when sown, frequently produce new
varieties. It is one of the earliest of all the sorts; but is
comparatively tender, and decays early.


LARGE ALENCON.

Echalote grosse d'Alencon. _Vil._

Bulb very large, exceeding in size that of the Jersey Shallot; which
variety it much resembles in form and color, and in being tender,
decaying early, and sometimes running to seed. It is, however, not quite
so early; and the leaves are longer and more glaucous. Flavor mild and
pleasant.

At the time of harvesting, the bulbs should be long exposed to the sun,
in order that they may be thoroughly dried before packing away. "The
bulbs are slow in forming, and the worst keepers, as, when stored, they
soon begin to sprout."

This variety, and also the Jersey Shallot, closely resemble the Onion.
It is possible they may constitute a distinct species.


LARGE SHALLOT.

Echalote grosse. _Vil._

Bulbs about two inches in diameter at the base, elongated, and enclosed
in a brownish-yellow skin, or pellicle; leaves fifteen to eighteen
inches high.

This variety, in size, much exceeds that of the Common or Small Shallot;
and, though later in ripening, is nevertheless the first to be found in
the market, as it forms its bulbs early in the season. Its keeping
properties are inferior to the last named.


LONG KEEPING.

This resembles the Common Shallot; but is considered superior to that
variety in its keeping properties, and in being less subject to the
attack of the maggot. It is said that the variety may be kept two
years.

       *       *       *       *       *

WELSH ONION.

Ciboule, of the French. Allium fistulosum.

The Welsh Onion is a hardy perennial from Siberia. It is quite distinct
from the Common Onion, as it forms no bulbs, but produces numerous
elongated, angular, tunicated stems, not unlike scallions, or some of
the smaller descriptions of leeks. The flower-stem is about eighteen
inches high, swollen near the middle, and terminates in a globular umbel
of greenish-white flowers. The seeds are small, black, somewhat
irregular in form, and retain their vitality two years. About thirty-six
thousand are contained in an ounce.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--The seeds are sown in drills about half an
inch in depth, and the crop subsequently treated as the Common Onion.

There are two varieties:--


COMMON OR RED WELSH ONION.

Skin, or pellicle, reddish-brown, changing to silvery-white about the
base of the leaves; the latter being fistulous, and about a foot in
height. Its principal recommendation is its remarkable hardiness. The
seeds are sometimes sown in July and August for the young stems and
leaves, which are used during winter and early in spring as salad.


WHITE WELSH ONION.

Early White. Ciboule Blanche Hative. _Vil._

This is a sub-variety of the Common Red. The skin is rose-white, and,
like that of the last named, changes to silvery-white about the upper
portion of the stem, or bulb; the leaves are longer, deeper colored,
firmer, and less subject to wither or decay at their extremities, than
those of the Common Red. The White is generally considered the better
variety; as it is more tender, and milder in flavor, though much less
productive.

The Welsh onions are of little value, except in cold latitudes; and are
rarely found in the vegetable gardens of this country.




CHAPTER III.

ASPARAGINOUS PLANTS.

The Artichoke. Asparagus. Cardoon. Hop. Oosung. Phytolacca.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ARTICHOKE.

Cynarus scolymus.

[Illustration: Green Globe Artichoke.]

The Artichoke is a hardy perennial. The stem is from four to five feet
in height, with numerous branches; the leaves are of remarkable size,
frequently measuring three feet, and sometimes nearly four feet in
length, pinnatifid, or deeply cut on the borders, and more or less
invested with an ash-colored down; the mid-ribs are large, fleshy, and
deeply grooved, or furrowed; the flowers are large, terminal, and
consist of numerous blue florets, enclosed by fleshy-pointed scales; the
seeds (eight hundred and fifty of which are contained in an ounce) are
of a grayish color, variegated with deep brown, oblong, angular,
somewhat flattened, and retain their vitality five years.

_Soil._--Select a light, rich, and rather moist soil, and trench it
well; incorporating in the process a liberal portion of old,
well-decomposed compost. Sea-weeds, kelp, rock-weed, and the like, where
they can be obtained, are the best fertilizers; but, where these are not
accessible, a slight application of salt will be beneficial.

_Propagation._--Artichokes may be propagated either by seeds, or by
slips, or suckers, from established plants. If by slips, they should be
taken off in May, when they have grown five or six inches in height, and
transplanted four or five inches deep, in rows four feet apart, and two
feet apart in the rows. Water freely, if dry weather occurs before the
young plants are established. Keep the ground loose by frequent hoeings;
and in August or September the heads will be fit for use. Before severe
weather, the plants should be covered with straw or stable-litter.

As plants of one year's growth produce but few heads, and are also later
in their development of these than established plants, it is the
practice of many cultivators to set a few young slips, and to destroy an
equal part of the old plantation, yearly.

_Propagation by Seeds._--"Sow the seeds in April, in a nursery-bed;
making the drills a foot apart, and covering the seeds an inch deep.
When the plants are three inches high, transplant as before directed.
Plants from seeds will seldom flower the first year."--_M'Int._

_To raise Seeds._--Allow a few of the largest central heads to remain;
and, just as the flowers expand, bend over the stalk so as to allow the
rain to run from the buds, as the seeds are often injured by wet
weather. In favorable seasons, they will ripen in September. According
to English authority, little dependence can be placed on seedling
plants: many produce small and worthless heads, whilst others produce
those of large size and of good quality.

_Taking the Crop._--"All of the heads should be cut as fast as they are
fit for use, whether wanted or not; as allowing them to flower greatly
weakens the plants, as does also permitting the stems that produced the
heads to remain after the heads are cut off. For pickling whole, the
heads should be cut when about two inches in diameter; for other
purposes, when they have nearly attained their full size, but before the
scales of the calyx begin to open. For what is called 'bottoms,' they
should be cut when they are at their largest size, and just as the
scales begin to show symptoms of opening, which is an indication that
the flowers are about to be formed; after which, the heads are
comparatively useless."--_M'Int._

_Use._--The portions of the plant used are the lowest parts of the
leaves, or scales, of the calyx; and also the fleshy receptacles of the
flower, freed from the bristles and seed-down. The latter are commonly
called the "choke," on account of their disagreeable character when
eaten.

Sometimes, particularly in France, the central leaf-stalk is blanched,
and eaten like cardoons. The bottom, which is the top of the
receptacles, is fried in paste, and enters largely into fricassees and
ragouts. They are sometimes pickled, and often used in a raw state as a
salad. The French also cut them into thin slices; leaving one of the
scales, or calyx leaves, attached, by which the slice is lifted, and
dipped in oil and vinegar before using. The English present the head
whole, or cut into quarters, upon a dry plate; the guests picking off
the scales one by one, which have a fleshy substance at the base. These
are eaten after being dipped in oil and vinegar.

What is called "artichoke chard" is the tender leaf-stalks blanched, and
cooked like cardoons. The Italians and French often eat the heads raw
with vinegar, oil, salt, and pepper; but they are generally preferred
when boiled.

_Varieties._--


DARK-RED SPINED.

Bud very small. The variety is remarkable for the very long spines in
which the scales terminate. For cultivation, it is inferior to the other
sorts.


EARLY PURPLE.

Purple. Purple Globe. Artichaut Violet. _Vil._

Heads rather small, obtusely conical; scales short and broad, pointed,
green at the base, tinged with purplish-red on the outside, towards
their extremities, moderately succulent, and of good quality. The
variety is early, but not hardy. In France, it is considered excellent
in its crude state, served with vinegar and oil; but not so good cooked.


GREEN GLOBE.

Large Round-headed. Globe.

A very large sort, much esteemed, and generally cultivated in England.
Heads, or buds, very large, nearly round, and with a dusky, purplish
tint. The scales turn in at the top, and the receptacle is more fleshy
than that of most varieties. It is generally preferred for the main
crop, as the scales, or edible parts, are thicker, and higher flavored,
than those of any other artichoke. It is not a hardy variety, and
requires ample protection during winter.


GREEN, OR COMMON.

French.

Bud very large, of a conical or oval form; scales deep-green, thick, and
fleshy, pointed at the tips, and turned outwards. Though it has not the
same thickness of flesh as the Green Globe Artichoke, it is much
hardier, more prolific, and one of the best sorts for cultivation.


GREEN PROVENCE.

Bud large; scales comparatively long and narrow, of a lively green
color, erect, fleshy at the base, and terminating in a sharp, brownish
spine, or thorn; leaves of the plant deep-green. Most esteemed in its
crude state; eaten as a salad in vinegar and oil.


LAON.

Gros vert de Laon. _Vil._

Similar to the Common Green Artichoke, but of larger size. Scales rather
loose and open, very deep-green, fleshy, and pointed. Much cultivated in
the vicinity of Paris, and there considered the best.


LARGE FLAT BRITTANY.

Artichaut Camus de Bretagne. _Vil._

Bud of medium size, somewhat globular, but flattened at the top; scales
closely set together, green, brownish on the borders,--short, thick, and
fleshy at the base. Earlier than the Laon, but not so fleshy. Much grown
in Anjou and Brittany.


PURPLISH-RED.

Bud conical; scales green towards their tips, and purplish-red at their
base. Not very fleshy, and in no respect superior to the other
varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

ASPARAGUS.

Asparagus officinalis.

Asparagus is a hardy, perennial, maritime plant. It rises to the height
of five feet and upwards, with an erect, branching stem; short, slender,
nearly cylindrical leaves; and greenish, drooping flowers. The seeds,
which are produced in globular, scarlet berries, are black, somewhat
triangular, and retain their germinative powers four years. Twelve
hundred and fifty weigh an ounce.

It is indigenous to the shores of various countries of Europe and Asia;
and, since its introduction, has become naturalized to a considerable
extent in this country. It is frequently seen in mowing-fields upon old
farms; and, in some instances, has found its way to the beaches and
marshes of the seacoast.

_Propagation._--It is propagated from seed, which may be sown either in
autumn, just before the closing-up of the ground; or in spring, as soon
as the soil is in good working condition. The nursery, or seed-bed,
should be thoroughly spaded over, the surface levelled and raked smooth
and fine, and the seed sown, not very thickly, in drills twelve or
fourteen inches apart, and about an inch in depth. An ounce of seed is
sufficient for fifty or sixty feet of drill.

When the plants are well up, thin them to three inches asunder; as they
will be much stronger, if grown at some distance apart, than if allowed
to stand closely together. Cultivate in the usual manner during the
summer, and give the plants a light covering of stable-litter during the
winter.

Good plants of one year's growth are preferred by experienced growers
for setting; but some choose those of two years, and they may be used
when three years old.

_Soil and Planting._--"A rich, sandy, alluvial soil, impregnated with
salt, is naturally best adapted to the growth of Asparagus; and, in such
soil, its cultivation is an easy matter. Soils of a different character
must be made rich by the application of fertilizing material, and light
and friable by trenching. Sand, in wet, heavy, clayey soil, is of
permanent benefit.

"The market-gardeners near London are aware of this; for, highly as they
manure their ground for crops generally, they procure sand, or sandy
mud, from certain parts of the Thames, for Asparagus plantations, where
the soil is too heavy.

"The ground should be thoroughly trenched to the depth of two and a half
or three feet: and, in order to make it rich, a large quantity of manure
should be incorporated, as well at the bottom as near the
surface,--using either sandy mud; the scourings of ditches made into
compost; rock-weed, or kelp, where they can be procured; decayed leaves,
or leaf-mould; the remains of hot-beds, good peat, or almost any other
manure not in too crude a state.

"Where the soil is not so deep, and the subsoil coarse and rather
gravelly, the ground is not trenched so deep; the bottom of the trench
being merely dug over. Above this, however, a large quantity of manure
is applied; and by this, with good after-management,--chiefly consisting
in making the soil fine and light for the shoots to push
through,--excellent crops are produced.

"The ground should be divided into beds either three or five feet wide,
with an alley or path of two feet in width between. The reason for
having some of the beds so much narrower than the others is, that the
narrow ones are sooner heated by the sun's rays, and consequently an
earlier production is induced.

"The distance between the rows in the beds may be regulated as follows:
When the beds are three feet wide, two rows should be transplanted along
them: each row should be a foot from the edge of the bed, and they will
consequently be a foot apart. In beds that are five feet wide, three
rows should be transplanted, also lengthwise,--one along the middle, and
one on each side, a foot from the edge of the bed. The distance from
plant to plant in the rows should not be less than one foot; at this
distance, good-sized heads will be produced: but, if very large heads
are desired for exhibition or competition, the plants should be fifteen,
or even eighteen, inches asunder.

"The transplanting may be performed either in April or May. The
three-feet beds should be traced out to run east and west, or so as to
present the side of the bed to the direct action of the sun's rays when
they are most powerful. Asparagus, in beds so formed, pushes earlier in
the season than it does in beds running north and south. For all except
the earliest beds, the direction is immaterial; and they may run east
and west, or north and south, as may be most convenient.

"In proceeding to transplant, the beds, and paths, or alleys, should be
marked off at the required distance. A stout stake should be driven at
each corner of the beds, and from these the distances for the rows
should be measured. There are various ways of transplanting. Some
stretch a line, and cut out a trench only deep enough to allow the roots
to be laid out without doubling; and they are spread out like a fan
perpendicularly against the side of the cut, the crown of the plant
being kept two inches below the surface of the ground. Some dig out a
trench, and form little hillocks of fine soil, over which the roots are
spread, extending like the sticks of an umbrella. Others make a ridge,
astride which they set the plants, spreading their roots on each side of
the ridge; and, again, some take off a portion of the soil on the bed,
and, after the surface has been raked smooth, the roots of the plants
are spread out nearly at right angles on the level.

"The first method is the most expeditious, and is generally practised in
setting extensive plantations: but, whatever plan be preferred, the
crowns of the plants should all be on the same level; otherwise those
that are too high would be liable to be injured by the knife in
cutting."

During the summer, nothing will be necessary but to keep the plants
clear of weeds; and, in doing this, the hoe should be dispensed with as
much as possible, to avoid injuring the roots. In the autumn, when the
tops have completely withered, they should be cut down nearly level with
the surface of the ground, and burned. The beds should then be lightly
dug over, and three or four inches of rich loam, intermixed with
well-digested compost, and salt at the rate of two quarts to the square
rod, should be applied; which will leave the crowns of the roots about
five inches below the surface.

_Second Year._--Early in spring, as soon as the frost leaves the ground,
dig over the beds, taking care not to disturb the roots; rake the
surface smooth; and, during the summer, cultivate as before directed:
but none of the shoots should be cut for use. In the autumn, after the
stalks have entirely withered, cut down and burn as in the previous
year; stir the surface of the bed, and add an inch of soil and manure,
which will bring the crowns six or seven inches below ground,--a depth
preferred, by a majority of cultivators, for established plantations.

_Third Year._--Early in spring, stir the ground as directed for the two
previous years. Some cultivators make a slight cutting during this
season; but the future strength of the plants will be increased by
allowing the crop to grow naturally as during the first and second
years. In autumn, cut and burn as before; dig over the surface; add a
dressing of manure; and, in the ensuing spring, the beds may be cut
freely for use.

Instead of transplanting the roots, asparagus-beds are sometimes formed
by sowing the seeds where the plants are to remain. When this method is
adopted, the beds should be laid out and trenched, as before directed,
and about three inches of soil removed from the entire surface. The seed
should then be sown in drills an inch deep, at the distances marked out
for the rows, and covered with rich, light soil. When the seedlings are
two or three inches high, they should be thinned to nine or twelve
inches apart; and, in thinning, the weakest plants should be removed. In
the autumn, cut down the plants after they have withered, stir and
smooth the surface, and add a dressing of manure. In the spring of the
second year, stir the surface again; and, during the summer, cultivate
as before. In the autumn, the plants will be ready for the dressing;
which consists of the soil previously taken from the bed, with
sufficient well-digested compost added to cover the crowns of the roots
five or six inches in depth. The after-culture is similar to that of
beds from transplanted roots.

"Asparagus-beds should be enriched every autumn with a liberal
application of good compost containing some mixture of salt; the benefit
of which will be evident, not only in the quantity, but in the size and
quality, of the produce. The dressing should be applied after the
removal of the decayed stalks, and forked in, that its enriching
properties may be washed to the roots of the plants by winter rains.

"In general, transplanted Asparagus comes up quite slender the first
year; is larger the second; and, the third year, a few shoots may be fit
for cutting. It is nearly in perfection the fourth year; and, if
properly managed, will annually give an abundant supply during the life
of the maker of a bed or plantation."

_Cutting._--"The shoots should be cut angularly, from two to three
inches below the surface of the ground; taking care not to wound the
younger buds. It is in the best condition for cutting when the shoots
are four or five inches above ground, and while the head, or bud,
remains close and firm.

"It is the practice to cut off all the shoots as they appear, up to the
period when it is thought best to leave off cutting altogether. The time
for this depends on the climate, season, nature of the soil, and
strength of the plants. Where the climate is good, or when the season is
an early one, cutting must be commenced early; and of course, in such a
case, it ought not to be continued late, as the plants would thereby be
weakened."

In the Middle States, the cutting should be discontinued from the 10th
to the 15th of June; and from the 15th to the 25th of the same month in
the Eastern States and the Canadas.

"If the plants are weak, they should be allowed to grow up as early as
possible, to make foliage, and consequently fresh roots, and thus to
acquire more vigor for the ensuing year. It is also advisable to leave
off at an early period the cutting of some of the best of the beds
intended for early produce, in order that the buds may be well matured
early in autumn, and thus be prepared to push vigorously early in
spring."

Asparagus-beds will continue from twenty to thirty years; and there are
instances of beds being regularly cut, and remaining in good condition
for more than fifty years.

_Seed._--"Select some of the finest and earliest heads as they make
their appearance in the spring; tie them to stakes during the summer,
taking care not to drive the stake through the crown of the plant. If
for the market, or to be sent to a distance, wash out the seeds in
autumn, and dry thoroughly; if for home-sowing, allow the seeds to
remain in the berries till used."

_Use._--The young shoots are boiled twenty minutes or half an hour,
until they become soft; and are principally served on toasted bread,
with melted butter. It is the practice of some to boil the shoots
entire; others cut or break the sprout just above the more tough or
fibrous part, and cook only the part which is tender and eatable. This
is snapped or cut into small sections, which are boiled, buttered,
seasoned, and served on toast in the usual form. "The smaller sprouts
are sometimes cut into pieces three-eighths of an inch long, and cooked
and served as green pease." The sprouts are also excellent when made
into soup.

It is one of the most productive, economical, and healthful of all
garden vegetables.

_Varieties._--"The names of numerous varieties occur in the catalogues
of seedsmen: but there seems to be little permanency of character in the
plants; such slight variations as appear from time to time being caused,
to a considerable extent, by the nature of the soil, or by the
situation in which the plants are grown. What are called the Red-topped
and Green-topped may perhaps be somewhat distinct, and considered as
varieties."--_Glenny._

Soil and location have unquestionably much influence, both as respects
the quality and size of the sprouts. A bed of asparagus in one locality
produced shoots seldom reaching a diameter of half an inch, and of a
very tough and fibrous character; while a bed in another situation,
formed of plants taken from the same nursery-bed, actually produced
sprouts so large and fine as to obtain the prize of the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society.

If any variety really exists peculiar in size, form, color, or quality,
it cannot be propagated by seed. Large sprouts may afford seeds, which,
as a general rule, will produce finer asparagus than seeds from smaller
plants; but a variety, when it occurs, can be propagated only by a
division of the roots.

Mr. Thompson states, that on one part of Mr. Grayson's extensive
plantation, on the south side of the Thames, near London, the so-called
Grayson's Giant was produced; and in another section, the common sort:
but, when both were made to change places, the common acquired the
dimensions of the Giant, whilst the latter diminished to the ordinary
size.

Seeds of the following named and described sorts may be obtained of
seedsmen, and will undoubtedly, in nearly all cases, afford fine
asparagus; but they will not produce plants which will uniformly possess
the character of the parent variety:--


BATTERSEA. _Rog._

Battersea is famed for producing fine asparagus, and the name is applied
to the particular variety there grown. The heads are large, full, and
close, and the tops tinted with a reddish-green color. It is probably
intermediate between the Green and Purple-topped.


GRAVESEND. _Rog._

Originated and named under like circumstances with the Battersea. The
top is greener, and not generally so plump and close; but it is
considered finer flavored. Both varieties are, however, held in great
estimation.


GRAYSON'S GIANT.

This variety, as also the Deptford, Mortlake, and Reading, all
originated and were named under the same conditions as the varieties
before described. All are fine sorts; but the difference between them,
and indeed between all of the kinds, if important, is certainly not
permanent, so long as they are offered in the form of seeds for
propagation.

Mr. Grayson, the originator of this variety, produced a hundred sprouts,
the aggregate weight of which was forty-two pounds,--the largest ever
raised in Britain.


GERMAN.

Asperge d'Allemagne. _Vil._

This variety very nearly resembles the Giant Purple-topped. It is,
however, considered a little earlier, and the top is deeper colored.


GIANT PURPLE-TOP.

Dutch. Red-top.

Sprout white; the top, as it breaks ground, purple; size very large,
sometimes measuring an inch and three-fourths in diameter, but greatly
affected by soil and cultivation.

A hundred sprouts of this variety have been produced which weighed
twenty-five pounds.


GREEN-TOP.

This variety, when grown under the same conditions as the Giant
Purple-top, is generally smaller or more slender. The top of the
sprout, and the scales on the sides, are often slightly tinged with
purple. The plant, when full grown, is perceptibly more green than that
of the Giant Purple-top. From most nursery-beds, plants of both
varieties will probably be obtained, with every intervening grade of
size and color.

       *       *       *       *       *

CARDOON.

Chardon. Chardoon. Cynara cardunculus.

In its general character and appearance, the Cardoon resembles the
Artichoke. Its full size is not attained until the second year, when it
is "truly a gigantic herbaceous plant," of five or six feet in height.
The flowers, which are smaller than those of the artichoke, are produced
in July and August of the second year, and are composed of numerous
small blue florets, enclosed by somewhat fleshy, pointed scales. The
seeds are oblong, a little flattened, of a grayish or grayish-green
color, spotted and streaked with deep brown; and, when perfectly grown,
are similar in size and form to those of the apple. About six hundred
are contained in an ounce; and they retain their vitality seven years.

_Soil, Propagation, and Culture._--The best soil for the Cardoon is a
light and deep but not over-rich loam. It is raised from seed; which, as
the plant is used in the first year of its growth and is liable to be
injured by the winter, should be sown annually, although the Cardoon is
really a perennial. It succeeds best when sown where the plants are to
remain; for, if removed, the plants recover slowly, are more liable to
run to seed, and, besides, seldom attain the size of those that have not
been transplanted.

The seed should be sown as early in spring as the weather becomes warm
and settled, in drills three feet apart, an inch and a half in depth,
and the young plants afterwards thinned to twelve inches asunder in the
drills. The leaves are blanched before being used.

It is sometimes raised and blanched as follows: Sow the seed at the
bottom of trenches made about six inches deep, twelve inches wide, three
feet apart, and of a length according to the supply required. At the
bottom of the trench, thoroughly mix a small quantity of well-digested
compost, and sow the seeds in small groups, or collections (three or
four seeds together), at about twelve or fifteen inches apart, and cover
them an inch or an inch and a half deep. When the young plants have
acquired three or four leaves, they should be thinned out to single
plants. During the summer, keep them free from weeds; and, as they
require much moisture, it is well to water frequently, if the weather is
very dry. In September, the plants will have attained their growth for
the season, and be ready for blanching; which should be done in a dry
day, and when the plants are entirely free from dampness. It is thus
performed: The leaves of each plant are carefully and lightly tied
together with strong matting; keeping the whole upright, and the ribs of
the leaves closely together. The plant is then bound with twisted
hay-bands, or bands of straw, about an inch and a half in diameter;
beginning at the root, and continuing the winding until two-thirds or
three-fourths of the height is covered. If there is no heavy frost, the
leaves will blanch quickly and finely without further pains: but, if
frosty weather occurs, it will be necessary to earth up about the
plants, as is practised with celery; but care should be taken not to
raise the earth higher than the hay-bands.

One method of blanching is simply to tie the leaves together with
matting, and then to earth up the plants from time to time like celery;
beginning early in September, and adding gradually every week until they
are sufficiently covered. Those, however, blanched by the banding
process, are superior, both in respect to color and in the greater
length of the parts blanched.

Another practice is to earth up a little about the base of the plant,
tie the leaves together with thread or matting, and then envelop the
whole quite to the top with a quantity of long, clean wheat or rye
straw, placed up and down the plant, and tied together with small cord
or strong matting. The leaves will thus blanch without being earthed up,
and speedily become white. This process is a good one, is economical,
and presents a neat appearance.

"In either of the methods, it is very necessary to be careful that the
plants are perfectly dry before they are enveloped in their covering:
they will otherwise rot." In about three weeks after being tied up, the
cardoons will be fit for use.

_Harvesting._--When the stems and midribs of the leaves are thoroughly
blanched, they are ready for use. Until the occurrence of severe
weather, the table may be supplied directly from the garden: but, before
the closing-up of the ground, "the plants should be taken up, roots and
leaves entire, and removed to the cellar; where they should be packed in
sand, laying the plants down in rows, and packing the sand around them,
one course over another, till finished. In this way, they not only keep
well, but become more perfectly blanched."

_To raise Seed._--Allow two or three plants to remain unblanched, and
leave them in the ground during the winter, protected by straw or other
convenient material. They will grow to the height, and flower and seed,
as before described. One plant will afford sufficient seed for any
common garden.

_Use._--"The stems of the leaves, as well as the mid-ribs, when
blanched, are used for soups, stews, and even for salads, in autumn and
winter. The longer these parts of the plant are, and the more rapidly
they are grown, the more they are esteemed, on account of their greater
crispness, tenderness, and color." The "Gardener's Chronicle" gives the
following directions for dressing them:--

"When a Cardoon is to be cooked, the solid stalks of the leaves are to
be cut in pieces about six inches long, and boiled, like any other
vegetable, in pure water (not salt and water), till they are tender.
They are then to be carefully deprived of the slime and strings that
will be found to cover them; and, having been thus thoroughly cleansed,
are to be plunged in cold water, where they must remain until they are
wanted for the table. They are then taken out, and heated with white
sauce, or marrow. The process just described is for the purpose of
rendering them white, and of depriving them of a bitterness which is
peculiar to them. If this is neglected, the cardoons will be black, not
white, as well as disagreeable." M'Intosh remarks, that, when skilfully
prepared, they form an excellent and wholesome dish, deserving far more
general notice.

In France, the flowers are gathered, and dried in the shade; and, when
so preserved, are used as a substitute for rennet, to coagulate milk.

_Varieties._--


COMMON, OR LARGE SMOOTH. _Trans._

Smooth Large Solid. Plein Inerme. _Vil._

This kind grows from four to five feet high. The leaves are large and
strong, though somewhat smaller than those of the Tours or Prickly
Cardoon. They are of a shining-green color, with little appearance of
hoariness on the upper surface, and generally destitute of spines;
though some of the plants occasionally have a few small ones at the base
of the leaflets.

The Cardon _Plein Inerme_ of the French, which is described in the "Bon
Jardinier" as a novelty, corresponds nearly with the Large Smooth or
Common Cardoon.


LARGE SPANISH. _Trans._

D'Espagne. _Vil._

Stem five or six feet high. The divisions of the leaflets are rather
narrower, and somewhat more hoary, than those of the Common Cardoon.
The ribs are longer, and the whole plant stronger and generally more
spiny; though, on the whole, comparatively smooth. It is not, however,
always very readily distinguished from the Common or Large Smooth
Cardoon. It runs up to seed quicker than the other varieties.


PUVIS. _Thomp._

Artichoke-leaved. Lance-leaved. Puvis de Bourg. _Vil._

The Puvis Cardoon is remarkable for its strong growth, the large size it
attains, and the thickness of the mid-ribs of the leaves, which are
almost solid. The leaves are thick, and not at all prickly, or very
slightly so. The terminal lobe is very large, and lance-formed: whence
the name. It is a fine variety, and of more tender substance than the
Tours Cardoon.


RED. _Trans._

Blood-ribbed. Red-stemmed. _Thomp._ Large Purple.

The leaves of this variety are green, without any hoariness; long,
narrow, and more sharply pointed than those of most of the other kinds.
The ribs are large, solid, and tinged with red. A recent sort, excellent
in quality, but wanting in hardiness.


TOURS. _Trans._

Large Tours Solid. Cardon de Tours. _Vil._

The leaves of this variety are very hoary on the upper surface; the
divisions are broad, sharply pointed, and terminate with rigid, sharp
spines. Spines also grow, in clusters of from three to five, at the base
of the leaflets; and are very strong, and of a yellowish color. This
variety is not so tall as the Spanish or Large Smooth. The ribs are
large and solid.

The Tours Cardoon is cultivated by the market-gardeners around Paris;
and, notwithstanding the inconvenience arising from its numerous and
rigid spines, it is considered by them as the best, because of its
thick, tender, and delicate ribs.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HOP.

Humulus lupulus.

The Hop is considered a native of this continent, and is found wild in
all parts of the United States. The root is perennial, but the stems are
annual. The latter are from ten to twenty-five feet in length, angular,
rough, and twine from right to left. The leaves are placed opposite each
other on the stem, on long, winding footstalks: the smaller ones are
heart-shaped; the larger ones three or five lobed, veiny, and rough. The
barren and fertile flowers are produced on separate plants: the former
being very numerous and paniculated; the latter in the form of an ament,
or collection of small scales, which are more or less covered with a
fine, yellow powder called "lupulin."

While several distinct sorts of the fertile or hop-bearing plant have
been long in cultivation, only one variety of the male or barren plant
is known.

_Soil and Location._--Though it may be cultivated with success in a
variety of soils, the Hop prefers a rich, deep loam, which should be
thoroughly ploughed, and, if necessary, enriched with well-digested
compost. In general, it may be said that "good corn-land is good
hop-land." Hops, however, are reputed to be of better quality when
raised on comparatively thin soils.

_Propagation and Culture._--It is propagated by a division of the roots
early in spring. When extensively cultivated, the plants are set in
hills, five to seven feet apart, and three or four cuttings or slips
allowed to a hill; but in garden culture, to procure the young shoots,
the plants are set in rows about three feet apart, and one foot from
plant to plant in the rows.

_Use._--The plant is principally cultivated for its flowers, which are
largely employed in the manufacture of malt liquors. The young shoots
are cut in spring, when they are five or six inches in height, and eaten
as salad, or used as asparagus, which they somewhat resemble in taste.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOOSUNG, OR OOSUNG. _Hov. Mag._

A lettuce-like plant from Shanghai. Stems cylindrical, from two to three
feet high, erect, light green, with a green, succulent pith; leaves
oblong, tapering to the base, the uppermost clasping; the flowers are
small, yellow, in panicles slightly drooping. If sown in April or May,
the plants will ripen their seed in August.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--Sow in a cool frame, in either April or May,
or continuously, for a succession, at intervals during May, and
transplant into the open ground in the usual manner of treating
lettuces; making the rows about eighteen inches apart, and placing the
plants about the same distance apart in the rows. The plants will be fit
for use early in June.

_Use._--The succulent stem is the part used. This is divested of its
outer rind, and either simply boiled, with a little salt in the water,
and dressed as asparagus, or stewed in soy, with salt, pepper, and
butter added, or boiled in soup as okra. It is a very agreeable and
pleasant addition to the list of vegetable esculents, and worthy of
trial.

The plant is very little cultivated; and there are no described
varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

PERENNIAL PHYTOLACCA.

Garget. Poke. Pigeon Berry. Phytolacca decandra.

A hardy, herbaceous, perennial plant, common by roadsides, in waste
places, and springing up spontaneously on newly burned pine-lands. It
has a branching, purplish stem, five to seven feet in height; and large,
oval, pointed, entire leaves. The flowers are produced in July and
August, in long clusters; and are of a dull-white color. The fruit
consists of a flat, purple, juicy berry; and is sometimes used for
dyeing purple.

_Soil and Culture._--It will thrive in almost any soil or situation; and
can be easily propagated from seed, or by dividing the roots. The plant
requires little cultivation, and is so abundant in many localities as to
afford an ample supply for the mere labor of gathering.

_Use._--The young shoots are eaten early in the season, as a substitute
for asparagus, which they resemble in taste. When treated in the manner
of sea-kale, the flavor of the sprouts is scarcely distinguishable from
that of asparagus. The root has reputed important medicinal properties;
and, when taken internally, acts as a violent emetic.


ANNUAL PHYTOLACCA.

Phytolacca esculenta.

An annual species, with foliage similar to the foregoing. It is much
less vigorous and stocky in habit. The seed should be sown in April, in
drills fifteen inches apart. The young shoots, or plants, are used in
the manner of the species before described.




CHAPTER IV.


CUCURBITACEOUS PLANTS.

The Cucumber. Egyptian Cucumber. Globe Cucumber. Gourd, or Calabash. The
Melon. Musk-melon. Persian Melons. Water-melon. Papanjay, or Sponge
Cucumber. Prickly-fruited Gherkin. Pumpkin. Snake Cucumber. Squash.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CUCUMBER.

Cucumis sativus.

The Cucumber is a tender, annual plant; and is a native of the East
Indies, or of tropical origin. It has an angular, creeping stem; large,
somewhat heart-shaped, leaves; and axillary staminate or pistillate
flowers. The fruit is cylindrical, generally elongated, often somewhat
angular, smooth, or with scattering black or white spines; the flesh is
white or greenish-white, and is divided at the centre of the fruit into
three parts, in each of which the seeds are produced in great abundance.
These seeds are of an elliptical or oval form, much flattened, and of a
pale yellowish-white color. About twelve hundred are contained in an
ounce; and they retain their vitality ten years.

_Soil and Culture._--Very dry and very wet soils should be avoided.
Cucumbers succeed decidedly best in warm, moist, rich, loamy ground. The
essentials to their growth are heat, and a fair proportion of moisture.
They should not be planted or set in the open air until there is a
prospect of continued warm and pleasant weather; as, when planted early,
not only are the seeds liable to decay in the ground, but the young
plants are frequently cut off by frost.

The hills should be five or six feet apart in each direction. Make them
fifteen or eighteen inches in diameter, and a foot in depth; fill them
three-fourths full of thoroughly digested compost, and then draw four or
five inches of earth over the whole, raising the hill a little above the
level of the ground; plant fifteen or twenty seeds in each, cover half
an inch deep, and press the earth smoothly over with the back of the
hoe. When all danger from bugs and worms is past, thin out the plants;
leaving but three or four of the strongest or healthiest to a hill.

_Taking the Crop._--As fast as the cucumbers attain a suitable size,
they should be plucked, whether required for use or not. The imperfectly
formed, as well as the symmetrical, should all be removed. Fruit,
however inferior, left to ripen on the vines, soon destroys their
productiveness.

_Seed._--"Cucumbers, from their natural proneness to impregnate each
other when, grown together, are exceedingly difficult to keep true to
their original points of merit;" and consequently, to retain any variety
in its purity, it must be grown apart from all other sorts. When a few
seeds are desired for the vegetable garden, two or three of the
finest-formed cucumbers should be selected early in the season, and
allowed to ripen on the plants. In September, or when fully ripe, cut
them open, take out the seeds, and allow them to stand a day or two, or
until the pulp attached to them begins to separate; when they should be
washed clean, thoroughly dried, and packed away for future use.

_For Pickling._--The land for raising cucumbers for pickling may be
either swarded or stubble; but it must be in good condition, and such as
is not easily affected by drought. It should be deeply ploughed, and the
surface afterwards made fine and friable by being thoroughly harrowed.
The hills should be six feet apart, and are generally formed by
furrowing the land at this distance in each direction. Manure the hills
with well-digested compost, level off, draw over a little fine earth,
and the land is ready for planting.

This may be done at any time from the middle of June to the first week
in July. The quantity of seed allowed to an acre varies from
three-fourths of a pound, upwards. In most cases, growers seed very
liberally, to provide against the depredation of worms and bugs; usually
putting six or eight times as many seeds in a hill as will be really
required for the crop. When the plants are well established and beyond
danger, the field is examined, and the hills thinned to three or four
plants; or, where there is a deficiency of plants, replanted.

As fast as the cucumbers attain the proper size, they should be plucked;
the usual practice being to go over the plantation daily. In gathering,
all the fruit should be removed,--the misshapen and unmarketable, as
well as those which are well formed; for, when any portion of the crop
is allowed to remain and ripen, the plants become much less productive.

In favorable seasons, and under a high state of cultivation, a hundred
and twenty-five thousand are obtained from an acre; while, under
opposite conditions, the crop may not exceed fifty thousand. The average
price is about a dollar and twenty-five cents per thousand.

_Varieties._--


EARLY CLUSTER.

Early Green Cluster.

A very popular, early cucumber, producing its fruit in clusters near the
root of the plant: whence the name. The plant is healthy, hardy, and
vigorous; fruit comparatively short and thick. Its usual length is about
five inches, and its diameter about two inches; skin prickly, green,--at
the blossom-end, often paler, or nearly white,--brownish-yellow when
ripe; flesh white, seedy, tender, and well flavored, but less crispy or
brittle than that of many other varieties.

It is a good early garden sort, and is very productive; but is not well
adapted for pickling, on account of the soft and seedy character of its
flesh.


EARLY FRAME.

Short Green.

One of the oldest of the garden sorts, justly styled a standard variety.
Plant healthy and vigorous, six to ten feet in length; fruit straight
and well formed, five inches and a half long, and two inches and a half
in diameter; skin deep-green, paler at the blossom-end, changing to
clear yellow as it approaches maturity, and, when fully ripe, of a
yellowish, russet-brown color; flesh greenish-white, rather seedy, but
tender, and of an agreeable flavor. It is a few days later than the
Early Cluster.

The variety is universally popular, and is found in almost every
vegetable garden. It is also very productive; succeeds well, whether
grown in open culture or under glass; and, if plucked while young and
small, makes an excellent pickle.


EARLY RUSSIAN.

This comparatively new variety resembles, in some respects, the Early
Cluster. Fruit from three to four inches in length, an inch and a half
or two inches in diameter, and generally produced in pairs; flesh
tender, crisp, and well flavored. When ripe, the fruit is deep-yellow or
yellowish-brown.

Its merits are its hardiness, extreme earliness, and great
productiveness. It comes into use nearly ten days in advance of the
Early Cluster, and is the earliest garden variety now cultivated. Its
small size is, however, considered an objection; and some of the larger
kinds are generally preferred for the main crop.


LONDON LONG GREEN. _M'Int._

Fruit about a foot in length, tapering towards the extremities; skin
very deep-green while the fruit is young, yellow when it is ripe; flesh
greenish-white, firm, and crisp; flavor good.

This variety is nearly related to the numerous prize sorts which in
England are cultivated under glass, and forced during the winter. There
is little permanency in the slight variations of character by which they
are distinguished; and old varieties are constantly being dropped from
the catalogues, and others, with different names, substituted. Amongst
the most prominent of these sub-varieties are the following:--

_Carter's Superior._--Recently introduced. Represented as one of the
largest and finest of the forcing varieties.

_Conqueror of the West._--Eighteen to twenty inches in length. It is a
fine prize sort, and succeeds well in open culture.

_Cuthill's Black Spine._--Six to nine inches in length, hardy, early,
and productive. An excellent sort for starting in a hot-bed. Fruit very
firm and attractive.

_The Doctor._--Sixteen to eighteen inches in length, and contracted
towards the stem in the form of a neck. In favorable seasons, it will
attain a good size, if grown in the open ground. Crisp, tender, and well
flavored.

_Eggleston's Conqueror._--"Very prolific, good for forcing, of fine
flavor, hardy, and a really useful sort. Specimens have been grown
measuring twenty-eight inches in length, nine inches and a half in
circumference, and weighing five pounds."

_Flanigan's Prize._--An old, established variety; having been grown in
England upwards of thirty years. Length fifteen inches.

_Hunter's Prolific._--Length eighteen inches. Very crisp and excellent,
but requires more heat than most other varieties. Spines white; fruit
covered with a good bloom, and not liable to turn yellow at the base.

_Improved Sion House._--This variety has received many prizes in
England. Not only is it well adapted for the summer crop, but it
succeeds remarkably well when grown under glass.

_Irishman._--Length twenty-two to twenty-five inches. Handsome, and
excellent for exhibition.

_Lord Kenyon's Favorite._--Length twelve to eighteen inches. A fine sort
for winter forcing.

_Manchester Prize._--This, like the Nepal, is one of the largest of the
English greenhouse prize varieties. It sometimes measures two feet in
length, and weighs twelve pounds. In favorable seasons, it will attain a
large size in open culture, and sometimes perfect its seed.

_Nepal._--One of the largest of all varieties; length about twenty-four
inches; weight ten to twelve pounds.

_Norman's Stitchworth-Park Hero._--A recently introduced variety, hardy,
long, handsome, very prolific, and fine flavored.

_Old Sion House._--Length about nine inches. This is a well-tried,
winter, forcing variety. Like the Improved Sion House, it also succeeds
well in open culture. Quality good, though the extremities are sometimes
bitter.

_Prize-fighter._--Length about sixteen inches. Good for the summer crop
or for exhibition.

_Rifleman._--This variety is described as one of the best prize
cucumbers. It has a black spine; always grows very even from stem to
point, with scarcely any handle; carries its bloom well; keeps a good
fresh color; and is not liable to turn yellow as many other sorts.
Length twenty-four to twenty-eight inches. An abundant bearer.

_Ringleader._--A prominent prize sort, about fifteen inches in length.
It succeeds well, whether grown under glass or in the open ground.

_Roman Emperor._--Length twelve to fifteen inches.

_Southgate._--This variety has been pronounced the most productive, and
the best for forcing, of all the prize sorts. It is not so late as many
of the English varieties, and will frequently succeed well if grown in
the open ground.

_Victory of Bath._--Length about seventeen inches. Well adapted for
forcing or for the general crop.


LONG GREEN PRICKLY.

Long Prickly. Early Long Green Prickly.

This is a large-sized variety, and somewhat later than the White-spined.
The plant is a strong grower, and the foliage of a deep-green color; the
fruit is about seven inches in length, straight, and generally angular;
skin dark-green, changing to yellow as the fruit approaches
maturity,--when fully ripe, it is reddish-brown, and is often
reticulated about the insertion of the stem; prickles black; flesh
white, somewhat seedy, but crisp, tender, and well flavored.

The Long Green Prickly is hardy and productive; makes a good pickle, if
plucked while young; and is well deserving of cultivation. It differs
from the London Long Green and the Long Green Turkey in its form, which
is much thicker in proportion to its length; and also in the character
of its flesh, which is more pulpy and seedy.


LONG GREEN TURKEY.

Extra Long Green Turkey.

A distinct and well-defined variety; when full grown, sometimes
measuring nearly eighteen inches in length. Form long and slender,
contracted towards the stem in the form of a neck, and swollen towards
the opposite extremity; seeds few, and usually produced nearest the
blossom-end. The neck is generally solid. While the fruit is young, the
skin is deep-green; afterwards it changes to clear yellow, and finally
assumes a rusty-yellow or yellowish-brown. Flesh remarkably firm and
crisp; exceeding, in these respects, that of any other variety. Very
productive and excellent.

Its remarkably firm and crispy flesh, and the absence of seeds, render
it serviceable for the table after it has reached a very considerable
size. For the same reasons, it may be pickled at a stage of its growth
when other more seedy and pulpy sorts would be comparatively worthless.


SHORT PRICKLY.

Short Green Prickly. Early Short Green Prickly.

This variety somewhat resembles the Long Prickly; but it is shorter, and
proportionally thicker. Its length, when suitable for use, is about four
inches. Skin prickly, green, changing to yellow at maturity; flesh
transparent greenish-white, rather seedy, but tender, crisp, and fine
flavored.

The variety is very hardy and productive, comes early into fruit, and is
one of the best for pickling. It is a few days later than the Early
Cluster.


UNDERWOOD'S SHORT PRICKLY.

This is an improved variety of the common Short Prickly, and is the best
of all the sorts for extensive cultivation for pickling. The plant is
hardy and productive. The fruit, when young, is very symmetrical, and of
a fine deep-green color. Its flesh is characterized by extraordinary
crispness and solidity. When more advanced, the color becomes paler, and
the flesh more soft and seedy. The fruit, at maturity, is yellow.


WHITE SPANISH.

The form of this variety is similar to that of the White-spined. The
fruit measures about five inches in length, two inches in diameter, and
is generally somewhat ribbed. When suitable for use, the skin is white;
a characteristic by which the variety is readily distinguished from all
others. The flesh is crisp, tender, and well flavored. At maturity, the
fruit is yellow.


WHITE-SPINED.

Early White-spined. New-York Market.

This very distinct variety is extensively grown for marketing, both at
the North and South. The plants grow from six to ten feet in length;
and, like those of the Early Frame, are of a healthy, luxurious habit.
The fruit is of full medium size, straight, and well formed; about six
inches in length, and two inches and a half in diameter. Skin
deep-green; prickles white; flesh white, tender, crispy, and of
remarkably fine flavor. As the fruit ripens, the skin gradually becomes
paler; and, when fully ripe, is nearly white: by which peculiarity, in
connection with its white spines, the variety is always readily
distinguishable.

The White-spined is one of the best sorts for the table; and is greatly
prized by market-men on account of its color, which is never changed to
yellow, though kept long after being plucked. It is generally thought to
retain its freshness longer than any other variety, and consequently to
be well fitted for transporting long distances; though, on account of
its peculiar color, the freshness may be less real than apparent.

For the very general dissemination of this variety, the public are, in a
great degree, indebted to the late I. P. Rand, Esq., of Boston, whose
integrity as a merchant, and whose skill as a practical vegetable
cultivator and horticulturist, will be long remembered.

       *       *       *       *       *

EGYPTIAN CUCUMBER.

Hairy Cucumber. Round-leaved Egyptian. Concombre chate. _Vil._ Cucumis
chate.

This is a tender, annual plant, with an angular, creeping stem, and
alternate, somewhat heart-shaped, leaves. The flowers are axillary,
about an inch in diameter, and of a pale-yellow color; the fruit is
small, oblong, and very hairy.

It is of little value as an esculent, and is rarely cultivated. The
fruit is sometimes eaten in its green state, and also when cooked.
According to Duchesne, the Egyptians prepare from the pulp a very
agreeable and refreshing beverage.

Plant and cultivate as directed for melons or cucumbers.

       *       *       *       *       *

GLOBE CUCUMBER.

Concombre des prophetes. _Vil._ Cucumis prophetarum.

A tender annual from Arabia. Stem slender, creeping, and furnished with
tendrils, or claspers. The leaves are about three inches in diameter,
five-lobed, and indented on the borders; the flowers are axillary,
yellow, and nearly three-fourths of an inch in diameter; the fruit is
round, and rarely measures an inch in thickness; skin striped with green
and yellow, and thickly set with rigid hairs, or bristles; the seeds are
small, oval, flattened, and of a yellowish color.

_Planting and Culture._--The seeds should be planted at the time of
planting cucumbers or melons, in hills four or five feet apart, and
covered about half an inch deep. Thin to two or three plants to a hill.

_Use._--The fruit is sometimes eaten boiled; but is generally pickled in
its green state, like the common cucumber.

As a table vegetable, it is comparatively unimportant, and not worthy of
cultivation.

       *       *       *       *       *

CALABASH, OR COMMON GOURD.

Bottle Gourd. Cucurbita lagenaria.

The Calabash, or Common Gourd, is a climbing or creeping annual plant,
frequently more than twenty feet in height or length. The leaves are
large, round, heart-shaped, very soft and velvety to the touch, and emit
a peculiar, musky odor, when bruised or roughly handled. The flowers,
which are produced on very long stems, are white, and nearly three
inches in diameter. They expand towards evening, and remain in
perfection only a few hours; as they are generally found drooping and
withering on the ensuing morning. The young fruit is hairy, and quite
soft and tender; but, when ripe, the surface becomes hard, smooth, and
glossy. The seeds are five-eighths of an inch in length, somewhat
quadrangular, of a fawn-yellow color, and retain their vitality five
years. About three hundred are contained in an ounce.

_Cultivation._--The seeds are planted at the same time and in the same
manner as those of the Squash. The Gourd succeeds best when provided
with a trellis, or other support, to keep the plant from the ground; as
the fruit is best developed in a pendent or hanging position.

_Use._--The fruit, while still young and tender, is sometimes pickled in
vinegar, like cucumbers. At maturity, the flesh is worthless: but the
shells, which are very hard, light, and comparatively strong, are used
as substitutes for baskets; and are also formed into water-dippers, and
various other articles both useful and ornamental. The varieties are as
follow:--


BOTTLE GOURD. _Vil._

Fruit about a foot in length, contracted at the middle, largest at the
blossom-end, but swollen also at the part next the stem.

There is a sub-variety, very much larger; but it is also later.


HERCULES CLUB.

Courge Massue d'Hercule. _Vil._

Fruit very long. Specimens are frequently produced measuring upwards of
five feet in length. It is smallest towards the stem, and increases
gradually in size towards the opposite extremity, which is rounded, and
near which, in its largest diameter, it measures from four to five
inches. Its form is quite peculiar, and is not unlike that of a massive
club: whence the name.

It is frequently seen at horticultural and agricultural shows; and,
though sometimes exhibited as a "cucumber," has little or no value as
an esculent, and must be considered much more curious than useful. It is
of a pea-green color while growing, and the skin is then quite soft and
tender; but, like the other varieties, the surface becomes smooth, and
the skin very hard and shell-like, at maturity.


POWDER-HORN.

Courge Poire a Poudre. _Vil._

Fruit long and slender, broadest at the base, tapering towards the stem,
and often more or less curved. In its general form, it resembles a
common horn, as implied by the name. Its usual length is twelve or
fourteen inches; and its largest diameter, nearly three inches.


SIPHON GOURD.

Courge Siphon. _Vil._

Fruit rounded, and flattened at the blossom-end; then suddenly
contracted to a long, slender neck. The latter often bends or turns
suddenly at nearly a right angle; and, in this form, the fruit very much
resembles a siphon. Pea-green while young, pale-green when mature. Shell
thick and hard.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MELON.

Of the Melon, there are two species in general cultivation,--the
Musk-melon (_Cucumis melo_) and the Water-melon (_Cucurbita citrullus_);
each, however, including many varieties. Like the Squash, they are
tender, annual plants, of tropical origin, and only thrive well in a
warm temperature. "The climate of the Middle and Southern States is
remarkably favorable for them; indeed, far more so than that of England,
France, or any of the temperate portions of Europe. Consequently, melons
are raised as field crops by market-gardeners: and, in the month of
August, the finest citrons or green-fleshed melons may be seen in the
markets of New York and Philadelphia in immense quantities; so abundant,
in most seasons, as frequently to be sold at half a dollar per basket,
containing nearly a bushel of fruit. The warm, dry soils of Long Island
and New Jersey are peculiarly favorable to the growth of melons; and,
even at low prices, the product is so large, that this crop is one of
the most profitable."--_Downing._

Through the extraordinary facilities now afforded by railroads and ocean
steam-navigation, the markets of all the cities and large towns of the
northern portions of the United States, and even of the Canadas, are
abundantly supplied within two or three days from the time of gathering:
and they are retailed at prices so low, as to allow of almost universal
consumption; well-ripened and delicious green-fleshed citron-melons
being often sold from six to ten cents each.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Both the Musk and the Water Melon thrive best
in a warm, mellow, rich, sandy loam, and in a sheltered exposure. After
thoroughly stirring the soil by ploughing or spading, make the hills six
or seven feet apart in each direction. Previous to planting, these hills
should be prepared as directed for the Squash; making them a foot and a
half or two feet in diameter, and twelve or fifteen inches in depth.
Thoroughly incorporate at the bottom of the hill a quantity of
well-digested compost, equal to three-fourths of the earth removed; and
then add sufficient fine loam to raise the hill two or three inches
above the surrounding level. On the top of the hill thus formed, plant
twelve or fifteen seeds; and, when the plants are well up, thin them out
from time to time as they progress in size. Finally, when all danger
from bugs and other insect depredators is past, leave but two or three
of the most stocky and promising plants to a hill. When the growth is
too luxuriant, many practise pinching or cutting off the leading shoots;
and, when the young fruit sets in too great numbers, a portion should be
removed, both for the purpose of increasing the size and of hastening
the maturity of those remaining. "Keep the fruit from being injured by
lying on the ground; and if slate, blackened shingles, or any dry, dark
material, be placed beneath it, by attraction of the sun's rays, the
fruit will ripen earlier and better."

The striped bug (_Galereuca vittata_) is the most serious enemy with
which the young melon-plants have to contend. Gauze vine-shields, though
the most expensive, are unquestionably the most effectual preventive.
Boxes either round or square, twelve or fifteen inches in depth, and
entirely uncovered at the top, if placed over the hills, will be found
useful in protecting the plants. The flight of the bug being generally
nearly parallel with the surface of the ground, very few will find their
way within the boxes, if of the depth required. Applications of guano,
ashes, dilutions of oil-soap, and plaster of Paris, applied while the
plants are wet, will be found of greater or less efficacy in their
protection. The pungent smell of guano is said to prevent the
depredation of the flea-beetle, which, in many localities, seriously
injures the plants early in the season, through its attacks on the
seed-leaves.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MUSK-MELON.

Cucumis melo.

Plant running,--varying in length from five to eight feet; leaves large,
angular, heart-shaped, and rough on the upper and under surface; flowers
yellow, one-petaled, five-pointed, and about an inch in diameter; seeds
oval, flat, generally yellow, but sometimes nearly white, about
four-tenths of an inch in length, and three-sixteenths of an inch in
breadth,--the size, however, varying to a considerable extent in the
different varieties. An ounce contains from nine hundred to eleven
hundred seeds; and they retain their germinative properties from eight
to ten years.

_Varieties._--These are exceedingly numerous, in consequence of the
great facility with which the various kinds intermix, or hybridize.
Varieties are, however, much more easily produced than retained:
consequently, old names are almost annually discarded from the
catalogues of seedsmen and gardeners; and new names, with superior
recommendations, offered in their stead. The following list embraces
most of the kinds of much prominence or value now cultivated either in
Europe or this country:--


BEECHWOOD.

Fruit nearly spherical, but rather longer than broad,--usually five or
six inches in diameter; skin greenish-yellow, thickly and regularly
netted; flesh green, melting, sugary, and excellent. An early and fine
variety.


BLACK-ROCK CANTALOUPE. _Loud._

A large-fruited, late variety; form variable, but generally round, and
flattened at the ends; size large,--ten inches in diameter, eight inches
deep, and weighing eight or ten pounds. The skin varies in color from
grayish-green to deep-green; becomes yellow at maturity, and is thickly
spread with knobby bunches, or small protuberances. Rind very thick;
flesh reddish-orange, melting, and sugary. It requires a long season for
its full perfection.


CHRISTIANA.

This variety was originated by the late Capt. Josiah Lovett, of Beverly,
Mass. Form roundish; size rather small,--average specimens measuring
nearly the same as the Green Citron; skin yellowish-green; flesh yellow,
sweet, juicy, and of good quality. Its early maturity is its principal
recommendation; the Green Citron, Nutmeg, and many other varieties,
surpassing it in firmness of flesh, sweetness, and general excellence.

It would probably ripen at the North, or in short seasons, when other
sorts generally fail.


CITRON.

Green-fleshed Citron. Green Citron.

[Illustration: Green Citron Melon.]

Fruit nearly round, but flattened slightly at the ends,--deeply and very
regularly ribbed; size medium, or rather small,--average specimens
measuring about six inches in diameter, and five inches and a half in
depth; skin green, and thickly netted,--when fully mature, the green
becomes more soft and mellow, or of a yellowish shade; flesh green,
quite thick, very juicy, and of the richest and most sugary flavor. It
is an abundant bearer, quite hardy, and remarkably uniform in its
quality. It is deservedly the most popular as a market sort; and for
cultivation for family use, every thing considered, has few superiors.

In common with the Carolina Water-melon, the Green Citron is extensively
grown at the South for shipping to the northern portions of the United
States; appearing in the markets of New York and Boston three or four
weeks in advance of the season of those raised in the same vicinity in
the open ground.


EARLY CANTALOUPE.

This variety possesses little merit aside from its very early maturity.
It is a roundish melon, flattened a little at the ends, ribbed, and of
comparatively small size; usually measuring about five inches in
diameter. Skin yellowish, often spotted with green, and sometimes a
little warty; rind quite thick; flesh reddish-orange, sweet, and of good
flavor.

It is exceedingly variable in size, form, and color.


HARDY RIDGE. _Loud._

Fruit rather small, round, depressed, strongly ribbed, and irregularly
warted all over its surface; skin dull yellow, mottled with dull green;
flesh an inch thick, bright orange-red, sweet, and well flavored; rind
thick; weight from three to four pounds. Not an early, but a productive
variety.


LARGE-RIBBED NETTED.

Common Musk-melon.

[Illustration: Large Netted Musk-melon.]

Fruit very large, oval, strongly ribbed; skin yellow, very thickly
netted, sometimes so closely as to cover nearly the entire surface;
flesh salmon-yellow, remarkably thick and sweet, but not fine-grained or
melting, when compared with the more recent and improved varieties.

Hardy and productive. In good soil and favorable seasons, the fruit
sometimes attains a length of fifteen inches, and weighs upwards of
twenty pounds.


MUNROE'S GREEN FLESH. _Vil._

A comparatively new variety. The fruit is nearly spherical, but tapers
slightly towards the stem, and is rather regularly as well as distinctly
ribbed. Its diameter is about five inches. Cicatrix large; skin
greenish-yellow, thickly and finely netted over the entire surface; rind
thin; flesh green, remarkably transparent, comparatively thick, very
melting, and highly perfumed.


NUTMEG.

Fruit oval, regularly but faintly ribbed, eight or nine inches in
length, and about six inches in its broadest diameter; skin pale-green,
and very thickly netted; rind thin; flesh light-green, rich, sweet,
melting, and highly perfumed.

The Nutmeg Melon has been long in cultivation, and is almost everywhere
to be found in the vegetable garden, though seldom in a perfectly
unmixed state. When the variety is pure, and the fruit perfectly
ripened, it is of most delicious excellence, and deservedly ranked as
one of "the best."


ORANGE CANTALOUPE.

An oval variety, about six inches in length by five inches in diameter,
rather prominently ribbed. Skin yellow, marbled with green, thickly
netted about the stem, and sparsely so over the remainder of the
surface; rind thick; flesh reddish-orange, sweet, highly perfumed, and
of good flavor. Very early and productive.


PINE-APPLE.

Form roundish, inclining to oval, either without ribs or with
rib-marking, very faintly defined; size small,--the average diameter
being about five inches and a half; skin olive-green, with net-markings
more or less abundant; rind thin; flesh green, melting, sweet, and
perfumed. Season early.

It is an excellent sort, easily grown, and very productive.


PRESCOTT CANTALOUPE. _Vil._

Fruit generally somewhat flattened, but variable in form, deeply ribbed;
size large,--well-grown specimens measuring eight or ten inches in
diameter, and weighing from seven to nine pounds; skin thickly covered
with small tubercles; color varying from grayish-green to clear-green,
more or less deep, changing to yellow at maturity; rind very thick;
flesh orange-red, sugary and melting, and of delicious flavor.

There are numerous sub-varieties, as grown by different gardeners,
varying somewhat in form, color, and time of maturity; all, however,
corresponding nearly with the above description, though known by
different names, as the "White," "Gray," "Black," "Prescott," &c. Much
esteemed in France, and extensively grown by market-gardeners in the
vicinity of Paris.


SKILLMAN'S FINE-NETTED.

This variety much resembles the Pine-apple. Form rounded, flattened
slightly at the ends; flesh green, sugary, melting, and excellent. It
has been pronounced "the earliest of the green-fleshed sorts."


VICTORY OF BATH.

A recently introduced variety of English origin. Fruit egg-shaped,
faintly ribbed, rounded at the blossom-end, and slightly contracted
towards the stem,--at the insertion of which, it is flattened to a
small, plane surface; size medium,--about six inches deep, and five
inches in diameter; skin green, clouded with yellow, and sparsely
covered with fine net-markings; skin thin; flesh green.

       *       *       *       *       *

PERSIAN MELONS. _Trans._

These differ remarkably from the varieties commonly cultivated. They are
destitute of the thick, hard rind which characterizes the common sorts,
and which renders so large a portion of the fruit useless. On the
contrary, the Persian melons are protected by a skin so thin and
delicate, that they are subject to injury from causes that would produce
no perceptible effect on the sorts in general cultivation. As a class,
they are not only prolific, but their flesh is extremely tender, rich,
and sweet, and flows copiously with a cool juice, which renders them
still more grateful. They are, however, not early; and, for their
complete perfection, require a long and warm season.

_Varieties._--


DAMPSHA. _M'Int._

Flesh dark-green near the skin, rather whitish towards the centre, quite
melting, and of excellent flavor. The first-produced fruit in the season
is somewhat cylindrical, bluntly pointed at both ends; the whole surface
being prominently netted, and of a pale-yellow or dark-olive color. The
secondary crop has the fruit more pointed and less netted, and the skin
becomes much darker. Like the other varieties of winter melons, it may
be preserved a long time after being taken from the vines, if suspended
in a dry room. Weight four to five pounds.


DAREE. _Trans._

This resembles the Geree Melon in color, as well as in many other
respects. It is of the same form; but the rind, when netted, exhibits
coarser reticulations. The flesh is white, thick, crisp, and melting;
when fully ripened, very sweet, but rather insipid if imperfectly
matured. It is always, however, cool and pleasant.


GEREE. _Trans._

A handsome green fruit. In shape, it is oval, or ovate; and measures
eight inches in length by four inches and a half in breadth. The skin is
closely mottled with dark sea-green upon a pale ground, and is either
netted or not. In the former case, the meshes are very close; by which
character, it may be readily distinguished from the Daree. Stalk very
short; flesh an inch and a half or two inches thick, bright-green,
melting, very sweet, and highly flavored. Though perhaps equally rich,
it is not so beautiful or so juicy as the Melon of Keiseng. A good
bearer, but requires a warm, long season.


GERMEK. _Trans._

Large Germek.

A handsome large-sized, ribbed fruit, shaped like a compressed sphere;
usually six inches in length, and from seven to nine inches in diameter.
Skin deep-green, closely netted; flesh from an inch and a half to two
inches thick, clear green, firm, juicy, and high flavored. This is an
excellent variety, an abundant bearer, ripens early, and exceeds in size
any of the Persian melons.


GREEN HOOSAINEE. _Trans._

A handsome egg-shaped fruit, five inches long by four inches broad: when
unripe, of a very deep-green; but, in maturity, acquiring a fine, even,
light-green, regularly netted surface, which, on the exposed side,
becomes rather yellow. The flesh is pale-greenish white, tender and
delicate, full of a highly perfumed, pleasant, sweet juice; the rind is
very thin; the seeds are unusually large.

It is a variety of much excellence, a great bearer, and one of the
hardiest of the Persian melons.


GREEN VALENCIA. _M'Int._

A winter sort. Although not rich in flavor, it is firm, saccharine, and
juicy; and upon the whole, if fully ripened, a more desirable melon than
many of the summer varieties.


ISPAHAN. _Trans._

Sweet Ispahan.

This has been pronounced "the most delicious of all melons." The fruit
is egg-shaped, varying in length from eight to twelve inches, and
weighing from six to eight pounds; skin nearly smooth, of a deep
sulphur-yellow; flesh nearly white, extending about half way to its
centre, crisp, sugary, and very rich.

It is a variety of much excellence, but is fully perfected only in
favorable seasons.


MELON OF KEISENG. _Loud._

A beautiful egg-shaped fruit, eight inches long, five inches wide in the
middle, six inches wide at the lower extremity; very regularly and
handsomely formed. Color pale lemon-yellow; flesh from an inch and a
half to two inches and a quarter thick, nearly white, flowing copiously
with juice, extremely delicate, sweet, and high flavored, very similar
in texture to a well-ripened Beurre pear; rind thin, but so firm that
all the fleshy part of the fruit may be eaten.

It differs from the Sweet Ispahan in being closely netted.


MELON OF SEEN.

A fruit of regular figure and handsome appearance, seven inches long by
five inches wide. Shape ovate, with a small mamelon at the apex; surface
pale dusky yellow, regularly and closely netted, except the mamelon,
which is but little marked; rind very thin; flesh from an inch and a
half to two inches thick, pale-green, sometimes becoming reddish towards
the inside, exceedingly tender and juicy; juice sweet, and delicately
perfumed. A good bearer, but requires a long season. Named from Seen, a
village near Ispahan; where the variety was procured.


SMALL GERMEK. _Trans._

This ripens about a week earlier than the Large Germek, but is not so
valuable a fruit. In form, it is a depressed sphere, with about eight
rounded ribs. It measures four inches in depth by four inches and a
half in width. The skin is even, yellowish, with a little green about
the interstices, obscurely netted; the flesh is green, inclining to
reddish in the inside, an inch and a half thick, juicy, and high
flavored; skin very thin. The pulp in which the seeds are immersed is
reddish. It is not a great bearer, and the vines are tender.


STRIPED HOOSAINEE. _Trans._

Fruit oval and much netted, dark-green in broad stripes, with narrow
intervals of dull white, which become faintly yellow as the fruit
ripens; pulp externally green, but more internally pale-red, excessively
juicy, and more perfectly melting than that of the famous Ispahan Melon.

It is sweeter and higher flavored than any other Persian variety, but
requires a long, warm season for its full perfection.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WATER-MELON.

Cucurbita citrullus.

Plant running,--the length varying from eight to twelve feet; leaves
bluish-green, five-lobed, the lobes rounded at the ends; flowers
pale-yellow, about an inch in diameter; fruit large, roundish, green, or
variegated with different shades of green; seeds oval, flattened, half
an inch long, five-sixteenths of an inch broad,--the color varying
according to the variety, being either red, white, black, yellowish or
grayish brown. An ounce contains from a hundred and seventy-five to two
hundred seeds, and they retain their vitality eight years.

The Water-melon is more vigorous in its habit than the Musk-melon, and
requires more space in cultivation; the hills being usually made eight
feet apart in each direction. It is less liable to injury from insects,
and the crop is consequently much more certain. The seed should not be
planted till May, or before established warm weather; and but two good
plants allowed to a hill. The varieties are as follow:--


APPLE-SEEDED.

A rather small, nearly round sort, deriving its name from its small,
peculiar seeds; which, in form, size, and color, are somewhat similar to
those of the apple. Skin deep, clear-green; rind very thin; flesh
bright-red to the centre, sweet, tender, and well-flavored. It is hardy,
bears abundantly, seldom fails to ripen perfectly in the shortest
seasons, and keeps a long time after being gathered.


BLACK SPANISH.

Spanish.

Form oblong; size large; skin very dark or blackish green; rind half an
inch thick; flesh deep-red (contrasting finely with the very deep-green
color of the skin), fine-grained, very sugary, and of excellent flavor.
The variety is hardy, productive, thrives well, matures its fruit in the
Northern and Eastern States, and is decidedly one of the best for
general cultivation. Seeds dark-brown, or nearly black.


BRADFORD. _W. D. Brinckle._

The Bradford is a highly prized, South-Carolina variety; size large;
form oblong; skin dark-green, with gray, longitudinal stripes, mottled
and reticulated with green; rind not exceeding half an inch in
thickness; seed yellowish-white, slightly mottled, and with a
yellowish-brown stripe around the edge; flesh fine red to the centre;
flavor fine and sugary; quality "best."


CAROLINA.

Fruit of large size, and of an oblong form, usually somewhat swollen
towards the blossom-end; skin deep-green, variegated with pale-green or
white; flesh deep-red, not fine-grained, but crisp, sweet, and of fair
quality; fruit frequently hollow at the centre; seeds black.

This variety is extensively grown in the Southern States for exportation
to the North, where it appears in the markets about the beginning of
August, and to some extent in July. Many of the specimens are much less
marked with stripes and variegations than the true Carolina; and some
shipments consist almost entirely of fruit of a uniform deep-green
color, but of the form and quality of the Carolina.

Downing mentions a sub-variety with pale-yellow flesh and white seeds.


CITRON WATER-MELON.

Form very nearly spherical; size rather small,--average specimens
measuring six or seven inches in diameter; color pale-green, marbled
with darker shades of green; flesh white, solid, tough, seedy, and very
squashy and unpalatable in its crude state. It ripens late in the
season, and will keep until December. "It is employed in the making of
sweetmeats and preserves, by removing the rind or skin and seeds,
cutting the flesh into convenient bits, and boiling in sirup which has
been flavored with ginger, lemon, or some agreeable article. Its
cultivation is the same as that of other kinds of melons."--_New
American Cyclopaedia._


CLARENDON. _W. D. Brinckle._

Dark-speckled.

Size large; form oblong; skin mottled-gray, with dark-green,
interrupted, longitudinal stripes, irregular in their outline, and
composed of a succession of peninsulas and isthmuses; rind thin, not
exceeding half an inch; seed yellow, with a black stripe extending round
the edge, and from one to three black spots on each side,--the form and
number corresponding on the two sides; flesh scarlet to the centre;
flavor sugary and exquisite, and quality "best."

This fine melon originated in Clarendon County, South Carolina; and,
when pure, may at all times be readily recognized by the peculiarly
characteristic markings of the seeds.


ICE-CREAM.

A large, very pale-green sort; when unmixed, readily distinguishable
from all other varieties. Form nearly round, but sometimes a little
depressed at the extremities; rind thicker than in most varieties; flesh
white, very sweet and tender, and of remarkably fine flavor; seeds
white. It is prolific, and also early; and is remarkably well adapted
for cultivation in cold localities, or where the seasons are too short
for the successful culture of the more tender and late kinds. Its
pale-green skin, white flesh, and white seeds, are its prominent
distinctive peculiarities.


IMPERIAL. _Down._

This variety is said to have been introduced from the Mediterranean.
Fruit round, or oblate, and of medium size; skin pale-green, with
stripes and variegations of white or paler green; rind thin; flesh
pale-red, crisp, sweet, and of excellent flavor; seeds reddish-brown.
Very productive, but requiring a warm situation and a long season for
its complete perfection.


MOUNTAIN SPROUT.

This variety is similar to the Mountain Sweet. It is of large size,
long, and of an oval form. Skin striped and marbled with paler and
deeper shades of green; rind thin,--measuring scarcely half an inch in
thickness; flesh scarlet, a little hollow at the centre, crisp, sugary,
and of excellent flavor.

Like the Mountain Sweet, it is a favorite market sort. It is not only of
fine quality, but very productive. Seeds russet-brown.


MOUNTAIN SWEET.

A large, long, oval variety, often contracted towards the stem in the
form of a neck; skin striped and marbled with different shades of green;
rind rather thin, measuring scarcely half an inch in thickness; flesh
scarlet, and solid quite to the centre; seeds pale russet-brown, but
often of greater depth of color in perfectly matured specimens of fruit.

A popular and extensively cultivated variety, quite hardy, productive,
and of good quality. "For many years, it was universally conceded to be
the best market sort cultivated in the Middle States, but of late has
lost some of the properties that recommended it so highly to favor. This
deterioration has probably been owing to the influence of pollen from
inferior kinds grown in its vicinity."


ODELL'S LARGE WHITE. _W. D. Brinckle._

Size very large, sometimes weighing sixty pounds; form round; skin gray,
with fine green network spread over its uneven surface; rind nearly
three-fourths of an inch in thickness; seeds large, grayish-black, and
not numerous; flesh pale-red; flavor fine; quality very good.
Productiveness said to exceed that of most other kinds.

This remarkably large melon originated with a negro man on the property
of Col. A. G. Sumner, of South Carolina. Its large size, and
long-keeping quality after being separated from the vine, will recommend
the variety, especially for the market.


ORANGE.

Form oval, of medium size; skin pale-green, marbled with shades of
deeper green; rind half an inch in depth, or of medium thickness; flesh
red, not fine-grained, but tender, sweet, and of good quality. When in
its mature state, the rind separates readily from the flesh, in the
manner of the peel from the flesh of an orange.

When first introduced, the variety was considered one of the best
quality; but it appears to have in some degree deteriorated, and now
compares unfavorably with many other sorts.


PIE-MELON.

California Pie-melon.

Plant running,--the foliage and general habit resembling the Common
Water-melon, but yet distinguishable by its larger size, more hairy
stem, and its more stocky and vigorous character; fruit oblong, very
large, measuring sixteen inches and upwards in length, and from eight to
ten inches in diameter; skin yellowish-green, often marbled with
different shades of light-green or pea-green; flesh white, succulent,
somewhat tender, but very unpalatable, or with a squash-like flavor, in
its crude state. As intimated by the name, it is used only for culinary
purposes.

This melon should be cooked as follows: After removing the rind, cut the
flesh into pieces of convenient size, and stew until soft and pulpy.
Lemon-juice, sugar, and spices should then be added; after which,
proceed in the usual manner of making pies from the apple or any other
fruit. If kept from freezing, or from dampness and extreme cold, the
Pie-melon may be preserved until March.


RAVENSCROFT. _W. D. Brinckle._

Size large; form oblong; skin dark-green, faintly striped and marked
with green of a lighter shade, and divided longitudinally by sutures
from an inch and a quarter to two inches apart; rind not more than half
an inch in thickness; seed cream-color, tipped with brown at the eye,
and having a brown stripe around the edge; flesh fine red, commencing
abruptly at the rind, and extending to the centre; flavor delicious and
sugary; quality "best."

This valuable water-melon originated with Col. A. G. Sumner, of South
Carolina.


SOUTER. _W. D. Brinckle._

Size large, sometimes weighing twenty or thirty pounds; form oblong,
occasionally roundish; skin peculiarly marked with finely reticulated,
isolated, gray spots, surrounded by paler green, and having irregular,
dark-green, longitudinal stripes extending from the base to the apex;
rind thin, about half an inch thick; seed pure cream-white, with a faint
russet stripe around the edge; flesh deep-red to the centre; flavor
sugary and delicious; quality "best." Productiveness said to be
unusually great.

This excellent variety originated in Sumpter District, South Carolina.

       *       *       *       *       *

PAPANJAY, OR SPONGE CUCUMBER.

Papangaye. _Vil._ Cucumis acutangulus.

This is an East-Indian plant, with a creeping stem, and angular,
heart-shaped leaves. The flowers (several of which are produced on one
stem) are yellow; the fruit is ten or twelve inches in length, about an
inch and a half in diameter, deeply furrowed or grooved in the
direction of its length, forming ten longitudinal, acute angles; the
skin is hard, and of a russet-yellow color; the seeds are black, rough,
and hard, and quite irregular in form,--about five hundred are contained
in an ounce.

_Use._--The fruit is eaten while it is quite young and small; served in
the manner of cucumbers, or like vegetable marrow. When fully ripened,
it is exceedingly tough, fibrous, and porous, and is sometimes used as a
substitute for sponge: whence the name.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRICKLY-FRUITED GHERKIN.

Gherkin. West-Indian Cucumber. Jamaica Cucumber. Cucumis anguria.

This species is said to be a native of Jamaica. The habit of the plant
is similar to that of the Globe Cucumber, and its season of maturity is
nearly the same. The surface of the fruit is thickly set with spiny
nipples, and has an appearance very unlike that of the Common Cucumber.
It is comparatively of small size, and of a regular, oval
form,--generally measuring about two inches in length by an inch and a
third in its largest diameter; color pale-green; flesh greenish-white,
very seedy and pulpy. The seeds are quite small, oval, flattened,
yellowish-white, and retain their vitality five years.

It is somewhat later than the Common Cucumber, and requires nearly the
whole season for its full development. Plant in hills about five feet
apart; cover the seeds scarcely half an inch deep, and leave three
plants to a hill.

The Prickly-fruited Gherkin is seldom served at table sliced in its
crude state. It is principally grown for pickling: for which purpose it
should be plucked when about half grown, or while the skin is tender,
and can be easily broken by the nail. As the season of maturity
approaches, the rind gradually hardens, and the fruit becomes worthless.
In all stages of its growth, the flesh is comparatively spongy; and, in
the process of pickling, absorbs a large quantity of vinegar.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PUMPKIN.

Cucurbita pepo.

Under this head, on the authority of the late Dr. T. W. Harris, should
properly be included "the common New-England field-pumpkin, the
bell-shaped and crook-necked winter squashes, the Canada crook-necked,
the custard squashes, and various others, all of which (whether rightly
or not, cannot now be determined) have been generally referred by
botanists to the _Cucurbita pepo_ of Linnaeus."

The term "pumpkin," as generally used in this country by writers on
gardening and agriculture, and as popularly understood, includes only
the few varieties of the Common New-England Pumpkin that have been long
grown in fields in an extensive but somewhat neglectful manner; the
usual practice being to plant a seed or two at certain intervals in
fields of corn or potatoes, and afterwards to leave the growing vines to
the care of themselves. Even under these circumstances, a ton is
frequently harvested from a single acre, in addition to a heavy crop of
corn or potatoes.

The Pumpkin was formerly much used in domestic economy; but, since the
introduction of the Crook-necks, Boston Marrow, Hubbard, and other
improved varieties of squashes, it has gradually fallen into disuse, and
is now cultivated principally for agricultural purposes.

_Varieties._--The following are the principal varieties, although
numerous intermediate sorts occur, more or less distinct, as well as
more or less permanent in character:--


CANADA PUMPKIN.

Vermont Pumpkin.

The Canada Pumpkin is of an oblate form, inclining to conic; and is
deeply and regularly ribbed. When well grown, it is of comparatively
large size, and measures thirteen or fourteen inches in diameter, and
about ten inches in depth. Color fine, deep orange-yellow; skin or shell
rather thick and hard; flesh yellow, fine-grained, sweet, and well
flavored. Hardy, and very productive.

Compared with the common field variety, the Canada is much more
flattened in its form, more regularly and deeply ribbed, of a deeper and
richer color; and the flesh is generally much sweeter, and less coarse
and stringy in its texture. It seems adapted to every description of
soil; thrives well in all climates; and is one of the best sorts for
agricultural purposes, as well as of good quality for the table.


CHEESE PUMPKIN.

Plant very vigorous; leaves large, deep-green; fruit much flattened,
deeply and rather regularly ribbed, broadly dishing about the stem, and
basin-like at the opposite extremity. It is of large size; and, when
well grown, often measures fifteen or sixteen inches in diameter, and
nine or ten inches in depth. Skin fine, deep reddish-orange, and, if the
fruit is perfectly matured, quite hard and shell-like; flesh very thick,
yellow, fine-grained, sweet, and well flavored. The seeds are not
distinguishable from those of the Common Field Pumpkin.

The Cheese Pumpkin is hardy, remarkably productive, and much superior in
all respects to most of the field-grown sorts. Whether the variety
originated in this country, cannot probably now be determined; but it
was extensively disseminated in the Middle States at the time of the
American Revolution, and was introduced into certain parts of New
England by the soldiers on their return from service. After a lapse of
more than seventy-five years,--during which time it must have
experienced great diversity of treatment and culture,--it still can be
found in its original type; having the same form, color, size, and the
same thickness, and quality of flesh, which it possessed at the time of
its introduction.


COMMON YELLOW FIELD PUMPKIN.

Plant of vigorous, stocky habit, extending twelve feet and upwards in
length; fruit rounded, usually a little more deep than broad, flattened
at the ends, and rather regularly, and more or less prominently, ribbed.
Its size is much affected by soil, season, and the purity of the seed.
Average specimens will measure about fourteen inches in length, and
eleven or twelve inches in diameter. Color rich, clear orange-yellow;
skin, or rind, if the fruit is well matured, rather dense and hard;
flesh variable in thickness, but averaging about an inch and a half, of
a yellow color, generally coarse-grained, and often stringy, but
sometimes of fine texture, dry, and of good quality; seeds of medium
size, cream-yellow.

The cultivation of the Common Yellow Field Pumpkin in this country is
almost co-eval with its settlement. For a long period, few, if any, of
the numerous varieties of squashes, now so generally disseminated, were
known; and the Pumpkin was not only extensively employed as a material
for pies, but was much used as a vegetable, in the form of squash, at
the table. During the struggle for national independence, when the
excessively high prices of sugars and molasses prevented their general
use, it was the practice to reduce by evaporation the liquid in which
the pumpkin had been cooked, and to use the saccharine matter thus
obtained as a substitute for the more costly but much more palatable
sweetening ingredients. When served at table in the form of a vegetable,
a well-ripened, fine-grained pumpkin was selected, divided either
lengthwise or crosswise; the seeds extracted; the loose, stringy matter
removed from the inner surface of the flesh; and the two sections, thus
prepared, were baked, till soft, in a common oven. The flesh was then
scooped from the shell, pressed, seasoned, and served in the usual form.
By many, it is still highly esteemed, and even preferred for pies to the
Squash, or the more improved varieties of pumpkins; but its cultivation
at present is rather for agricultural than for culinary purposes.


CONNECTICUT FIELD PUMPKIN.

A large, yellow, field variety, not unlike the Common Yellow in form,
but with a softer skin, or shell. It is very prolific, of fair quality
as an esculent, and one of the best for cultivating for stock or for
agricultural purposes.


LONG YELLOW FIELD PUMPKIN.

Plant hardy and vigorous, not distinguishable from that of the Common
Yellow variety; fruit oval, much elongated, the length usually about
twice the diameter; size large,--well-grown specimens measuring sixteen
to twenty inches in length, and nine or ten inches in diameter; surface
somewhat ribbed, but with the markings less distinct than those of the
Common Yellow; color bright orange-yellow; skin of moderate thickness,
generally easily broken by the nail; flesh about an inch and a half in
thickness, yellow, of good but not fine quality, usually sweet, but
watery, and of no great value for the table.

It is very hardy and productive; well adapted for planting among corn or
potatoes; may be profitably raised for feeding out to stock; keeps well
when properly stored; and selected specimens will afford a tolerable
substitute for the Squash in the kitchen, particularly for pies.

Between this and the Common Yellow, there are various intermediate
sorts; and, as they readily hybridize with each other, it is with
difficulty that these varieties can be preserved in a pure state. Only
one of the sorts should be cultivated, unless there is sufficient
territory to enable the cultivator to allow a large distance between
the fields where the different varieties are grown.


NANTUCKET.

Hard-shell. "Nigger-head."

Form flattened or depressed, but sometimes oblong or bell-shaped, often
faintly ribbed; size medium or rather small; color deep-green, somewhat
mellowed by exposure to the sun, or at full maturity; skin or shell
thick and hard, and more or less thickly covered with prominent,
wart-like excrescences; flesh comparatively thick, yellow, sweet,
fine-grained, and of excellent flavor,--comparing favorably in all
respects with that of the Sugar Pumpkin. It is a productive sort, and
its flesh much dryer and more sugary than the peculiar, green, and warty
appearance of the fruit would indicate. When cooked, it should be
divided into pieces of convenient size; the seeds, and loose, stringy
parts, removed from the inner surface of the flesh, and then boiled or
baked in the skin or shell; afterwards scooping out the flesh, as is
practised with the Hubbard Squash or other hard-shelled varieties of
pumpkins. It is an excellent pie-variety, and selected specimens will be
found of good quality when served as squash at the table. It will keep
till February or March.


STRIPED FIELD PUMPKIN.

Habit of the plant, and form of the fruit, very similar to the Common
Yellow Field Pumpkin. The size, however, will average less; although
specimens may sometimes be procured as large as the dimension given for
the Common Yellow. Color yellow, striped and variegated with
green,--after being gathered, the green becomes gradually softer and
paler, and the yellow deeper; flesh yellow, moderately thick, and,
though by some considered of superior quality, has not the fine, dry,
and well-flavored character essential for table use; seeds similar to
the foregoing sorts.

The Striped Field Pumpkin is a hardy sort, and yields well. It is,
however, exceedingly liable to hybridize with all the varieties of the
family, and is with difficulty preserved in an unmixed condition. It
should be grown as far apart as possible from all others, especially
when the seed raised is designed for sale or for reproduction at home.


SUGAR-PUMPKIN.

Small Sugar-pumpkin.

[Illustration: Sugar-pumkin.]

Plant similar in its character and general appearance to the Common
Field Pumpkin; fruit small, eight or nine inches at its broadest
diameter, and about six inches in depth; form much depressed, usually
broadest near the middle, and more or less distinctly ribbed; skin
bright orange-yellow when the fruit is well ripened, hard, and
shell-like, and not easily broken by the nail; stem quite long,
greenish, furrowed, and somewhat reticulated; flesh of good thickness,
light-yellow, very fine-grained, sweet, and well flavored; seeds of
smaller size than, but in other respects similar to, those of the Field
Pumpkin. The variety is the smallest of the sorts usually employed for
field cultivation. It is, however, a most abundant bearer, rarely fails
in maturing its crops perfectly, is of first-rate quality, and may be
justly styled an acquisition. For pies, it is not surpassed by any of
the family; and it is superior for table use to many of the garden
squashes. The facility with which it hybridizes or mixes with other
kinds renders it extremely difficult to keep the variety pure; the
tendency being to increase in size, to grow longer or deeper, and to
become warty: either of which conditions may be considered an infallible
evidence of deterioration.

Varieties sometimes occur more or less marbled and spotted with green;
the green, however, often changing to yellow after harvesting.

       *       *       *       *       *

SNAKE OR SERPENT CUCUMBER.

Cucumis flexuosus.

Though generally considered as a species of cucumber, this plant should
properly be classed with the melons. In its manner of growth, foliage,
flowering, and in the odor and taste of the ripened fruit, it strongly
resembles the musk-melon. The fruit is slender and flexuous; frequently
measures more than three feet in length; and is often gracefully coiled
or folded in a serpent-like form. The skin is green; the flesh, while
the fruit is forming, is greenish-white,--at maturity, yellow; the seeds
are yellowish-white, oval, flattened, often twisted or contorted like
those of some varieties of melons, and retain their vitality five years.

_Planting and Cultivation._--The seeds should be planted in May, in
hills six feet apart. Cover half an inch deep, and allow three plants to
a hill.

_Use._--The fruit is sometimes pickled in the manner of the Common
Cucumber, but is seldom served at table sliced in its crude state. It is
generally cultivated on account of its serpent-like form, rather than
for its value as an esculent.

Well-grown specimens are quite attractive; and, as curious vegetable
productions, contribute to the interest and variety of horticultural
exhibitions.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SQUASH.

All the varieties are tender annuals, and of tropical origin. They only
thrive well in a warm temperature: and the seed should not be sown in
spring until all danger from frost is past, and the ground is warm and
thoroughly settled; as, aside from the tender nature of the plant, the
seed is extremely liable to rot in the ground in continued damp and cold
weather.

Any good, well-enriched soil is adapted to the growth of the Squash. The
hills should be made from eight to ten inches in depth, two feet in
diameter, and then filled within three or four inches of the surface
with well-digested compost; afterwards adding sufficient fine loam to
raise the hill an inch or two above the surrounding level. On this,
plant twelve or fifteen seeds; covering about three-fourths of an inch
deep. Keep the earth about the plants loose and clean; and from time to
time remove the surplus vines, leaving the most stocky and vigorous.
Three plants are sufficient for a hill; to which number the hills should
ultimately be thinned, making the final thinning when all danger from
bugs and other vermin is past. The dwarfs may be planted four feet
apart; but the running sorts should not be less than six or eight. The
custom of cutting or nipping off the leading shoot of the running
varieties is now practised to some extent, with the impression that it
both facilitates the formation of fruitful laterals and the early
maturing of the fruit. Whether the amount of product is increased by the
process, is not yet determined.

In giving the following descriptions, no attempt has been made to
present them under scientific divisions; but they have been arranged as
they are in this country popularly understood:--

_Summer Varieties._--


APPLE SQUASH.

Early Apple.

Plant running, not of stocky habit, but healthy and vigorous; fruit
obtusely conical, three inches broad at the stem, and two inches and a
half in depth; skin yellowish-white, thin and tender while the fruit is
young, hard and shell-like when ripe; flesh dry and well flavored in its
green state, and often of good quality at full maturity.

The fruit is comparatively small; and, on this account, the variety is
very little cultivated.


BUSH SUMMER WARTED CROOKNECK.

Early Summer Crookneck. Yellow Summer Warted Crookneck. Cucurbita
verrucosa.

[Illustration: Bush Summer Warted Crookneck Squash.]

Plant dwarfish or bushy in habit, generally about two feet and a half in
height or length; fruit largest at the blossom-end, and tapering
gradually to a neck, which is solid, and more or less curved; size
medium,--average specimens, when suitable for use, measuring about eight
inches in length, and three inches in diameter at the broadest part; the
neck is usually about two inches in thickness; color clear,
bright-yellow; skin very warty, thin, and easily broken by the nail
while the fruit is young, and suitable for use,--as the season of
maturity approaches, the rind gradually becomes firmer, and, when fully
ripe, is very hard and shell-like; flesh greenish-yellow, dry, and well
flavored; seeds comparatively small, broad in proportion to the length,
and of a pale-yellow color. About four hundred are contained in an
ounce.

The Bush Summer Crookneck is generally esteemed the finest of the summer
varieties. It is used only while young and tender, or when the skin can
be easily pierced or broken by the nail. After the fruit hardens, the
flesh becomes watery, coarse, strong flavored, and unfit for table use.

On account of the dwarfish character of the plants, the hills may be
made four feet apart. Three plants will be sufficient for a hill.


EARLY WHITE BUSH SCOLLOPED.

White Pattypan. Cymbling. White Summer Scolloped. Pattison Blanc. _Vil._

This is a sub-variety of the Early Yellow Bush Scolloped. The plant has
the same dwarf habit, and the fruit is nearly of the same size and
form. The principal distinction between the varieties consists in the
difference of color.

By some, the white variety is considered a little inferior in fineness
of texture and in flavor to the yellow; though the white is much the
more abundant in the markets. Both of the varieties are hardy and
productive; and there is but little difference in the season of their
maturity.

In the month of June, large quantities are shipped from the Southern and
Middle States to the North and East, where they anticipate from two to
three weeks the products of the home-market gardens; the facilities
afforded by steam transportation rendering nearly profitless the efforts
of gardeners to obtain an early crop. As the variety keeps well, and
suffers little from transportation, the squashes are generally found
fresh and in good order on their arrival.


EARLY YELLOW BUSH SCOLLOPED.

Cymbling. Pattypan. Yellow Summer Scollop.

[Illustration: Early Yellow Bush Scolloped.]

Plant dwarf, of rather erect habit, and about two feet and a half in
height; leaves large, clear-green; fruit somewhat of a hemispherical
form, expanded at the edge, which is deeply and very regularly
scolloped. When suitable for use, it measures about five inches in
diameter, and three inches in depth; but, when fully matured, the
diameter is often ten or twelve inches, and even upwards. Color yellow;
skin, while young, thin, and easily pierced,--at maturity, hard and
shell-like; flesh pale-yellow, tolerably fine-grained, and well
flavored,--not, however, quite so dry and sweet as that of the Summer
Crookneck; seeds broader in proportion to their length than the seeds of
most varieties, and of comparatively small size. Four hundred and
twenty-five weigh an ounce.

This variety has been common to the gardens of this country for upwards
of a century; during which period, the form and general character have
been very slightly, if at all, changed. When grown in the vicinity of
the Bush Summer Crookneck, the surface sometimes exhibits the same
wart-like excrescences; but there is little difficulty in procuring
seeds that will prove true to the description above given.

Like the Summer Crookneck, the scolloped squashes are used while young
or in a green state. After the hardening of the skin, or shell, the
flesh generally becomes coarse, watery, strong-flavored, and unfit for
the table.

The hills should be made about four feet apart, and three plants allowed
to a hill. Season from the beginning of July to the middle or last of
August.


EGG-SQUASH.

Cucurbita ovifera.

An ornamental variety, generally cultivated for its peculiar, egg-like
fruit, which usually measures about three inches in length, and two
inches or two and a half in diameter. Skin, or shell, white. It is
seldom used as an esculent; though, in its young state, the flesh is
quite similar in flavor and texture to that of the scolloped varieties.
"If trained to a trellis, or when allowed to cover a dry, branching
tree, it is quite ornamental; and, in its ripened state, is quite
interesting, and attractive at public exhibitions." Increase of size
indicates mixture or deterioration.

"It has been generally supposed, that the Egg-squash was a native of
Astrachan, in Tartary. Dr. Loroche included it in a list of plants not
natives of Astrachan, but cultivated only in gardens where it is
associated with such exotics as Indian corn, or maize, with which it was
probably introduced directly or indirectly from America. We also learn
from Loroche that this species varied in form, being sometimes
pear-shaped; that it was sometimes variegated in color with green and
white, and the shell served instead of boxes. Here we have plainly
indicated the little gourd-like, hard-shelled, and variegated squashes
that are often cultivated as ornamental plants.

"From these and similar authorities, it is evident that summer squashes
were originally natives of America, where so many of them were found in
use by the Indians, when the country began to be settled by
Europeans."--_Dr. T. W. Harris, in Pennsylvania Farm Journal._


GREEN BUSH SCOLLOPED.

Pattison Vert. _Vil._

Fruit similar in size and form to the Yellow or White Bush Scolloped;
skin or shell bottle-green, marbled or clouded with shades of lighter
green. It is comparatively of poor quality, and is little cultivated.


GREEN-STRIPED BERGEN.

"Plant dwarf, but of strong and vigorous habit; fruit of small size,
bell-shaped; colors dark-green and white, striped.

"An early but not productive sort, little cultivated at the North or
East, but grown to a considerable extent for the New-York market. It is
eaten both while green and when fully ripe."


LARGE SUMMER WARTED CROOKNECK.

A large variety of the Bush or Dwarf Summer Crookneck. Plant twelve feet
and upwards in length, running; fruit of the form of the last named, but
of much greater proportions,--sometimes attaining a length of nearly two
feet; skin clear, bright yellow, and thickly covered with the prominent
wart-like excrescences peculiar to the varieties; flesh greenish-yellow,
and of coarser texture than that of the Dwarf Summer Crookneck. Hardy
and very productive. The hills should be made six feet apart.


ORANGE.

Cucurbita aurantiaca.

Fruit of the size, form, and color of an orange. Though generally
cultivated for ornament, and considered more curious than useful, "some
of them are the very best of the summer squashes for table use; far
superior to either the scolloped or warted varieties." When trained as
directed for the Egg-squash, it is equally showy and attractive.


VARIEGATED BUSH SCOLLOPED.

Pattison Panache. _Vil._

Pale yellow, or nearly white, variegated with green. Very handsome, but
of inferior quality.

_Autumn and Winter Varieties._--


AUTUMNAL MARROW. _J. M. Ives._

Boston Marrow. Courge de l'Ohio. _Vil._

Plant twelve feet or more in length, moderately vigorous; fruit ovoid,
pointed at the extremities, eight or nine inches in length, and seven
inches in diameter; stem very large, fleshy, and contracted a little at
its junction with the fruit,--the summit, or blossom-end, often tipped
with a small nipple or wart-like excrescence; skin remarkably thin,
easily bruised or broken, cream-yellow at the time of ripening, but
changing to red after harvesting, or by remaining on the plants after
full maturity; flesh rich, salmon-yellow, remarkably dry, fine-grained,
and, in sweetness and excellence, surpassed by few varieties. The seeds
are large, thick, and pure white: the surface, in appearance and to the
touch, resembles glove-leather or dressed goat-skin. About one hundred
are contained in an ounce.

In favorable seasons, the Autumnal Marrow Squash will be sufficiently
grown for use early in August; and, if kept from cold and dampness, may
be preserved till March.

Mr. John M. Ives, of Salem, who was awarded a piece of silver plate by
the Massachusetts Horticultural Society for the introduction of this
valuable variety, has furnished the following statement relative to its
origin and dissemination:--

  SALEM, MASS., Feb. 7, 1858.

     DEAR SIR,--As requested, I forward you a few facts relative to the
     introduction of the Autumnal Marrow Squash, the cultivation of
     which has extended not only over our entire country, but throughout
     Europe. It succeeds better in England than the Crooknecks; and may
     be seen in great abundance every season at Covent-Garden Market, in
     London.

     Early in the spring of 1831, a friend of mine from Northampton, in
     this State, brought to my grounds a specimen of this vegetable, of
     five or six pounds' weight, which he called "Vegetable Marrow." As
     it bore no resemblance to the true Vegetable Marrow, either in its
     form or color, I planted the seeds, and was successful in raising
     eight or ten specimens. Finding it a superior vegetable, with a
     skin as thin as the inner envelope of an egg, and the flesh of fine
     texture, and also that it was in eating early in the fall, I
     ventured to call it "Autumnal Marrow Squash." Soon a drawing was
     made, and forwarded, with a description, to the "Horticultural
     Register" of Fessenden, and also to the "New-England Farmer."

     In cultivating this vegetable, I found the fruit to average from
     eight to nine pounds, particularly if grown on newly broken-up sod
     or grass land. From its facility in hybridizing with the tribe of
     pumpkins, I consider it to be, properly speaking, a fine-grained
     pumpkin. The first indication of deterioration or mixture will be
     manifested in the thickening of the skin, or by a green circle or
     coloring of green at the blossom-end.

     More recently, I have been informed, by the gentleman to whom I was
     indebted for the first specimen, that the seeds came originally
     from Buffalo, N.Y., where they were supposed to have been
     introduced by a tribe of Indians, who were accustomed to visit that
     city in the spring of the year. I have not been able to trace it
     beyond this. It is, unquestionably, an accidental hybrid.

                                  Yours truly,
                                                  JOHN M. IVES.

     Mr. F. BURR, Jun.


CANADA CROOKNECK.

The plants of this variety are similar in habit to those of the Common
Winter Crookneck; but the foliage is smaller, and the growth less
luxuriant. In point of size, the Canada Crookneck is the smallest of its
class. When the variety is unmixed, the weight seldom exceeds five or
six pounds. It is sometimes bottle-formed; but the neck is generally
small, solid, and curved in the form of the Large Winter Crooknecks. The
seeds are contained at the blossom-end, which expands somewhat abruptly,
and is often slightly ribbed. Skin of moderate thickness, and easily
pierced by the nail; color, when fully ripened, cream-yellow, but, if
long kept, becoming duller and darker; flesh salmon-red, very
close-grained, dry, sweet, and fine-flavored; seeds comparatively small,
of a grayish or dull-white color, with a rough and uneven
yellowish-brown border; three hundred are contained in an ounce.

[Illustration]

The Canada is unquestionably the best of the Crooknecked sorts. The
vines are remarkably hardy and prolific; yielding almost a certain crop
both North and South. The variety ripens early; the plants suffer but
little from the depredations of bugs or worms; and the fruit, with
trifling care, may be preserved throughout the year. It is also quite
uniform in quality; being seldom of the coarse and stringy character so
common to other varieties of this class.


CASHEW.

Cushaw Pumpkin.

Somewhat of the form and color of the Common Winter Crookneck. Two
prominent varieties, however, occur. The first is nearly round; the
other curved, or of the shape of a hunter's horn. The latter is the most
desirable. It is not cultivated or generally known in New England or in
the northern portions of the United States; for though well suited to
Louisiana and other portions of the South, where it is much esteemed, it
is evidently too tender for cultivation where the seasons are
comparatively short and cool.

In an experimental trial by the late Dr. Harris, specimens raised from
seed received from New Jersey "did not ripen well, and many decayed
before half ripe."

The Crooknecks of New England "may be distinguished from the Cashew by
the want of a persistent style, and by their furrowed and club-shaped
fruit-stems."


COCOA-NUT SQUASH.

Cocoa Squash.

Fruit oval, elongated, sixteen to twenty inches in length, eight or ten
inches in diameter, and weighing from fifteen to twenty pounds and
upwards; skin thin, easily pierced or broken, of an ash-gray color,
spotted, and marked with light drab and nankeen-brown,--the furrows
dividing the ribs light drab; stem small; flesh deep orange-yellow, of
medium thickness; seeds pure white, broader in proportion to their
length than those of the Hubbard or Boston Marrow.

The quality of the Cocoa-nut Squash is extremely variable. Sometimes the
flesh is fine-grained, dry, sweet, and of a rich, nut-like flavor; but
well-developed and apparently well-matured specimens are often coarse,
fibrous, watery, and unfit for table use. The variety ripens in
September, and will keep till March or April.


CUSTARD SQUASH.

[Illustration]

Plant healthy and of vigorous habit, often twenty feet and upwards in
length; fruit oblong, gathered in deep folds or wrinkles at the stem,
near which it is the smallest, abruptly shortened at the opposite
extremity, prominently marked by large, rounded, lengthwise elevations,
and corresponding deep furrows, or depressions; skin, or shell,
cream-white; flesh pale-yellow, not remarkable for solidity, or fineness
of texture, but well flavored; the seeds are yellowish-white, and
readily distinguished from those of other varieties by their long and
narrow form. Under favorable conditions of soil and season, the Custard
Squash attains a large size; often measuring twenty inches and upwards
in length, eight or ten inches in diameter, and weighing from eighteen
to twenty-five pounds.

It is one of the hardiest and most productive of all varieties. Crops
are recorded of fourteen tons from an acre. It is esteemed by some for
pies; but, as a table squash, is inferior to most other sorts. Its great
yield makes it worthy the attention of agriculturists, as it would
doubtless prove a profitable variety to be cultivated for stock.

From the habit of the plant, the form and character of the fruit, and
its great hardiness and productiveness, it appears to be allied to the
Vegetable Marrow.


EGG-SHAPED, OR REEVES. _Thomp._

Fruit large, weighing from fifteen to twenty pounds; but in rich, highly
manured soil, and with only a few on each plant, it may be grown to
upwards of fifty pounds' weight. It is short, ovate, sometimes tapering
rather abruptly. Skin, or shell, hard, of a reddish color; flesh firm,
red, excellent in a ripe state cooked as a vegetable, or in any other
way in which squashes are prepared. The stems run to a very great
length, and bear all along most abundantly. Altogether, it is a sort
highly deserving of cultivation.

It was brought into notice by John Reeves, Esq.; who has contributed to
horticulture many valuable plants from China, where he resided for many
years.

Plant in hills eight feet apart, and thin to two plants to a hill.


HONOLULU.

Plant twelve feet or more in length, remarkably strong and vigorous;
leaves very large,--the leaf-stems often three feet and upwards in
length; fruit large, oblate, depressed about the stem, broadly, and
sometimes deeply, but in general faintly, ribbed; skin moderately thick,
but not shell-like, of an ash-green color, striped and variegated with
drab or lighter shades of green; flesh reddish-orange, very thick, of
good flavor, but less dry and sweet than that of the Hubbard or Boston
Marrow; seeds large, white.

This recently introduced variety is hardy, productive, a good keeper,
excellent for pies, and by some esteemed for table use.

Specimens frequently occur of a reddish cream-color, striped and marked
with drab or pale-yellow.


HUBBARD. _J. J. H. Gregory._

[Illustration: Hubbard Squash.]

Plant similar in character and appearance to that of the Autumnal
Marrow; fruit irregularly oval, sometimes ribbed, but often without
rib-markings, from eight to ten inches in length, seven or eight inches
in diameter, and weighing from seven to nine pounds,--some specimens
terminate quite obtusely, others taper sharply towards the extremities,
which are frequently bent or curved; skin, or shell, dense and hard,
nearly one-eighth of an inch thick, and overspread with numerous small
protuberances; stem fleshy, but not large; color variable, always rather
dull, and usually clay-blue or deep olive-green,--the upper surface, if
long exposed to the sun, assuming a brownish cast, and the under
surface, if deprived of light, becoming orange-yellow; flesh rich
salmon-yellow, thicker than that of the Autumnal Marrow, very
fine-grained, sweet, dry, and of most excellent flavor,--in this last
respect, resembling that of roasted or boiled chestnuts; seeds
white,--similar to those of the Autumnal Marrow. Season from September
to June; but the flesh is dryest and sweetest during autumn and the
early part of winter.

The Hubbard Squash should be grown in hills seven feet apart, and three
plants allowed to a hill. It is essential that the planting be made as
far as possible from similar varieties, as it mixes, or hybridizes,
readily with all of its kind. In point of productiveness, it is about
equal to the Autumnal Marrow. "The average yield from six acres was
nearly five tons of marketable squashes to the acre."

Mr. J. J. H. Gregory, of Marblehead, Mass., who introduced this variety
to notice, and through whose exertions it has become widely
disseminated, remarks in the "New-England Farmer" as follows:--

"Of its history I know next to nothing, farther than that the seed was
given to me by an aged female, about twelve years since, in remembrance
of whom I named it; and that the party from whom she received it cannot
tell from whence the seed came. I infer that it is of foreign origin,
partly from the fact that the gentleman to whom I traced it is a
resident of a seaport town, and is largely connected with those who
follow the seas."


ITALIAN VEGETABLE MARROW. _Thomp._

Courge Coucourzelle.

This forms a dwarf bush, with short, reclining stems, and upright
leaves, which are deeply five-lobed. The fruits are used when the
flowers are about to drop from their ends. They are then from four to
five inches long, and an inch and a half to two inches in diameter. When
ripe, the fruit is from fifteen to eighteen inches in length, and about
six inches in diameter. It is of a pale yellow, striped with green. It
should, however, be used in the young, green state; for, when mature, it
is not so good as many of the other sorts. It bears very abundantly;
and, as it does not run, may be grown in smaller compass than the true
Vegetable Marrow.


MAMMOTH.

Mammoth Pumpkin. Large Yellow Gourd, of the English. _Thomp._ Potiron
jaune, of the French. Cucurbita maxima.

This is the largest-fruited variety known. In a very rich compost, and
under favorable conditions of climate, it grows to an enormous size.
Fruit weighing a hundred and twenty pounds is not uncommon; and
instances, though exceptional, are recorded of weights ranging from two
hundred to nearly two hundred and fifty pounds.

The leaves are very large, and the stems thick, running along the ground
to the distance of twenty or thirty feet if not stopped, and readily
striking root at the joints.

The fruit is round, or oblate; sometimes flattened on the under side,
owing to its great weight; sometimes obtusely ribbed, yellowish, or pale
buff, and frequently covered to a considerable extent with a gray
netting. Flesh very deep yellow; seeds white.

It is used only in its full-grown or ripe state, in which it will keep
for several months; and even during the winter, if stored in a dry, warm
situation. The flesh is sweet, though generally coarse-grained and
watery. It is used in soups and stews, and also for pies; but is seldom
served like squash at the table.


NEAPOLITAN.

Courge pleine de Naples. _Vil._

Plant running; leaves small, smooth, striped and marked with white along
the nerves; fruit nearly two feet in length, and rather more than five
inches in its smallest diameter, bent at the middle, and broadly but
faintly ribbed,--it increases in size towards the extremities, but is
largest at the blossom-end, where it reaches a diameter of eight or ten
inches; skin bright green; stem small; flesh bright, clear yellow; the
neck is entirely solid, and the seed-end has an unusually small cavity;
seeds dull white.

The late Rev. A. R. Pope, in a communication to the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society, describes it as follows: "New, very heavy; having
a large, solid neck, and a small cavity for the seeds. Flesh sweet, dry,
and somewhat coarse, but not stringy. Very superior for pies, and a good
keeper."


PATAGONIAN.

A large, long Squash, prominently ribbed. It differs little in form or
size from the Custard. Skin very deep green; flesh pale yellow; seeds of
medium size, yellowish-white.

The plant is a vigorous grower, and the yield abundant; but its quality
is inferior, and the variety can hardly be considered worthy of
cultivation for table use. It may, however, prove a profitable sort for
growing for agricultural purposes.


PURITAN.

[Illustration: Puritan Squash.]

Plant running, ten feet and upwards in length; leaves clear green, of
medium size; fruit bottle-formed, fourteen or fifteen inches long, and
about ten inches in diameter at the broadest part; neck solid, four or
five inches in diameter; average weight eight to ten pounds; skin thin,
usually white or cream-white, striped and marked with green, though
specimens sometimes occur, from unmixed seed, uniformly green; flesh
pale yellow, dry, sweet, mild, and well flavored; seeds of medium size,
white. Season from August to January.

This variety, long common to gardens in the vicinity of the Old Colony,
retains its distinctive character to a very remarkable degree, even when
grown under the most unfavorable circumstances. Seeds, obtained from a
gardener who had cultivated the variety indiscriminately among numerous
summer and winter kinds for upwards of twenty years, produced specimens
uniformly true to the normal form color, and quality. It is hardy and
productive, good for table use, excellent for pies, and well deserving
of cultivation.


SWEET-POTATO SQUASH.

Plant very similar in character to that of the Hubbard or Autumnal
Marrow; fruit twelve or fourteen inches long, seven or eight inches
thick, sometimes ribbed, but usually without rib-markings; oblong,
tapering to the ends, which are often bent or curved in the manner of
some of the types of the Hubbard; stem of medium size, striated; skin
ash-green, with a smooth, polished surface; flesh salmon-yellow, thick,
fine-grained, dry, and sweet,--if the variety is pure, and the fruit
well matured, its quality approaches that of the Hubbard and Autumnal
Marrow; seeds white.

The variety is hardy and productive, keeps well, and is deserving of
cultivation. When grown in the vicinity of the last-named sorts, it
often becomes mixed, and rapidly degenerates. In its purity, it is
uniformly of one color; with perhaps the exception of the under surface,
which is sometimes paler or yellowish. It has been suggested that this
variety and the Hubbard may have originated under similar circumstances.


TURBAN.

Acorn. Giraumon Turban. Turk's-cap. Cucurbita piliformis.

Plant running; leaves small, soft, slightly lobed on the borders; fruit
rounded, flattened, expanding about the stem to a broad, plain,
brick-red surface, of ten or twelve inches in diameter. At the
blossom-end, the fruit suddenly contracts to an irregular, cone-like
point, or termination, of a greenish color, striped with white; and
thus, in form and color, somewhat resembles a turban: whence the name.
Flesh orange-yellow, thick, fine-grained, sugary, and well flavored;
seeds white, comparatively short, and small.

The Turban Squash is not early, and should have the advantage of the
whole season. "Its specific gravity is said to exceed that of any other
variety. Its keeping properties are not particularly good; but its
flavor, when grown on light, dry soil, will compare well with either
the Autumnal Marrow or the Hubbard." It mixes very readily when grown in
the vicinity of other varieties, is not an abundant bearer, and cannot
be recommended for general cultivation.

Dr. Harris states that "this variety--sometimes called the 'Acorn
Squash,' because, when the fruit is small, it resembles somewhat an
acorn in its cup--seems to be the _Cucurbita piliformis_ of Duchesne;"
and he further adds, that "it sometimes grows to a large size, measuring
fourteen or fifteen inches in transverse diameter, and looks like an
immense Turkish turban in shape. Specimens raised in my garden in 1851
were little more than ten inches in diameter, and weighed ten pounds or
more; having very thick and firm flesh, and but a small cavity within.
They proved excellent for table use,--equal in quality to the best
Autumnal Marrows. They keep quite as well as the latter."


VALPARAISO.

Porter's Valparaiso. Commodore Porter.

Plant running; leaves large, not lobed, but cut in rounded angles on the
borders; fruit oval, about sixteen inches in length, ten or eleven
inches in diameter, slightly ribbed, and largest at the blossom-end,
which often terminates in a wart-like excrescence; skin cream-white,
sometimes smooth and polished, but often more or less reticulated, or
netted; flesh comparatively thick, orange-yellow, generally dry, sweet,
and well flavored, but sometimes fibrous and watery; seeds rather large,
nankeen-yellow, smooth and glossy.

The variety requires the whole season for its perfection. It hybridizes
readily with the Autumnal Marrow and kindred sorts, and is kept pure
with considerable difficulty. It is in use from September to spring. The
variety, if obtained in its purity, will be found of comparative
excellence, and well deserving of cultivation. Stripes and clouds of
green upon the surface are infallible evidences of mixture and
deterioration.

The late Dr. Harris, in a communication to the "Pennsylvania Farm
Journal," remarks as follows: "The Valparaiso squashes (of which there
seem to be several varieties, known to cultivators by many different
names, some of them merely local in their application) belong to a
peculiar group of the genus _Cucurbita_, the distinguishing characters
of which have not been fully described by botanists. The word 'squash,'
as applied to these fruits, is a misnomer, as may be shown hereafter. It
would be well to drop it entirely, and to call the fruits of this group
'pompions,' 'pumpkins,' or 'potirons.' It is my belief, that they were
originally indigenous to the tropical and sub-tropical parts of the
western coast of America. They are extensively cultivated from Chili to
California, and also in the West Indies; whence enormous specimens are
sometimes brought to the Atlantic States. How much soever these
Valparaiso pumpkins may differ in form, size, color, and quality, they
all agree in certain peculiarities that are found in no other species or
varieties of _Cucurbita_. Their leaves are never deeply lobed like those
of other pumpkins and squashes, but are more or less five-angled, or
almost rounded and heart-shaped, at base: they are also softer than
those of other pumpkins and squashes. The summit, or blossom-end, of the
fruit has a nipple-like projection upon it, consisting of the permanent
fleshy style. The fruit-stalk is short, nearly cylindrical, never deeply
five-furrowed, but merely longitudinally striated or wrinkled, and never
clavated, or enlarged with projecting angles, next to the fruit. With
few exceptions, they contain four or five double rows of seeds. To this
group belong Mr. Ives's Autumnal Marrow Squash (or Pumpkin); Commodore
Porter's Valparaiso Squash (Pumpkin); the so-called Mammoth Pumpkin, or
_Cucurbita maxima_ of the botanists; the Turban or Acorn Squash;
_Cucurbita piliformis_ of Duchesne; the Cashew Pumpkin; Stetson's
Hybrid, called the 'Wilder Squash;' with various others."


VEGETABLE MARROW. _Thomp._

Succade Gourd. Courge a la moelle, of the French.

Plant twelve feet and upwards in length; leaves deeply five-lobed; fruit
about nine inches long, and of an elliptic shape,--but it is sometimes
grown to twice that length, and of an oblong form; surface slightly
uneven, by irregular, longitudinal, obtuse ribs, which terminate in a
projecting apex at the extremity of the fruit. When mature, it is of a
uniform pale yellow or straw color. The skin, or shell, is very hard
when the fruit is perfectly ripened; flesh white, tender, and succulent,
even till the seeds are ripe. It may be used in every stage of its
growth. Some prefer it when the flower is still at the extremity of the
fruit; others like it older. When well ripened, it will keep well
throughout the winter, if stored in a perfectly dry place, out of the
reach of frost, and not exposed to great changes of temperature.

To have Vegetable Marrows large and fine for winter, the young fruit
should be regularly taken off for use; and, when the plant has acquired
strength, a moderate quantity should be allowed to set for maturity.
Sufficient for this purpose being reserved, the young fruit that may be
subsequently formed should be removed for use in a very young state. The
vines, or shoots, may be allowed to run along the surface of the ground;
or they may be trained against a wall, or on palings or trellises.

The seed should be planted at the same time and in the same manner as
those of the Winter Crookneck or Boston Marrow.


WILDER.

Stetson's Hybrid.

The Wilder Squash was produced about twelve years since, from the
Valparaiso and the Autumnal Marrow, by Mr. A. W. Stetson, of Braintree,
Mass.; and was named for the Hon. Marshall P. Wilder, a gentleman
widely known for his patriotic devotion to the advancement of
agricultural and pomological science in the United States.

The plant is a strong grower, and resembles that of the Valparaiso. The
fruit is somewhat ovoid, but rather irregular in form, broadly and
faintly ribbed (sometimes, however, without rib-markings), and varies in
weight from twelve to thirty pounds and upwards; stem very large,
striated or reticulated, and often turned at right angles near its
connection with the fruit,--the opposite extremity terminates in the
wart-like excrescence peculiar to the class; skin reddish-yellow, not
unlike that of the Autumnal Marrow; the flesh is remarkably thick, of a
salmon-yellow color, sweet and well flavored. In some forms of cookery,
and especially for pies, it is esteemed equal, if not superior, to any
other variety. When served in the customary manner of serving squash at
table, it is inferior to the Hubbard or Autumnal Marrow. The seeds are
white.


WINTER CROOKNECK.

Cuckaw.

[Illustration: Winter Crookneck.]

This is one of the oldest and most familiar of the winter varieties.
Plant hardy and vigorous; fruit somewhat irregular in form, the neck
solid and nearly cylindrical, and the blossom-end more or less swollen.
In some specimens, the neck is nearly straight; in others, sweeping, or
circular; and sometimes the extremities nearly or quite approach each
other. Size very variable, being affected greatly both by soil and
season; the weight ranging from six pounds to forty pounds and upwards.
A specimen was raised by Capt. Josiah Lovett, of Beverly, Mass., and
exhibited before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society, the weight of
which was nearly seventy pounds. Color sometimes green; but, when fully
mature, often cream-yellow. The color, like that of the Canada
Crookneck, frequently changes after being harvested. If green when
plucked, it gradually becomes paler; or, if yellow when taken from the
vines, it becomes, during the winter, of a reddish cream-color. Flesh
salmon-yellow, not uniform in texture or solidity, sometimes
close-grained, sweet, and fine flavored, and sometimes very coarse,
stringy, and nearly worthless for the table; seeds of medium size,
grayish-white, the border darker, or brownish. About two hundred are
contained in an ounce.

It is a very hardy and productive variety; ripens its crop with great
certainty; suffers less from the depredations of insects than most of
the winter sorts; and, if protected from cold and dampness during the
winter months, will keep the entire year.


WINTER STRIPED CROOKNECK.

This is a sub-variety of the common Winter Crookneck. Size large,--the
weight varying from six to twenty-five pounds; neck large and solid;
seed-end of medium size, and usually smooth; skin thin, very pale-green
or light cream-white, diversified with lengthwise stripes and plashes of
bright green,--the colors becoming gradually softer and paler after
gathering; flesh bright orange, and, like that of the common Winter
Crookneck, not uniform in texture or in flavor. Different specimens vary
greatly in these respects: some are tough and stringy, others very
fine-grained and well flavored. Seeds not distinguishable, in size,
form, or color, from those of the Winter Crookneck.

The variety is hardy, grows luxuriantly, is prolific, and keeps well. It
is more uniform in shape, and generally more symmetrical, than the
Winter Crookneck; though varieties occur of almost every form and color
between this and the last named.

As the plants require considerable space, the hills should not be less
than eight feet apart. Two or three plants are sufficient for a hill.

"The 'Crookneck Squash,' as it is commonly but incorrectly called, is a
kind of 'pumpkin,'--perhaps a genuine species; for it has preserved its
identity, to our certain knowledge, ever since the year 1686, when it
was described by Ray. Before the introduction of the Autumnal Marrow, it
was raised in large quantities for table use during the winter, in
preference to pumpkins, which it almost entirely superseded. Many
farmers now use it instead of pumpkins for cattle; the vine being more
productive, and the fruit containing much more nutriment in proportion
to its size. It varies considerably in form and color. The best kinds
are those which are very much curved,--nearly as large at the stem as at
the blossom-end,--and of a rich cream-color. It is said to degenerate in
the Middle and Southern States; where, probably, the Valparaiso or some
kindred variety may be better adapted to the climate."--_Dr. Harris._




CHAPTER V.

BRASSICACEOUS PLANTS.

Borecole, or Kale. Broccoli. Brussels Sprouts. Cabbage. Cauliflower.
Colewort. Couve Tronchuda, or Portugal Cabbage. Pak-Choei. Pe-Tsai, or
Chinese Cabbage. Savoy. Sea-kale.

       *       *       *       *       *

BORECOLE, OR KALE.

Brassica oleracea sabellica.

The term "Borecole," or "Kale," is applied to a class of plants, of the
Cabbage family, which form neither heads as the common cabbage, nor
eatable flowers like the broccoli and cauliflower. Some of the varieties
attain a height of six or seven feet; but while a few are compact and
symmetrical in their manner of growth, and of good quality for table
use, many are "ill-colored, coarse, rambling-growing, and comparatively
unpalatable and indigestible." Most of the kinds are either annuals or
biennials, and are raised from seeds, which, in size, form, and color,
resemble those of the cabbage.

_Sowing._--The seeds are sown at the time of sowing the seeds of the
cabbage or cauliflower, and in the same manner. Early plants may be
started in a hot-bed, or the seeds may be sown in the open ground in
April or May. In transplanting, treat the plants like young cabbages;
setting them more or less remote, according to the size or habit of the
variety.

Though they are extremely hardy, and will endure quite a low
temperature, they are generally harvested in autumn, before the
closing-up of the ground. If reset in the following spring, they will
furnish an abundance of tender sprouts, which, when cooked, are
superior in flavor and delicacy to the cabbage, and resemble coleworts
or Brussels sprouts.

_Seeds._--"The plants for seed should be selected from those kept over
winter, and in April set rather deeply in a spot well exposed to the
sun, and in a sandy rather than stiff soil. The stems should be
supported, to prevent breakage by the wind."

J. E. Teschemacher gives the following directions for culture and use:--

"Sow, the middle or last of May, a small bed on a moderately rich soil,
but in a well-exposed situation. Strong plants cannot be obtained from
seedlings grown in the shade. When the young plants have six or eight
leaves, prepare a piece of well-manured, open soil, plant the young
seedlings six or eight inches asunder, water well, and shade for a few
days against the hot sun. About a hundred plants are enough for a
family. Towards the latter end of July, or middle of August, they should
be thick, stocky plants, fit for final transplanting to the spots where
they are to remain. They may be planted in the lines from which early
crops of pease have been removed. The ground must be well manured, and
the plants moved singly and carefully, with as much earth attached to
the roots as possible. This last precaution is very necessary in all
summer transplanting, as the only means of enabling the plants to bear
the hot sun. In a garden, they should be well supplied with water for a
few days; but in field-planting, where this is not possible, a moist
time should be chosen. They will not show much signs of growth until the
cool nights prevail: after that, they will grow rapidly. They will not
boil tender or with much flavor until they have been frozen, or have
experienced a temperature of about 28 deg. Fahrenheit.

_Use._--"The tender, upper part alone is eaten. They are often, but not
always, frozen when cut; and, when this is the case, they should be put
into a cool cellar or in cold water until the frost is out of them. It
will take one-half to three-quarters of an hour to boil them tender. Put
them into the boiling water; to which add a lump of soda. This rather
softens them, and causes them to retain their green color. When done,
press the water thoroughly out, chop them up with a knife, put them into
a vessel to evaporate still more of the water, and serve with melted
butter, pepper and salt. In Germany, they frequently boil a few
chestnuts, and chop up with the Kale; between which and the stem and
stalk of the Kale it is difficult to perceive much difference in taste.
The beautiful curled leaves are quite ornamental.

"From one hundred plants, pluckings for the table were made twice a
week, from the middle of November to the middle of January; and these
fresh from the open garden, although the thermometer in the time had
indicated a temperature approaching to zero."--_Hov. Mag._

_Varieties._--The varieties, which are numerous, and in many instances
not well marked or defined, are as follow:--


BUDA KALE, OR BORECOLE. _Thomp._

Russian Kale. Asparagus Kale. Manchester Borecole. Dwarf Feather Kale.
Oak-leaved Kale.

The Buda Kale somewhat resembles the Purple; but the stalk is shorter.
The leaves are purplish, somewhat glaucous, cut and fringed. The variety
is not only hardy and well flavored, but continues to produce sprouts
longer than any other sort. It is sometimes blanched like sea-kale.


CABBAGING KALE, OR BORECOLE. _Thomp._

Imperial Hearting.

This is a new variety, and very much resembles the Dwarf Green Curled in
the nature, color, and general appearance of the leaves: the
heart-leaves, however, fold over each other, somewhat like those of a
cabbage, but, on account of the curls of the margin, not so compactly.
The quality is excellent.


COCK'S-COMB KALE.

Curled Proliferous Kale. Chou frise prolifere. _Vil._

Stalk about twenty inches high. The leaves differ to a considerable
extent in size, and are of a glaucous-green color. From the upper
surface of the ribs and nerves, and also from other portions of the
leaves, are developed numerous small tufts, or fascicles of leaves,
which, in turn, give rise to other smaller but similar groups. The
foliage thus exhibits a cock's-comb form: whence the name.

The variety is hardy, but more curious than useful.


COW-CABBAGE.

Tree-cabbage. _Thomp._ Cesarean Borecole. Cesarean Cabbage. Chou
Cavalier.

This variety generally grows to the height of about six feet; although
in some places it is reported as attaining a height of twelve feet, and
even upwards. The leaves are large,--measuring from two and a half to
nearly three feet in length,--smooth, or but slightly curled.

It is generally grown for stock; but the young sprouts are tender and
mild-flavored when cooked. Its value for agricultural purposes appears
to have been greatly overrated; for, when tried in this country against
other varieties of cabbages, the produce was not extraordinary.

The plants should be set three feet or three feet and a half apart.


DAUBENTON'S CREEPING BORECOLE.

Chou vivace de Daubenton. _Vil._

Stalk four or five feet in height or length. The leaves are nearly two
feet long, deep green; the leaf-stems are long and flexible. It
sometimes takes root where the stem rests upon the surface of the
ground; and, on this account, has been called perennial.

The variety is hardy, and yields abundantly; though, in this last
respect, it is inferior to the Thousand-headed.


DWARF GREEN CURLED BORECOLE. _Thomp._

Dwarf Curled Kale. Green Scotch Kale. Dwarf Curlies. Chou frise a Pied
court. _Vil._ Canada Dwarf Curled.

The Dwarf Green Curled is a very hardy but comparatively low-growing
variety; the stems seldom exceeding sixteen or eighteen inches in
height. The leaves are finely curled; and the crowns of the plants, as
well as the young shoots, are tender and delicate, especially after
having been exposed to the action of frost.

The plants may be set eighteen inches apart.


FIELD CABBAGE.

Field Kale for mowing. Chou a Faucher. _Vil._

Leaves sixteen to eighteen inches in length, very dark green, deeply
lobed, or lyrate, and hairy, or hispid, on the nerves and borders. The
leaf-stems are nearly white.

The variety produces small tufts, or collections of leaves, which are
excellent for fodder, and which may be cut several times during the
season. It is sometimes cultivated for stock; but, as a table vegetable,
is of little value.


FLANDERS KALE. _Thomp._

Chou Caulet de Flanders. _Vil._

This is a sub-variety of the Tree-cabbage, from which it is
distinguished by the purplish color of its foliage. Its height is nearly
the same, and the plant has the same general appearance. It is, however,
considered somewhat hardier.


GREEN MARROW-STEM BORECOLE.

Chou Moellier. _Vil._

Stem green, about five feet high, clavate, or club-formed; thickest at
the top, where it measures nearly two inches, and a half in diameter.
This stem, or stalk, is filled with a succulent pith, or marrow, which
is much relished by cattle; and, for this quality, the plant is
sometimes cultivated. The leaves are large, and nearly entire on the
edges; the leaf-stems are thick, short, white, and fleshy.

It is not so hardy as most of the other varieties. The plants should be
grown about three feet apart in one direction, by two feet or two feet
and a half in the opposite.


LANNILIS BORECOLE.

Chou de Lannilis. _Vil._ Lannilis Tree-cabbage.

Stem five feet high, thicker and shorter than that of the Cow or Tree
Cabbage; leaves long, entire on the borders, pale-green, and very thick
and fleshy. The leaf-stems are also thicker and shorter than those of
the last-named varieties.

The stalk is largest towards the top, and has the form of that of the
Marrow-stem. It sometimes approaches so near that variety, as to be
scarcely distinguishable from it.


NEAPOLITAN BORECOLE. _Trans._

Neapolitan Curled Kale. Chou frise de Naples. _Vil._

The Neapolitan Borecole is remarkable for its peculiar manner of growth,
but is hardly worthy of cultivation as a table vegetable, or even for
stock. The stem is short and thick, and terminates in an oval bulb,
somewhat in the manner of the Kohl Rabi. From all parts of this bulb are
put forth numerous erect, small leaves, finely curled on their edges.
The whole plant does not exceed twenty inches in height. The leaves are
attached to footstalks six or seven inches long. They are obovate,
smooth on the surface, with an extraordinary number of white veins,
nearly covering the whole leaf. The fringed edges are irregularly cut
and finely curled, and so extended as nearly to conceal the other parts
of the leaf. As the plant gets old, it throws out numerous small
branches from the axils of the leaves on the sides of the bulb.

The swollen portion of the stem is of a fleshy, succulent character, and
is used in the manner of Kohl Rabi; between which and the Cabbage it
appears to be intermediate.


PALM KALE.

Palm Borecole. Chou Palmier. _Vil._

Stalk six feet in height, terminating at the top in a cluster of leaves,
which are nearly entire on the borders, blistered on the surface like
those of the Savoys, and which sometimes measure three feet in length by
four or five inches in width.

As grown in France, the plant is remarkable for its fine appearance, and
is considered quite ornamental; though, as an article of food, it is of
little value. In England, it is said to have a tall, rambling habit, and
to be little esteemed.

The plants should be set three feet and a half apart in each direction.


PURPLE BORECOLE.

Red Borecole. Tall Purple Kale. Curled Brown Kale. Chou frise Rouge
Grand. _Vil._

With the exception of its color, the Purple Borecole much resembles the
Tall Green Curled. As the leaves increase in size, they often change to
green; but the veins still retain their purple hue. When cooked, the
color nearly or quite disappears.

It is remarkably hardy, and is much cultivated in Germany.


RED MARROW-STEM BORECOLE.

Red-stalked Kale.

Stalk purplish-red, four and a half or five feet high, and surmounted by
a cluster of large, fleshy leaves, on short, thick stems. The stalk is
much larger than that of the Green Marrow-stem, and sometimes measures
more than three inches in diameter. It is cultivated in the same manner,
and used for the same purposes, as the last-named variety.


TALL GREEN CURLED. _Thomp._

Tall Scotch Kale. Tall Green Borecole. Tall German Greens. Chou frise
grand du Nord. _Vil._

This variety, if unmixed, may be known by its bright-green, deeply
lobed, and curled leaves. Its height is two feet and a half and upwards.
Very hardy and productive.

The parts used are the crowns of the plants; and also the tender
side-shoots, which are produced in great abundance. These boil well, and
are sweet and delicate, especially after frost; though the quality is
impaired by protracted, dry, freezing weather.


THOUSAND-HEADED BORECOLE. _Thomp._

Chou branchu du Poitou. _Vil._ Chou a Mille Tetes.

The Thousand-headed Borecole much resembles the Tree or Cow Cabbage, but
is not so tall-growing. It sends out numerous side-shoots from the main
stem, and is perhaps preferable to the last-named sort. It is chiefly
valuable as an agricultural plant, but may occasionally be grown in
gardens on account of its great hardiness; but its flavor is inferior
to all other winter greens.


VARIEGATED BORECOLE. _Thomp._

Variegated Kale. Variegated Canadian Kale. Chou frise panache. _Vil._

This is a sub-variety of the Purple Borecole, growing about a foot and a
half high. The leaves vary much in size, and are lobed and finely
curled. They are also beautifully variegated, sometimes with green and
yellowish-white or green and purple, and sometimes with bright-red and
green.

It is frequently grown as an ornamental plant, is occasionally employed
for garnishing, and is sometimes put into bouquets. It is very good
cooked after frost, but is not quite so hardy as the Purple Borecole.


VARIEGATED COCK'S-COMB KALE.

A variety of the Common Cock's-comb Kale, with the leaves more or less
variegated with purple and white. It is not of much value as an
esculent.


WOBURN PERENNIAL KALE. _Thomp._

This is a tall variety of the Purple Borecole, with foliage very finely
divided or fringed. The plant lasts many years, and may be propagated by
cuttings, as it neither flowers readily nor perfects well its seeds. Its
produce is stated to have been more than four times greater than that of
either the Green or Purple Borecole on the same extent of ground. The
weight of produce from ten square yards was a hundred and forty-four
pounds ten ounces; but some of the large kinds of cabbages and savoys
will exceed this considerably, and prove of better quality. The Woburn
Perennial Kale can therefore only be recommended where the climate is
too severe for the more tender kinds of the Cabbage tribe.

       *       *       *       *       *

BROCCOLI.

Brassica oleracea var.

In its structure and general habit, the Broccoli resembles the
Cauliflower. Between these vegetables the marks of distinction are so
obscurely defined, that some of the white varieties of Broccoli appear
to be identical with the Cauliflower. Botanists divide them as
follows:--

"The Cauliflower has generally a short stalk, and white-ribbed, oblong
leaves. The stem by which the flower is supported unites at the head of
the primary branches into thick, short, irregular bundles, in the form
of a corymb. It appears to be a degeneration of the _Brassica oleracea
costata_, or Portugal Cabbage.

"In the Broccoli, the stalk is more elevated; the leaf-nerves less
prominent; the pedicles, or stems, connected with and supporting the
flower, or head, less thick and close. They are also longer; so that, on
becoming fleshy, they resemble in shape the young shoots of asparagus:
hence the name of 'Asparagoides,' given by ancient botanists to
Broccoli. It seems to be a degeneration of the 'Chou cavalier,' or tall,
open Cabbage.

"Cultivation, by improving the finer kinds of white Broccolis, is
narrowing the distinctive marks: but, although so nearly alike, they
must ever remain really distinct, inasmuch as they derive their origin
from two very distinct types; viz., the Portugal Cabbage and the Tall
Curled Kale. The Cauliflower also originated in the south of Europe, and
the Broccoli in the north of Europe, either in Germany or Britain."

_Seed._--Broccoli-seeds are rarely raised in this country; most of the
supply being received from France or England. In size, form, and color,
they are similar to those of the Cabbage or Cauliflower. An ounce may be
calculated to produce about five thousand plants, although it contains
nearly twice that number of seeds.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--In New England, as well as in the Middle and
Western States, the seeds of the later sorts should be sown in March or
April, in the manner of early cabbages; whilst the earlier varieties may
be sown in the open ground, from the middle to the last of May. If the
sowing be made in the open ground, prepare a small nursery-bed not too
directly exposed to the sun, and sow in shallow drills six or eight
inches apart. The last of June, or as soon as the plants have attained
sufficient size, transplant them into soil that is well enriched, and
has been deeply stirred; setting them at the distance directed for the
variety. If possible, the setting should be performed when the weather
is somewhat dull, for then the plants become sooner established; but, if
planted out in dry weather, they should be immediately and thoroughly
watered. If the plants have been started in a hot-bed, they should be
set out at the time of transplanting cabbages.

The after-culture consists in hoeing frequently to keep the ground loose
and clean, and in earthing up slightly from time to time about the stem.

Some of the early varieties will be fit for use in September; whilst the
later sorts, if properly treated, will supply the table till spring.

The difficulties attending the growing of Broccoli in this country arise
mainly from the extreme heat and dryness of the summer and the intense
cold of the winter. Whatever will tend to counteract these will promote
the growth of the plants, and tend to secure the development of large
and well-formed heads.

"When the heads of White Broccoli are exposed to light, and especially
to the direct influence of the sun, the color is soon changed to a dingy
or yellowish hue. It is, therefore, necessary to guard against this as
much as possible by frequently examining the plants; and, when any
heads are not naturally screened, one or two of the adjoining
side-leaves should be bent over the flower-head to shade it from the
light, and likewise to protect it from the rain. Some kinds are almost
self-protecting; whilst the leaves of others spread, and consequently
require more care in shading."--_Thomp._

_Taking the Crop._--"Broccoli should not be allowed to remain till the
compactness of the head is broken, but should always be cut while the
'curd,' as the flowering mass is termed, is entire, or before bristly,
leafy points make their appearance through it. In trimming the head, a
portion of the stalk is left, and a few of the leaves immediately
surrounding the head; the extremities being cut off a little below the
top of the latter."--_Thomp._

_Preservation._--"They are sometimes preserved during winter as follows:
Immediately previous to the setting-in of hard frost in autumn, take up
the plants on a dry day, with the roots entire, and turn their tops
downwards for a few hours, to drain off any water that may be lodged
between the leaves. Then make choice of a ridge of dry earth, in a
well-sheltered, warm exposure, and plant them down to their heads
therein, close to one another; having previously taken off a few of the
lower, loose leaves. Immediately erect over them a low, temporary shed,
of any kind that will keep them perfectly free from wet, and which can
be opened to admit the air in mild, dry weather. In very severe freezing
seasons, an extra covering of straw, or other description of dry litter,
should be applied over and around the shed; but this should be removed
on the recurrence of moderate weather."

They will keep well in a light, dry cellar, if set in earth as far as
the lower leaves.

_Seeds._--The seeds of Broccoli are not distinguishable from those of
the Cauliflower. They, however, rarely ripen well in this country, and
seedsmen are generally supplied from abroad.

_Use._--The heads, or flowers, are cooked and served in all the forms of
the Cauliflower.

_Varieties._--These are exceedingly numerous; although the distinctions,
in many instances, are neither permanent nor well defined.

In 1861-62, a hundred and three nominally distinct sorts were
experimentally cultivated at the Chiswick Gardens, near London, Eng.,
under the direction of Robert Hogg, Esq. In reporting the result, he
says, "It is quite evident that the varieties of Broccoli, as now grown,
are in a state of great confusion. The old varieties, such as Grange's
and the Old Early White, have entirely disappeared, or lost their
original character; whilst the distinctive names of Early White and Late
White seem now to be possessed of no value, as, in some cases, the one
is used for the other, and _vice versa_."

The kinds catalogued by seedsmen, and recommended for cultivation, are
the following; viz.:--


AMBLER'S EARLY WHITE. _R. Hogg._

Similar to Mitchinson's Penzance, but easily distinguished by its winged
leaves; those of the last named being interrupted. It is remarkably
hardy, and produces a large, creamy-white head, very uniform in size.


CHAPPELL'S LARGE CREAM-COLORED.

Chappell's New Cream-colored.

A very large and fine sort, earlier than the Portsmouth; flower
cream-yellow. Sow in the open ground in May, and transplant three feet
apart in each direction.


DANISH, OR LATE GREEN.

_Late Danish. Siberian._

The leaves of this variety are long, narrow, and much undulated; the
leaf-stems are tinged with purple; the heads are of medium size,
compact, exposed, and of a greenish color. It is one of the latest and
hardiest of all varieties.


DWARF BROWN CLOSE-HEADED. _Trans._

This variety resembles the Sulphur-colored; from which it probably
originated. It is, however, earlier, and differs in the form, as well as
in the color, of the flower. The leaves are small, not much waved,
dark-green, with white veins: they grow erect, and afford no protection
to the head. Most of the crowns are green at first; but they soon change
to large, handsome, brown heads.

The plants should be set two feet apart in each direction.


EARLY PURPLE. _Trans._

Early Purple Sprouting.

An excellent kind, of a deep-purple color. When the variety is unmixed,
it is close-headed at first; afterwards it branches, but is liable to be
too much branched, and to become green. The plant is from two to three
feet high, and a strong grower; the leaves are comparatively short,
spreading, and of a purplish-green color; the head is quite open from
the leaves. Small leaves are sometimes intermixed with the head, and the
plant produces sprouts of flowers from the alae of the leaves.

It succeeds best in rich soil, and the plants should be set three feet
apart.


EARLY SPROUTING. _M'Int._

Asparagus Broccoli. North's Early Purple. Italian Sprouting. Early
Branching.

A strong-growing, hardy sort, from two to three feet high. The leaves
are spreading, much indented, and of a purplish-green color. The flower
is close-headed, and, in the genuine variety, of a rich purple on its
first appearance. It is, however, liable to lose its color, and to
become greenish; and sometimes produces numerous small, green leaves,
intermixed with the flower, particularly if grown in soil too rich.

The variety is extensively grown by the market-gardeners in the vicinity
of London.


ELLETSON'S GIGANTIC LATE WHITE.

Elletson's Mammoth.

One of the largest and latest of the white broccolis. Leaves spreading;
stem short.


FINE EARLY WHITE. _Thomp._

Early White. Devonshire White. Autumn White.

Plant tall, with erect, dark-green, nearly entire leaves. The heads are
very white and close.

This variety, in common with a few others, is sometimes cut in
considerable quantities by market-gardeners previous to heavy frost, and
preserved in cellars for the supply of the market.


FROGMORE PROTECTING. _Hov. Mag._

Head pure white, scarcely distinguishable from the finest cauliflower;
size large,--when well formed, measuring from seven to nine inches in
diameter.

A recently introduced sort, promising to be one of the best. The plants
are extremely hardy and vigorous, and rarely fail to develop a large and
fine head, having a rich, curdy appearance, and, as before observed,
similar to a well-grown cauliflower. It is of dwarf growth; and the
outer leaves, closing over the large head of flowers, protect it from
the action of severe weather.


GILLESPIE'S BROCCOLI. _Thomp._

A fine, white, early autumn variety, much grown about Edinburgh.


GRANGE'S EARLY CAULIFLOWER BROCCOLI. _M'Int._

Grange's Early White. Hopwood's Early White. Marshall's Early White.
Bath White. Invisible.

This is an old variety, and, when pure, still stands in high estimation;
having a head nearly as large and as white as a cauliflower. The
leaf-stems are long and naked; the leaves are somewhat ovate, lobed at
the base, very slightly waved, and, incurving a little over the flower,
defend it from frost and wet. It is not a large grower; and, being
upright in habit, may be grown at two feet distant.

Hardy, and well deserving of cultivation. The London market-gardeners
cultivate four varieties, of which this is the principal.


GREEN CAPE. _Thomp._

Autumnal Cape. Maher's Hardy Cape.

Leaves long and narrow; the veins and midribs green; the head is
greenish, and generally covered by the leaves.

This variety and the Purple Cape often become intermixed, and are liable
to degenerate. They are, however, quite distinct, and, when pure, very
beautiful.


GREEN CLOSE-HEADED WINTER. _Trans._

Late Green. Siberian. Dwarf Roman.

This new and excellent Broccoli is apparently a seedling from the Green
Cape. The plants are dwarf; the leaves are large and numerous, with
white veins. The flower grows exposed, is not of large size, and
resembles that of the Green Cape. Its season immediately follows that of
the last-named variety.


HAMMOND'S WHITE CAPE.

An excellent, pure white variety, obtained in England by cultivation and
selection.


KENT'S LATE WHITE.. _R. Hogg._

A remarkably hardy, dwarf-growing variety, with very dark-green foliage.
Bouquet white, of good size, and well protected.


KIDDERMINSTER. _R. Hogg._

Head large and handsome, of pure whiteness, and much exposed. It is
evidently a form of "Willcove," and has, undoubtedly, emanated from that
variety; but it is somewhat earlier.


KNIGHT'S PROTECTING. _R. Hogg._ _M'Int._

Early Gem. The Gem. Lake's Gem. Waterloo Late White. Dilliston's Late
White. Hampton Court. Invisible Late White.

When pure, this variety is of a dwarfish habit of growth, with long,
pointed, and winged leaves, which have a spiral twist about the head,
and turn in closely over it, so as effectually to protect it from the
effect of frost, and preserve it of a fine white color.

It is remarkably hardy; and as the plants are of small size, with
comparatively large heads, a great product is realized from a small
piece of ground.


LATE DWARF PURPLE.

Dwarf Swedish. Italian Purple. Dwarf Danish.

This is the latest purple Broccoli. The plants seldom rise above a foot
in height. The flower, at first, shows small and green; but soon
enlarges, and changes to a close, conical, purple head. The leaves are
short and small, dark-green, with white veins, much sinuated, deeply
indented, and form a regular radius round the flower. The whole plant
presents a singular and beautiful appearance.


MILLER'S LATE WHITE. _Thomp._

Miller's Dwarf.

This is an old variety; but is considered by some to be the best late
sort, if it can be obtained true. Hardy. Transplant two feet apart.


MITCHELL'S NE PLUS ULTRA. _Thomp._

Hardy, and of dwarf habit; leaves smooth, glaucous, protecting the head,
which is cream-colored, large, and compact. Transplant two feet apart.


MITCHINSON'S PENZANCE. _R. Hogg._

Early White Cornish. Mitchinson's Early White.

One of the best of the Spring Whites. The leaves are much waved on the
margin, and enclose large and fine heads, which are nearly of a pure
white color. Very hardy.


PORTSMOUTH. _Thomp._

Cream-colored. Southampton. Maher's New Dwarf.

Leaves large, broad, with white veins, spreading; although the central
ones partially cover the flower, or head, which is buff, or
cream-colored. It is a hardy sort; and the flower, which is produced
near the ground, is said to exceed in size that of any other variety.
The plants should be set three feet apart.


PURPLE CAPE. _Trans._

Early Purple Cape. Purple Silesian. Howden's Superb Purple. Grange's
Early Cape. Blue Cape.

This has a close, compact head, of a purple color, and, in favorable
seasons, comes as large as a cauliflower. The plants grow from a foot to
a foot and a half in height, with short, erect, concave leaves,
regularly surrounding the head. The veins and midribs are stained with
purple. The head is exposed to view in growing; and, as it enlarges,
the projecting parts of the flower show a greenish-white mixed with the
purple color. When boiled, the whole flower becomes green.

Excellent for general culture, as it is not only one of the finest
varieties for the table, but the plants form their heads much more
generally than many other kinds. It is the earliest of the purple
broccolis.

The seed should not be sown before the middle or last of May, and the
plants will require a space of two feet and a half in each direction.


SNOW'S SUPERB WHITE WINTER. _Thomp._

Gill's Yarmouth White.

This variety is of dwarfish habit. The leaves are broad, with short
stems; the heads are large, white, very compact, well protected by the
incurved leaves, and equal in quality to those of the Cauliflower. By
many it is considered superior to Grange's Early Cauliflower Broccoli.


SNOW'S SPRING WHITE OR CAULIFLOWER BROCCOLI. _Trans._

Naples White. Early White. Adam's Early White. Neapolitan White.
Imperial Early White. Grange's Cauliflower. Covent-Garden Market.

Plant about two feet high, robust, and a strong grower. The leaves are
large, thick-veined, flat, and narrow; and generally compress the head,
so as to render it invisible when ready for cutting, and thus protect it
from rain and the effects of frost. Head large, perfectly white.


SULPHUR OR BRIMSTONE BROCCOLI. _Trans._

Late Brimstone. Fine Late Sulphur. Edinburgh Sulphur.

Leaves with long stems; heads large, compact, somewhat conical,
sulphur-colored, sometimes tinged with purple. Hardy.


WALCHEREN BROCCOLI. _M'Int._

Comparatively new, and so closely resembling a cauliflower as to be
scarcely distinguishable from it. The leaves, however, are more curled,
and its constitution is of a hardier nature, enduring the cold, and also
withstanding heat and drought better. Much esteemed in England, where,
by successive sowings, it is brought to the table at every season of the
year.


WARD'S SUPERB. _R. Hogg._

This is a form of Knight's Protecting, but is from two to three weeks
later. It is of a dwarfish habit of growth, closely protected by the
spirally compressed leaves, with a good-sized and perfectly white head.
One of the best of the late White Broccolis.


WHITE CAPE. _Thomp._

Heads of medium size, white, and compact.


WILLCOVE. _R. Hogg._

Late Willcove.

The true Willcove is a variety perfectly distinct from every other of
its season. The heads are very large, firm, even, and fine, and of a
pure whiteness. They are fully exposed, and not protected by the leaves
as most other broccolis are. On this account, the variety is more liable
to be injured by the weather than any other late sort; and therefore, in
severe seasons, it must be regarded as deficient in hardiness.

"It derives its name from a small village near Devonport, Eng.; where it
originated, and where the Broccoli is said to be grown in great
perfection."

       *       *       *       *       *

BRUSSELS SPROUTS.

Thousand-headed Cabbage. Brassica oleracea var.

[Illustration: Brussels Sprouts.]

In its general character, this vegetable is not unlike some of the
varieties of Kale or Borecole. Its stem is from a foot to four feet in
height, and from an inch and a half to upwards of two inches in
diameter. It is remarkable for the production of numerous small axillary
heads, or sprouts, which are arranged somewhat in a spiral manner, and
which are often so closely set together as entirely to cover the sides
of the stem. "These small heads are firm and compact like little
cabbages, or rather like hearted savoys in miniature. A small head,
resembling an open savoy, surmounts the stem of the plant, and maintains
a circulation of sap to the extremity. Most of the original side-leaves
drop off as these small buds, or heads, enlarge."--_Thomp._

_Culture._--The plant is always raised from seeds, which, in size, form,
or color, are scarcely distinguishable from the seeds of the Common
Cabbage. These should be sown at the time and in the manner of the
Cabbage, either in hot-beds in March or April, or in the open ground in
April or May. When three or four inches high, transplant two feet apart
in each direction, and cultivate as directed for cabbages and
cauliflowers. In September, the early plantings will be fit for
gathering; whilst the later plants will afford a succession that will
supply the table during the winter. For the latter purpose, they should
be harvested before severe freezing weather, and preserved in the cellar
as cauliflowers and broccolis. They are quite hardy, easily grown,
thrive well in New England or in the Middle States, and deserve more
general cultivation.

_To raise Seeds._--In the autumn, select two or three of the finest
plants; keep them in the cellar, or out of the reach of frost, during
winter; and in the spring set them in the open ground, two feet apart,
and as far as possible from all flowering plants of the Cabbage family.
Cut off the top shoot, and save the branches of pods that proceed from
the finest of the small heads on the sides of the main stem.

_Use._--The small heads are boiled and served in the manner of cabbages.
They are also often used in the form of the cauliflower, boiled until
soft, then drained, and afterwards stewed with milk, cream, or butter.

_Varieties._--Two varieties are enumerated by gardeners and seedsmen;
viz.:--


DWARF BRUSSELS SPROUTS.

A low-growing sort, usually from eighteen inches to two feet in height.
It differs from the following variety principally in size, though it is
somewhat earlier. The dwarf stems are said to produce heads which are
more tender and succulent when cooked than those obtained from taller
plants.


TALL OR GIANT BRUSSELS SPROUTS.

Stem nearly four feet in height; plant healthy and vigorous, producing
the small heads peculiar to its class in great abundance. It is somewhat
hardier than the foregoing variety; and, on account of its greater
length of stalk, much more productive.

There is, however, very little permanency to these sorts. Much of the
seed found in the market will not only produce plants corresponding with
both of the varieties described, but also numerous intermediate kinds.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CABBAGE.

Brassica oleracea capitata.

The Cabbage is a biennial plant; and, though comparatively
hardy,--growing at all seasons unprotected in England,--will not
withstand the winters of the Northern States in the open ground.

When fully developed, it is from four to five feet in height. The
flowers are cruciform, generally yellow, but sometimes white or
yellowish-white. The seeds, which ripen in July and August of the second
year, are round, reddish-brown or blackish-brown, and retain their
vitality five years. About ten thousand are contained in an ounce.

_Soil and Situation._--"Though not particularly nice as to soil or
situation, cabbages do best when grown in well-manured ground. In such
soil, they are generally earlier than when raised in cold and stiff
ground. But manure need not be profusely applied, if the ground is
naturally of a fertile and open kind; for the flavor is generally better
in such soil than where a great quantity of fertilizer is used."

_Propagation._--All of the varieties are propagated from seed sown
annually. For early use, a sowing may be made in a hot-bed in February
or March; and, for winter use, the seed may be sown in a nursery-bed in
the open ground in May or June. When five or six inches high, transplant
to the distance directed in the description of the variety. In the
hot-bed or nursery-bed, the plants should not be allowed to stand too
thickly together, as this causes them to draw up weak and feeble.

_To raise Seed._--At the time of harvesting, select a few of the most
compact and best-formed heads possessing the characters of the pure
variety; and, in the following April, set the plants entire, three feet
apart in each direction. As they progress in growth, remove all of the
side-shoots, and encourage the main sprout, that will push up through
the centre of the head. Seeds from the side-shoots, as well as those
produced from decapitated stems, are of little value. No cabbage-seed is
really reliable that is not obtained from firm and symmetrical heads;
and seed thus cultivated for a few successive seasons will produce
plants, ninety per cent of which will yield well-formed and good-sized
cabbages.

American-grown seed is generally considered superior to that of foreign
growth; and, when it can be obtained from a reliable seedsman or
seeds-grower, the purchaser should not be induced by the difference in
price to select the nominally cheaper, as there are few vegetables with
which the character of the seed is of greater importance.

_Varieties._--The varieties are numerous, and the distinction, in many
instances, well-defined and permanent. Between some of the sorts,
however, the variations are slight, and comparatively unimportant.


ATKINS'S MATCHLESS. _M'Int._

This is a variety of the Early York: the head, however, is smaller and
more conical, and the leaves are more wrinkled,--somewhat similar to
those of the Savoys. It is of tender texture and delicate flavor; and,
with the exception of its smaller size, is considered equal, if not
superior, to the last-named variety.

It is comparatively a recent sort, and seems to be desirable rather for
its precocity and excellent quality than for its size or productiveness.

Transplant to rows fifteen inches apart, and twelve inches asunder in
the rows.


BARNES'S EARLY.

Barnes's Early Dwarf.

This variety, in respect to season, size, form, and general habit, seems
to be intermediate between, or a hybrid from, the York and Ox-heart.
Head ovate, rather compact; texture fine and tender; flavor mild and
good.

Set in rows two feet apart, and eighteen inches apart in the rows.


BERGEN DRUMHEAD.

Large Bergen. Great American. Quintal. _Vil._ Large German Drumhead.

Head remarkably large, round, flattened at the top, compact; the leaves
are of a peculiar, glaucous-green color, of thick texture, firm, and
rather erect; the nerves large and prominent; the outer leaves of the
head are usually revoluted on the borders; the loose leaves are
numerous, and rarely rise above a level with the summit of the head; the
stalk is short.

The Bergen Drumhead is one of the largest and latest of all the
cabbages; and, when not fully perfected before being harvested, has the
reputation, if reset in earth in the cellar, of heading, and increasing
in size, during winter. It is a popular market sort; and,
notwithstanding its extraordinary proportions, is tender, well flavored,
and of more than average quality for family use. The plants should be
set three feet apart.


CHAMPION OF AMERICA.

One of the largest of the recently introduced sorts; the whole plant
sometimes attaining a weight of forty pounds and upwards. Head very
large, flattened, somewhat resembling the Drumheads; outer leaves very
few, succulent, and tender; stalk short; quality tender, mild, and well
flavored. As a market variety, it has few, if any, superiors. It heads
with great uniformity, and bears transportation well; but its large size
is objectionable when required for the use of families numbering but few
members.


EARLY BATTERSEA. _Thomp._

Dwarf Battersea. Early Dwarf Battersea.

The type of the Early Battersea is very old. When fully grown, the four
outside or lower leaves are about sixteen inches in diameter; and, when
taken off and spread out, their general outline is nearly circular. The
stem is dwarfish, and the leaf-stalks come out quite close to each
other; so that scarcely any portion of the stem is to be seen between
them. The whole cabbage measures about three feet in circumference. The
heart is shortly conical, with a broad base; near which it is about two
feet in circumference, when divested of the outside leaves. The ribs
boil tender.

It is one of the best sorts for the general crop of early cabbages; is
not liable to crack; and, when cut close to the stem, often puts forth a
number of fresh heads, of fair size and good quality.


EARLY CORNISH.

Penton. Paignton. Pentonville.

This is an intermediate sort, both in respect to size and season; and is
said to derive its name from a village in Devonshire, Eng., where it has
been cultivated for ages. The head is of full medium size, somewhat
conical in form, and moderately firm and solid. The outside leaves are
rather numerous, long, and of a pale or yellowish green color. Its
texture is fine and tender, and its flavor mild and agreeable. It is
three or four weeks later than the Early York.

If reset in spring, this variety, like the Yanack, will send out from
the stalk abundant tender sprouts, which will supply the table with the
best of coleworts, or greens, for several weeks of the early part of the
season.

The plants are somewhat leafy and spreading, and require full the
average space. The rows should be two and a half or three feet apart,
and the distance between the plants in the rows full two feet.


EARLY DRUMHEAD.

This is an intermediate variety, about the size of the Early York, and a
little later. The head is round, flattened a little at the top, firm and
well formed, tender in texture, and well flavored.

It is a good sort for the garden, as it heads well, occupies but little
space in cultivation, and comes to the table immediately after the
earlier sorts.

The plants should be set in rows two feet apart, and eighteen inches
apart in the rows.


EARLY DUTCH TWIST. _M'Int._

An excellent cabbage of the smallest size. It is very early and
delicate, and may be planted almost as close together as a crop of
cabbage-lettuce.

The first sowing should be made early; afterwards, sowings should be
made at intervals of two or three weeks, which will secure for the table
a constant supply of fresh and tender heads from July till winter.


EARLY HOPE.

A rather small, solid, oval-headed, early sort, nearly of the season of
the Early York. Its color is bright-green, and its leaves rather erect
and firm. In quality, it is not unlike the Small Early Ox-heart, and
requires the same space in cultivation.

The variety is comparatively new; and, though found on the catalogues of
seedsmen, is little disseminated.


EARLY LOW DUTCH.

Early Dutch Drumhead.

This well-known and standard variety has a round, medium-sized, solid
head, sometimes tinted with brown at its top. The outside and loose
leaves are few in number, large, rounded, clasping, blistered, and of a
glaucous-green color; the ribs and nerves are small; the stalk is thick
and short. It is rather early, tender, and of good quality; heads well;
and is one of the best sorts for growing in a small garden for early
table use. The plants should be allowed a space of two feet and a half
between the rows, and nearly two feet in the rows.


EARLY NONPAREIL.

Head of medium size, bright-green, rather ovoid or egg-shaped, solid;
the leaves are generally erect, roundish, concave, and of thick, firm
texture; the stalk is comparatively short, and the spare leaves few in
number; flavor mild and pleasant. By some, it is considered the best of
the intermediate varieties.

In many respects, it resembles the Small Ox-heart.


EARLY SUGAR-LOAF.

The color of this variety, and the form of its head, distinguish it from
all others. The plant, when well developed, has an appearance not unlike
some of the varieties of Cos lettuces; the head being round and full at
the top, and tapering thence to the base, forming a tolerably regular,
inverted cone. The leaves are erect, of a peculiar ashy or bluish-green
hue, spoon-shaped, and clasp or cove over and around the head in the
manner of a hood or cowl.

Though an early cabbage, it is thought to be more affected by heat than
most of the early varieties; and is also said to lose some of its
qualities, if kept late in the season. Head of medium size, seldom
compactly formed; and, when cut and cooked in its greatest perfection,
tender and well flavored.

Transplant in rows two feet apart, and from eighteen to twenty-four
inches apart in the rows.


EARLY WAKEFIELD.

Head of medium size, generally somewhat conical, but sometimes nearly
round, compact; leaves very glaucous; stalk small.

A fine, early variety, heading readily. As the plants occupy but little
space, it is recommended as a desirable sort for early marketing.


EARLY YORK.

According to Rogers, the Early York Cabbage was introduced into England
from Flanders, more than a hundred years ago, by a private soldier named
Telford, who was there many years in the reign of Queen Anne. On his
return to England, he settled as a seedsman in Yorkshire: whence the
name and celebrity of the variety.

In this country, it is one of the oldest, most familiar, and, as an
early market sort, one of the most popular, of all the kinds now
cultivated. The head is of rather less than medium size, roundish-ovoid,
close, and well-formed, of a deep or ash-green color, tender, and well
flavored. The loose leaves are few in number, often revoluted on the
border, and comparatively smooth on the surface; nerves greenish-white.
The plants of the true variety have short stalks, occupy but little
space, and seldom fail to produce a well-formed, and, for an early sort,
a good-sized head. They require a distance of about eighteen inches
between the rows, and fifteen or eighteen inches in the row.

Its earliness and its unfailing productiveness make it a favorite with
market-gardeners; and it still retains its long-established popularity,
notwithstanding the introduction of numerous new sorts, represented as
being as early, equally prolific, and surpassing it in general
excellence.


EAST HAM.

From East Ham, in Essex, Eng. It is not a large, but a fine, early sort,
not unlike the Ox-heart. The head is of an oval form, compact, and
rather regular; the leaves are firm in texture, sometimes reflexed, or
curved backward, but generally erect and concave; nerves pale
greenish-white; stem very short. It is mild and delicate, and a
desirable early variety.

In setting the plants, allow two feet and a half between the rows, and
two feet between the plants in the rows.


GREEN GLAZED.

American Green Glazed.

Head large, rather loose and open; the leaves are numerous, large,
rounded, waved on the borders, and slightly blistered on the surface;
stalk comparatively long. Its texture is coarse and hard, and the
variety really possesses little merit; though it is somewhat extensively
grown in warm latitudes, where it appears to be less liable to the
attacks of the cabbage-worm than any other sort.

A distinguishing characteristic of this cabbage is its deep,
shining-green color; the plants being readily known from their peculiar,
varnished, or glossy appearance.


LARGE LATE DRUMHEAD.

American Drumhead.

Head very large, round, sometimes flattened a little at the top, close
and firm; the loose leaves are numerous, broad, round, and full,
clasping, blistered, and of a sea-green color; the ribs and nerves are
of medium size, and comparatively succulent and tender; stem short. The
variety is hardy, seldom fails to form a head, keeps well, and is of
good quality.

In cultivation, it requires more than the average space, as the plants
have a spreading habit of growth. The rows should not be less than three
feet apart; and two feet and a half should be allowed between the plants
in the rows.

There are many varieties of this cabbage, introduced by different
cultivators and seedsmen under various names, differing slightly, in
some unimportant particulars, from the foregoing description, and also
differing somewhat from each other, "but agreeing in being large,
rounded, cabbaging uniformly, having a short stem, keeping well, and in
being tender and good flavored."


LARGE YORK.

This is a larger cabbage than the Early York; which variety it somewhat
resembles. The head, however, is broader in proportion to its depth, and
more firm and solid; the leaves not connected with the head are more
erect, of a firmer texture, not quite so smooth and polished, and the
surface slightly bullated, or blistered. It also has a shorter stalk,
and is two or three weeks later.

The Large York seems to be intermediate between the Early York and the
Large Late Drumheads, as well in respect to form and general character
as to its season of maturity. It is recommended as being less affected
by heat than many other kinds, and, for this reason, well adapted for
cultivation in warm climates. It seldom fails in forming its head, and
is tender and well flavored.


LARGE OX-HEART.

Large French Ox-heart.

This is a French variety, of the same form and general character as the
Small Ox-heart, but of larger size. The stalk is short; the head firm
and close, and of a light-green color; the spare leaves are few in
number, generally erect, and concave. It is a week or ten days later
than the Small Ox-heart, forms its head readily, and is tender and well
flavored. One of the best of the intermediate sorts.

The plants should be set two feet apart in each direction.


MARBLEHEAD MAMMOTH DRUMHEAD. _J. J. H. Gregory._

One of the largest of the Cabbage family, produced from the Mason, or
Stone-mason, by Mr. Alley, and introduced by Mr. J. J. H. Gregory, of
Marblehead, Mass.

Heads not uniform in shape,--some being nearly flat, while others are
almost hemispherical; size very large, varying from fifteen to twenty
inches in diameter,--although specimens have been grown of the
extraordinary dimensions of twenty-four inches. In good soil, and with
proper culture, the variety is represented as attaining an average
weight of thirty pounds. Quality tender and sweet.

Cultivate in rows four feet apart, and allow four feet between the
plants in the rows. For early use, start in a hot-bed; for winter, sow
in the open ground from the first to the middle of May. Sixty tons of
this variety have been raised from a single acre.


MASON. _J. J. H. Gregory._

The Mason Cabbage, in shape, is nearly hemispherical; the head standing
well out from among the leaves, growing on a small and short stalk.
Under good cultivation, the heads will average about nine inches in
diameter and seven inches in depth. It is characterized for its
sweetness, and for its reliability for forming a solid head. It is also
an excellent variety for cultivation in extreme Northern latitudes,
where, from the shortness of the season, or in those sections of the
South, where, from excessive heat, plants rarely cabbage well. Under
good cultivation, nearly every plant will set a marketable head.

Originated by Mr. John Mason, of Marblehead, Mass.


POMERANIAN.

This variety is of comparatively recent introduction. The head, which is
of medium size, has the form of an elongated cone, and is very regular
and symmetrical. It is quite solid, of a pale or yellowish green color,
tender and well flavored, and remarkable for the peculiar manner in
which the leaves are collected, and twisted to a point, at its top. The
loose, exterior leaves are numerous, large, and broad; stalk rather
high.

It is not early, but rather an intermediate variety, and excellent
either as an autumnal or winter cabbage. As it heads promptly and almost
invariably, and, besides, is of remarkable solidity, it makes a
profitable market cabbage; keeping well, and bearing transportation with
very little injury.


PREMIUM FLAT DUTCH.

Large Flat Dutch.

Head large, bluish-green, round, solid, broad and flat on the top, and
often tinted with red or brown. The exterior leaves are few in number,
roundish, broad and large, clasping, blistered on the surface,
bluish-green in the early part of the season, and tinged with purple
towards the time of harvesting; stalk short.

It is one of the largest of the cabbages, rather late, good for autumn
use, and one of the best for winter or late keeping, as it not only
remains sound, but retains its freshness and flavor till late in spring.
The heads open white and crisp, and, when cooked, are tender and well
flavored. It requires a good soil, and should be set in rows not less
than three feet apart, and not nearer together than thirty inches in the
rows. As a variety for the winter market, the Premium Flat Dutch has no
superior. It is also one of the best sorts for extensive culture, as it
is remarkably hardy, and seldom fails in forming a good head. An acre of
land, well set and cultivated, will yield about four thousand heads.


ST. DENIS. _Vil._

Head of large size, round, a little flattened, solid; the exterior
leaves are numerous, glaucous-green, clasping at their base, and often
reflexed at the ends; the ribs and nerves are large and prominent; stem
long.

This variety is of good quality, seldom fails to form a head, and yields
a large crop in proportion to the quantity of land it occupies. The
plants should be set two feet and a half apart in each direction.


SHILLING'S QUEEN.

A half-early variety, intermediate in form and size between the York and
Ox-heart. As a "second early," it is one of the best. It compares
favorably with the Early Nonpareil, and is tender, mild, and delicate.

Transplant in rows two feet and a half apart, and eighteen inches apart
in the rows.


SMALL OX-HEART.

Coeur de Boeuf petit, of the French. _Vil._

Head below medium size, ovate or egg-shaped, obtuse, broad at the base,
compact. The leaves are of the same bright green as those of the York
Cabbage, round, of firm texture, sometimes revolute, but generally
erect, and concave; the nerves are white, more numerous and less
delicate than those of the last-named variety; the stalk is short, and
the leaves not composing the head few in number.

The Ox-heart cabbages--with respect to character, and period of
maturity--are intermediate between the Yorks and Drumheads; more nearly,
however, resembling the former than the latter. The Small Ox-heart is
about ten days later than the Early York.

As not only the heads, but the full-grown plants, of this variety are of
small size, they may be grown in rows two feet apart, and sixteen inches
apart in the rows.


STONE-MASON. _J. J. H. Gregory._

An improved variety of the Mason, originated by Mr. John Stone, jun., of
Marblehead, Mass. Head larger than that of the original, varying in size
from ten to fourteen inches in diameter, according to the strength of
the soil and the cultivation given it. The form of the head is flatter
than that of the Mason, and but little, if any, inferior to it in
solidity. Stem very short and small. Under good culture, the heads,
exclusive of the outer foliage, will weigh about nine pounds. Quality
exceedingly sweet, tender, and rich. A profitable variety for market
purposes; the gross returns per acre, in the vicinity of Boston, Mass.,
often reaching from two hundred dollars to three hundred and fifty.

The Mason, Stone-mason, and the Marblehead Mammoth, severally originated
from a package of seeds received from England, under the name of the
"Scotch Drumhead," by Mr. John M. Ives, of Salem, Mass.


SUTTON'S DWARF COMB. _M'Int._

This is one of the earliest of all the cabbages. It is small and
dwarfish in its habit, hearts well early in the season, and will afford
a good supply of delicate sprouts throughout a large part of the summer.

The plants require a space of only twelve inches between the rows, and
the same distance between the plants in the rows.

The seed of this variety, in common with other dwarfish and early sorts,
should be sown more frequently than the larger growing kinds, so as to
keep up a succession of young and delicate heads, much after the manner
of sowing lettuce.


VANACK. _Lind._

This variety was introduced into England from Holland, more than a
century ago, by a wealthy Dutch farmer of the name of Vanack. Though
often found upon the catalogues of our seedsmen, it has not been
extensively grown in this country, and perhaps is really but little
known.

Head somewhat irregular in shape, broad at the base, and terminating in
rather a sharp point; color palish-green, the ribs and nerves of the
leaves paler. The exterior leaves are large, spreading, deep-green, and
strongly veined.

It is tender in texture, sweet and delicate in flavor, cabbages early
and uniformly, and, when kept through the winter and reset in spring,
pushes abundant and fine sprouts, forming excellent early coleworts, or
greens. Lindley pronounces its quality inferior to none of the best
cabbages. Transplant to rows two feet and a half apart, and two feet
apart in the rows.


VAUGIRARD CABBAGE. _Thomp._

Chou de Vaugirard. _Vil._

A large, late, but coarse, French variety. The head is generally round;
leaves deep-green,--those of the outside having the veins sometimes
tinged with red.

The plants should be set three feet apart in each direction.


WAITE'S NEW DWARF. _Hov. Mag._

Heads small, but solid and uniform in shape. It has little of the
coarseness common to the larger varieties, and the flavor is superior.

One of the finest early cabbages, and one of the best sorts for the
market. It occupies but little space compared with some of the older
kinds, and a large number of plants may be grown upon a small piece of
ground.


WINNIGSTADT.

Pointed Head.

This is a German variety, somewhat similar to the Ox-heart, but more
regularly conical. Head broad at the base, and tapering symmetrically to
a point, solid, and of the size of the Ox-heart; leaves of the head pale
or yellowish green, with large nerves and ribs; the exterior leaves are
large, short, and rounded, smooth, and of firm texture; the stalk is
short.

It is an intermediate sort, immediately following the Early York. A
large proportion of the plants will form good heads; and as these are
not only of remarkable solidity, but retain their freshness well during
winter, it is a good variety for marketing, though rather hard, and
somewhat deficient in the qualities that constitute a good
table-cabbage.

It requires a space of about eighteen inches by two feet.

_Red Varieties._--These are comparatively few in number, and generally
used as salad or for pickling. When cooked, they are considered less
mild and tender than the common varieties, besides retaining a portion
of their color; which, by many, is considered an objection.


EARLY DWARF RED.

Early Blood Red. Small Red.

Head nearly round, generally of a deep-red or dark-purple color. The
leaves on the outside of the plant are not numerous, rather rigid or
stiff, green, much washed or clouded with red; stalk short.

It is about ten days earlier than the Large Red Dutch, and is quite
variable in form and color.

The seed should be sown early; and, when transplanted, the rows should
be about two feet apart, and the plants eighteen inches in the rows.

The variety is seldom served at the table, cooked in the manner of other
sorts; for, when boiled, it has a dark and unattractive appearance. It
is almost invariably shredded, and with the addition of vinegar,
olive-oil, mustard, or other seasoning, served as a salad.


LARGE RED DUTCH.

The most familiar as well as the most popular of the red varieties. The
head is rather large, round, hard, and solid; the leaves composing-the
head are of an intense purplish-red; the outer leaves are numerous, red,
with some intermixture or shades of green, firm in texture, and often
petioled at the union with the stalk of the plant, which is of medium
height.

On account of its dark color when cooked, it is seldom used in the
manner of the common cabbages. It is chiefly used for pickling, or,
like the other red sorts, cut in shreds, and served as a salad; though
any solid, well-blanched, small-ribbed, white-headed sort will answer
for the same purpose, and perhaps prove equally tender and palatable.

The Large Red Dutch is one of the latest of cabbages, and should receive
the advantage of nearly the entire season. Make the sowing, if in the
open ground, as soon as the soil is in good working condition, and
transplant or thin to rows two and a half or three feet apart, and two
feet apart in the rows.

The heads may be kept fresh and sound until May.


SUPERFINE BLACK. _Thomp._

Small, like the Utrecht Red, but of a still deeper color. When pickled,
however, the dark coloring matter is greatly discharged, so that the
substance is left paler than that of others originally not so dark. It
is, therefore, not so good for pickling as other sorts which retain
their color and brightness.


UTRECHT RED. _Thomp._

Chou noiratre d'Utrecht.

A small but very fine dark-red cabbage.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CAULIFLOWER.

Brassica oleracea var.

The Cauliflower, like the Broccoli, is strictly an annual plant; as it
blossoms and perfects its seed the year in which it is sown. When fully
grown or in flower, it is about four feet in height, and in character
and general appearance is similar to the Cabbage or Broccoli at a like
stage of growth. The seeds resemble those of the Cabbage in size, form,
and color; although not generally so uniformly plump and fair. From ten
to twelve thousand are contained in an ounce, and they retain their
germinative properties five years.

_Soil._--"Much of the delicacy and excellence of the Cauliflower depends
on the quickness of its growth: therefore, to promote this, the soil
cannot be too highly enriched or too deeply cultivated; and, as all the
tribe thrive best in new soil, the deeper the ground is dug, and the
more new or rested matter that is turned up for the roots, the better."

_Sowing and Culture._--The seed may be sown in a hot-bed in March, at
the same time and in the same manner as early cabbages, and the plants
set in the open ground late in May; or the seed may be sown in the open
air in April or the beginning of May, in a common nursery-bed, in
shallow drills six or eight inches apart; and, when sufficiently grown,
the plants may be set where they are to remain. They need not all be
transplanted at one time; nor is it important when, except that, as soon
as they are large enough, the first opportunity should be improved for
beginning the setting.

"Cauliflowers, after transplanting, require no particular skill during
summer, and not much labor. The soil, however, must be kept free from
weeds, and stirred with the hoe from time to time. As the plants
increase in size, a little earth should be drawn about their roots from
the middle of the row; and, in continued dry weather, an application of
liquid manure will be very beneficial."

The leaves are sometimes gathered, and tied loosely over the tops of the
heads, to facilitate the blanching.

_Taking the Crop._--Cauliflowers raised by open culture will generally
come to the table in October. Such as have not fully perfected their
heads, may, just as the ground is closing, be taken up by their roots,
and suspended, with the top downward, in a light cellar, or other place
secure from frost; by which process, the heads will increase in size,
and be suitable for use the last of December or first of January.

"Cauliflowers are ready for cutting when the heads have attained a good
size, and while they are close, firm, and white. They may even be cut
before they have attained their full size; but it is always advisable to
cut them before the heads begin to open, as the flavor is at this stage
much more delicate and agreeable. In taking the crop, the stalks should
be cut immediately under the lowest leaves, and the upper parts of these
should be cut away near the flower-head.

"It is not size that constitutes a good Cauliflower, but its fine,
white, or creamy color, its compactness, and what is technically called
its 'curdy' appearance, from its resemblance to the curd of milk in its
preparation for cheese. When the flower begins to open, or when it is of
a frosty or wart-like appearance, it is less esteemed. In the summer
season, it should not be cut long before using."

_Use._--"The heads, or flowers, are considered one of the greatest of
vegetable delicacies, when served up at the table either plain boiled,
to be eaten with meat, like other Brassicae, or dressed with white sauce,
after the French manner. It is much used as a pickle, either by itself,
or as forming an ingredient in what is called 'mixed pickles.' It may
also be preserved a considerable time when pickled in the manner of
'sour-krout.' It also forms an excellent addition to vegetable
soups."--_M'Int._

_Preservation during Winter._--The best way to preserve them during
winter is to take them up late in the fall, with as much earth as
possible about their roots, and reset them in earth, in a light, dry
cellar, or in any other light and dry location secure from frost.

_Varieties._--These are comparatively few in number; the distinctions,
in many instances, being quite unimportant. In the color, foliage,
general habit, and even in the quality, of the entire list, there is
great similarity.


EARLY LONDON CAULIFLOWER.

London Particular. Fitch's Early London.

Stem tall; leaves of medium size. It has a fine, white, compact "curd,"
as the unexpanded head is termed; and is the sort grown in the vicinity
of London for the early crop. It is comparatively hardy, and succeeds
well when grown in this country. The plants should be set two feet and a
half apart.


EARLY PARIS CAULIFLOWER.

Head rather large, white, and compact; leaves large; stalk short. An
early sort. In France, it is sown in June, and the heads come to table
in autumn.


ERFURT'S EARLY CAULIFLOWER.

Erfurt's Extra Early.

Leaves large, long, waved, and serrated on the borders; stalk of medium
height; head large,--measuring from seven to ten inches in
diameter,--close, and compact.

From the experience of a single season, this variety promises to be one
of the best for cultivation in this country. Specimens exhibited under
this name, before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society, measured
fully ten inches in diameter; the surface being very close, and the
heads possessing the peculiar white, curdy character so rarely attained
in the climate of the United States. The plants seldom fail to form a
good-sized and symmetrical head, or flower.


LARGE ASIATIC CAULIFLOWER. _Thomp._

Originally from Holland. It is a fine, large, white, compact variety,
taller and later than the Early London Cauliflower; it has also larger
leaves. If sown at the same time, it will afford a succession.


LE NORMAND. _R. Hogg._

Plant about fifteen inches high, with winged leaves, which are broad,
and taper abruptly towards the base. They are toothed and waved on the
margin, and expose a head which is about nine inches in diameter, and of
a creamy color.

It is earlier than the Walcheren, and is readily distinguished from it
by the waved and toothed margin of the foliage.


MITCHELL'S HARDY EARLY CAULIFLOWER.

A new variety. Bouquet not large, but handsome and compact. It is so
firm, that it remains an unusual length of time without running to seed
or becoming pithy. A desirable sort for private gardens and for forcing.


STADTHOLD. _Vil._

A new variety, introduced from Holland. Flower fine white, and of large
size. Not early.


WAITE'S ALMA CAULIFLOWER.

A new variety, represented as being of large size, and firm; surpassing
in excellence the Walcheren.


WALCHEREN CAULIFLOWER. _Thomp._

Early Leyden. Legge's Walcheren Broccoli.

This has been cultivated as a Broccoli for more than ten years; though
originally introduced by the London Horticultural Society, under the
name of Early Leyden Cauliflower. Stem comparatively short; leaves
broad, less pointed and more undulated than those of the Cauliflower
usually are. The difference in constitution is, however, important; as
it not only resists the cold in winter, but the drought in summer, much
better than other cauliflowers. In hot, dry summers, when scarcely a
head of these could be obtained, the Walcheren Cauliflower, planted
under similar circumstances, formed beautiful heads,--large, white,
firm, and of uniform closeness.


WELLINGTON CAULIFLOWER.

Messrs. Henderson and Son describe this Cauliflower as the finest kind
in cultivation; pure white; size of the head over two feet; in growth,
very dwarfish,--the stem not more than two or three inches from the
soil. It is one of the hardiest varieties known, and is said to
withstand the extreme variations of the climate of the United States. An
excellent sort for early planting and for forcing.

       *       *       *       *       *

COLEWORT, OR COLLARDS. _Loud._

Collet.

The Colewort, strictly speaking, is a plant distinct from the other
varieties of Cabbage. It is of small habit, and attains sufficient size
for use in a few weeks. It is eatable from the time it has four or six
leaves until it has a hard heart. Loudon says the original Colewort
seems to be lost, and is now succeeded by what are called "Cabbage
Coleworts." These are cabbage-plants in their young state; and, when
cooked, are quite as tender and good as the true Colewort. In growing
these, all that is necessary is to sow the seed of almost any variety of
the common green cabbages in drills a foot apart, and half an inch deep.
For a succession, sowings may be made, at intervals of two weeks, from
the last of April to the last of August. In the Southern States, the
sowings might be continued through the winter.

When cultivated for sale, simply allow them to stand till there is
enough to be worth bunching and eating. They are boiled and served at
table as greens.


ROSETTE COLEWORT.

A small but remarkably neat variety; the whole plant, when well grown,
measuring twelve inches in diameter, and having the form of a rose not
completely expanded,--the head corresponding to the bud still remaining
at the heart, or centre; stalk small and short. The plants may be grown
twelve inches asunder.

       *       *       *       *       *

COUVE TRONCHUDA, OR PORTUGAL CABBAGE. _Trans._

Portugal Borecole. Large-ribbed Borecole. Trauxuda Kale.

Though a species of Cabbage, the Couve Tronchuda is quite distinct from
the common head varieties. The stalk is short and thick; the outer
leaves are large, roundish, of a dark bluish-green, wrinkled on the
surface, and slightly undulated on the borders; the mid-rib of the leaf
is large, thick, nearly white, and branches into veins of the same
color; the plant forms a loose, open head, and, when full grown, is
nearly two feet high.

_Culture._--It should be planted and treated like the Common Cabbage.
The seeds may be sown early in frames, and the plants afterwards set in
the open ground; or the sowing may be made in the open ground in May.
The plants require two feet and a half between the rows, and two feet
between the plants in the rows. The seeds, in size, form, and color,
resemble those of the Cabbage, and will keep five years. One-fourth of
an ounce will produce about a thousand plants.

_To raise Seed._--In the autumn, before severe weather, remove two or
three plants entire to the cellar; and, in April following, reset them
about two feet apart. Cut off the lower and smaller side-sprouts as they
may appear, and allow only the strong, central shoot to grow. The seeds
will ripen in August.

_Use._--Different parts of the Couve Tronchuda are applicable to
culinary purposes. The ribs of the outer and larger leaves, when boiled,
somewhat resemble sea-kale in texture and flavor. The heart, or middle
of the plant, is, however, the best for use. It is peculiarly delicate,
and agreeably flavored, without any of the coarseness which is so often
found in plants of the Cabbage tribe.


DWARF COUVE TRONCHUDA. _Trans._

Murciana. Dwarf Portugal Cabbage. Dwarf Trauxuda Kale.

Much earlier and smaller throughout than the Common Couve Tronchuda.
Stem from fifteen to eighteen inches high. The leaves are of medium
size, rounded, smooth, and collected at the centre of the plant into a
loose heart, or head. When the lower leaves are taken off for use, the
plant, unlike the former variety, throws out numerous sprouts, or
shoots, from the base of the stem, which make excellent coleworts, or
greens. It is, however, wanting in hardiness; and appears to be better
adapted for early use than for late keeping.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Both of the varieties require a well-manured
soil. The seeds of the Dwarf Couve Tronchuda may be sown early in
frames, and the plants afterwards set in the open ground; or the sowing
may be made, in May or June, where the plants are to remain. They should
be two feet apart in each direction.


FRINGED TRONCHUDA.

Stem short; leaf-stems thicker and larger than those of the Common Couve
Tronchuda, but not so fleshy and succulent. The leaves expand towards
their extremities into a spatulate form, the edges being regularly lobed
and curled. They are of a glaucous or bluish green color, and form a
sort of loose heart, or head, at the centre of the plant. Its only
superiority over the common varieties consists in its more hardy
character.

The Fringed Tronchuda is, however, very succulent, and of good quality;
and is cultivated to some extent in France, particularly in the vicinity
of Paris.


WHITE-RIBBED TRONCHUDA.

White-ribbed Aviles Cabbage. White-ribbed Portugal Cabbage. Chou a Cotes
blanches d'Aviles.

This variety nearly resembles the Dwarf Portugal Cabbage, or Dwarf Couve
Tronchuda, if it is not identical. It has white ribs, and forms a close
heart.

It should be planted, and in all respects treated, as the Dwarf Portugal
Cabbage.

       *       *       *       *       *

PAK-CHOeI. _Vil._

Chinese Cabbage. Brassica sp.

An annual plant, introduced from China. The root-leaves are oval,
regular, very smooth, deep-green, with long, naked, fleshy, white stems,
somewhat similar to those of the Swiss Chards, or Leaf-beets.

When in blossom, the plant measures about four feet in height, and the
stem is smooth and branching. The flowers are yellow; the seeds are
small, round, blackish-brown, and, in their general appearance, resemble
those of the Turnip or Cabbage. An ounce contains about ten thousand
seeds, and they will keep five years.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--The seed should be sown in April or May, and
the plants may be grown in hills or drills. They are usually sown in
rows, and thinned to twelve inches apart.

_Use._--The leaves are eaten boiled, like cabbage; but they are much
more tender, and of a more agreeable flavor.

       *       *       *       *       *

PE-TSAI.

Chinese Cabbage. Brassica chinensis.

The Pe-Tsai, like the Pak-Choei, is an annual plant, originally from
China. The leaves are of an oval form, rounded at the ends, somewhat
blistered on the surface; and, at the centre, are collected together
into a long and rather compact tuft, or head. The plant, when well grown
and ready for use, has somewhat the appearance of a head of Cos Lettuce,
and will weigh six or seven pounds; though, in its native country, it is
said to reach a weight of upwards of twenty pounds.

Towards the end of the summer, the flower-stalk shoots from the centre
of the head to the height of three feet, producing long and pointed
leaves, and terminating in loose spikes of yellow flowers. The seeds are
small, round, brownish-black, and resemble those of the Common Cabbage.
They retain their vitality five years. An ounce contains eight thousand
seeds.

_Cultivation._--Sow in April or May, and thin or transplant to rows
eighteen inches apart, and a foot apart in the rows.

_Use._--It is used like the Common Cabbage, and is sweet, mild-flavored,
and easy of digestion. The young plants are also boiled like coleworts
or spinach.

       *       *       *       *       *

SAVOY.

Savoy Cabbage. Brassica oleracea, var. bullata. _Dec._

This class of cabbages derives its popular name from Savoy, a small
district adjoining Italy, where the variety originated, and from whence
it was introduced into England and France more than a hundred and fifty
years ago. The Savoys are distinguished from the common head or
close-hearted cabbages by their peculiar, wrinkled, or blistered leaves.
According to Decandole, this peculiarity is caused by the fact, that the
pulp, or thin portion of the leaf, is developed more rapidly than the
ribs and nerves.

Besides the distinction in the structure of the leaves, the Savoys, when
compared with the common cabbages, are slower in their development, and
have more open or less compactly formed heads. In texture and flavor,
they are thought to approach some of the broccolis or cauliflowers;
having, generally, little of the peculiar musky odor and taste common to
some of the coarser and larger varieties of cabbages.

None of the family are hardier or more easily cultivated than the
Savoys; and though they will not quite survive the winter in the open
ground, so far from being injured by cold and frosty weather, a certain
degree of frost is considered necessary for the complete perfection of
their texture and flavor.

_Soil._--They succeed best in strong, mellow loam, liberally enriched
with well-digested compost.

_Sowing._--The first sowing may be made early in a hot-bed, and the
plants set in the open ground in May, or as soon as the weather will
admit. Subsequent sowings may be made in drills, in the open ground, in
May, or early in June. When the seedlings are five or six inches high,
thin or transplant to about three feet apart.

_Harvesting._--During the autumn, take the heads directly from the
garden, whenever they are required for the table; but they should all be
taken in before the ground is deeply frozen, or covered with snow. No
other treatment will be required during the winter than such as is
usually given to the Common Cabbage.

_To raise Seed._--In April, select a few well-formed, good-sized heads,
as near types of the variety as possible; and set them entire, about two
feet apart. If small shoots start from the side of the stalk, they
should be removed; as only the sprout that comes from the centre of the
head produces seed that is really valuable. All varieties rapidly
deteriorate, if grown from seeds produced by side-shoots, or suckers.

The seeds, when ripe, in form, size, and color, are not distinguishable
from those of the Common Cabbage. An ounce contains ten thousand seeds,
which will generally produce about three thousand plants.

_Varieties._--


DRUMHEAD SAVOY.

Cape Savoy.

Head large, round, compact, yellowish at the centre, and a little
flattened, in the form of some of the common Drumhead cabbages, which it
nearly approaches in size. The exterior leaves of the plant are round
and concave, clasping, sea-green or bluish-green, rise above a level
with the top of the head, and are more finely and less distinctly
fretted or blistered on the surface than the leaves of the Green Globe.
Stalk of medium length.

The Drumhead Savoy seldom fails to heart well, affords a good quantity
of produce, is hardy, and, when brought to the table, is of very tender
substance, and finely flavored. It is considered one of the best of the
large kinds; and, wherever cultivated, has become a standard sort. It
keeps well during winter, and retains its freshness late into the
spring.

As it requires nearly all of the season for its complete development,
the seed should be sown comparatively early.

Transplant to rows at least three feet apart, and allow nearly the same
distance between the plants in the row.


EARLY DWARF SAVOY.

Early Green Savoy.

Head small, flattened, firm, and close; leaves rather numerous, but not
large, deep-green, finely but distinctly blistered, broad and rounded at
the top, and tapering towards the stalk or stem of the plant, which is
short. It is not quite so early as the Ulm Savoy; but it hearts readily,
is tender and of good quality, and a desirable sort for early use.

It requires a space of about twenty inches in each direction.


EARLY FLAT GREEN CURLED SAVOY. _Thomp._

A middle-sized, very dwarf, and flat-headed variety; color deep-green;
quality tender and good.

The plants should be set fifteen or eighteen inches asunder.


EARLY LONG YELLOW SAVOY.

Chou de Milan Dore a Tete Longue. _Vil._

Similar to the Golden Savoy, and, like it, an early sort. It has,
however, a longer head, and does not heart so firmly. In flavor and
texture, as well as in its peculiar color, there is little difference
between the varieties.

Cultivate in rows eighteen inches apart, and fifteen or eighteen inches
apart in the rows.


EARLY ULM SAVOY.

New Ulm Savoy. Earliest Ulm Savoy. _M'Int._

A dwarfish, early sort. Head small, round, solid; leaves rather small,
thick, fleshy, and somewhat rigid, of a fine, deep-green, with numerous
prominent blister-like elevations. The loose leaves are remarkably few
in number; nearly all of the leaves of the plant contributing to the
formation of the head.

It very quickly forms a heart, which, though not of large size, is of
excellent quality. It is, however, too small a sort for market purposes;
but, for private gardens, would, no doubt, be an acquisition. In the
London Horticultural Society's garden, it proved the earliest variety in
cultivation.

Being one of the smallest of the Savoys, it requires but a small space
for its cultivation. If fifteen inches between the rows, and about the
same distance in the rows, be allowed, the plants will have ample room
for their full development.


FEATHER-STEM SAVOY. _M'Int._

This curious and useful variety has been in existence for several years,
and is said to be a cross between the Savoy and the Brussels Sprouts. It
is what may be called a sprouting Savoy; producing numerous shoots, or
sprouts, along the stem.

A sowing should be made the last of April, and another from the middle
to the 20th of May, and the plants set out as soon as they are of
suitable size, in the usual manner of Savoys and other winter greens.


GOLDEN SAVOY.

Early Yellow Savoy. _M'Int._

A middle-sized, roundish, rather loose-headed variety; changing during
the winter to a clear, bright yellow. The exterior leaves, at the time
of harvesting, are erect, clasping, of a pale-green color, and coarsely
but not prominently blistered on the surface; stalk short.

The Golden Savoy comes to the table early, hearts readily, is of very
tender substance when cooked, and of excellent quality; though its
peculiar color is objectionable to many.

It requires a space of about eighteen inches between the rows, and
fifteen to eighteen inches between the plants in the rows.


GREEN GLOBE SAVOY.

Green Curled Savoy. Large Green Savoy.

One of the best and one of the most familiar of the Savoys; having been
long in cultivation, and become a standard sort. The head is of medium
size, round, bluish or sea green on the outside, yellow towards the
centre, and loosely formed. The interior leaves are fleshy and
succulent, with large and prominent midribs,--the exterior leaves are
round and large, of a glaucous or sea green color, and, in common with
those of the head, thickly and distinctly blistered in the peculiar
manner of the Savoys; stalk of medium height.

The variety possesses all the qualities of its class: the texture is
fine, and the flavor mild and excellent. On account of its remarkably
fleshy and tender character, the inner loose leaves about the head will
be found good for the table, and to possess a flavor nearly as fine as
the more central parts of the plant.

It is remarkably hardy, and attains its greatest perfection only late in
the season, or under the influence of cool or frosty weather. As the
plants develop much less rapidly than those of the Common Cabbage, the
seed should be sown early. Transplant in rows two and a half or three
feet apart, and allow a space of two feet and a half between the plants
in the rows.


LONG-HEADED SAVOY. _Vil._

Chou Milan a Tete Longue.

A comparatively small variety, with an oval, long, yellowish-green, but
very compact head; leaves erect, inclining to bluish-green, long and
narrow, revoluted on the borders, and finely fretted or blistered on the
surface; stem rather high.

It is hardy and of excellent quality, but yields less than many other
sorts. It is, however, a good kind for gardens of limited size, as it
occupies little space, and cabbages well. The plants may be set eighteen
inches apart in one direction by about fifteen inches in the opposite.


MARCELIN SAVOY. _Thomp._

A new sort, allied to the Early Ulm, but growing somewhat larger. Though
not so early, it is next to it in point of earliness; and, if both sorts
are sown at the same time, the Marcelin will form a succession. It is a
low grower; the leaves are dark-green, finely wrinkled and curled; the
head is round, compact, and of excellent quality. When cut above the
lower course of leaves, about four small heads, almost equal in delicacy
to Brussels Sprouts, are generally formed. This sort is exceedingly
hardy; and, on the whole, must be considered a valuable acquisition.

The plants should be set eighteen inches by twelve inches apart.


TOUR'S SAVOY.

Dwarf Green Curled Savoy. _M'Int._ Pancalier de Tourraine. _Vil._

Head small, loose, and irregular; leaves numerous, bright-green, rigid,
concave or spoon-shaped; the nerves and ribs large, and the entire
surface thickly and finely covered with the blister-like swellings
peculiar to the Savoys.

It has some resemblance to the Early Dwarf Savoy; but is larger, less
compact, and slower in its development.

A useful, hardy, smallish sort, adapted to small gardens; requiring only
eighteen or twenty inches' space each way. Excellent for use before it
becomes fully cabbaged.


YELLOW CURLED SAVOY. _Thomp._

Large Late Yellow Savoy. White Savoy.

Dwarf, middle-sized, round; leaves pale-green at first, but quite yellow
in winter; the heart is not so compact as some, but of tender quality,
and by many preferred, as it is much sweeter than the other kinds. It is
later and hardier than the Yellow Savoys, before described.

       *       *       *       *       *

SEA-KALE.

Crambe maritima.

Sea-kale is a native of the southern shores of Great Britain, and is
also abundant on the seacoasts of the south of Europe. There is but one
species cultivated, and this is perennial and perfectly hardy. The
leaves are large, thick, oval or roundish, sometimes lobed on the
borders, smooth, and of a peculiar bluish-green color; the stalk, when
the plant is in flower, is solid and branching, and measures about four
feet in height; the flowers, which are produced in groups, or clusters,
are white, and have an odor very similar to that of honey. The seed is
enclosed in a yellowish-brown shell, or pod, which, externally and
internally, resembles a pit, or cobble, of the common cherry. About six
hundred seeds, or pods, are contained in an ounce; and they retain their
germinative powers three years. "They are large and light, and, when
sold in the market, are often old, or imperfectly formed; but their
quality is easily ascertained by cutting them through the middle: if
sound, they will be found plump and solid." They are usually sown
without being broken.

_Preparation of the Ground, and Sowing._--The ground should be trenched
to the depth of from a foot to two feet, according to the depth of the
soil, and well enriched throughout. The seeds may be sown in April,
where the plants are to remain; or they may be sown at the same season
in a nursery-bed, and transplanted the following spring. They should be
set or planted out in rows three feet apart, and eighteen inches apart
in the rows.

_Culture._--"After the piece is set, let the plants be kept very clean.
The earth should be occasionally stirred, when the rains have run the
surface together; and, when the plants come up, let them have their own
way the first season. As the plants will blossom the second season if
let alone, and the bearing of seed has a tendency to weaken every thing,
take off the flower-buds as soon as they appear, and not allow the
plants to seed. When the leaves begin to decay in autumn, clear them all
off, and dig a complete trench between the rows, and earth up the
ridges: that is, all the soil you take out must be laid on the plants,
so as to pile or bank up eight inches above the crowns of the roots,
thus forming a flat-topped bank a foot across; widening a little
downwards, so that the edges shall not break away. In doing this, the
piece is formed into alternate furrows and ridges; the plants being
under the centre of the ridges.

"As the weather gets warm in the spring, these banks should be watered;
and, when the surface is broken by the rising plant, remove the earth,
and cut off the white shoots close to their base: for these shoots form
the eatable portion; and, being blanched under ground, they are tender
and white, and from six to eight inches long. The shoots should be cut
as soon as they reach the surface; because, if the shoot comes through,
the top gets purple, and the plants become strong-flavored. As all of
the shoots will not appear at once, the bed should be looked over
frequently, and a shoot cut whenever it has broken the surface of the
soil; for, if not taken early, it soon becomes nearly worthless. In the
process of cutting the shoots, the earth becomes gradually removed; and
the tops of the plants, coming to the surface again, put forth other
shoots, which must be allowed to grow the remainder of the summer, only
taking off the blossom-shoots as before. When, at the fall of the year,
the leaves turn yellow, and decay, earth up again, after clearing the
plants of their bad leaves and removing every weed. Before earthing up,
fork the surface a little, just to break it up, that the earth may
better take hold, and form a regular mass."--_Glenny._

_Pot-forcing and Blanching._--"The ground, once planted, is as good for
pot-forcing as for any thing; except that, for pot-forcing, it is usual
to plant three plants in a triangle, about nine inches apart. The plants
are cleared when the leaves decay, and the ground is kept level instead
of being earthed up. Pots and covers (called 'sea-kale pots') are placed
over the plants, or patches of plants, and the cover (which goes on and
off at pleasure) put on. These pots are of various sizes; usually from
ten to fourteen inches in diameter, and from a foot to twenty inches in
height. If proper sea-kale pots cannot be procured, large-sized
flower-pots will answer as substitutes; the pots being put over the
plants as they are wanted, generally a few at a time, so as to keep up a
succession. Dung is placed all over them; or, if no dung can be had,
leaves are used: and they ferment and give out heat as genial, but not
so violent, nor do they command so much influence, as the dung. Some may
be placed on in February, and some in March. The dung is removed from
the top to admit of seeing if the plant is started; and, by timely
examination, it is easily seen when the plant is ready for use. The
shoots are as white, when thus treated, as when grown by the other
method, because of the total darkness that prevails while they are
covered; but there is more air in the empty pots than there possibly
could be in the solid earth, and it is considered that the vegetable is
not so tender in consequence. However, the greater bulk of Sea-kale is
so produced."--_Glenny._

_Taking the Crop._--"The blanched sprouts should be cut when they are
from three to six inches in length, and while stiff, crisp, and compact.
They should not be left till they are drawn up so as to bend, or hang
down. The soil or other material used for excluding the light should be
carefully removed, so as to expose the stem of the sprout; and the
latter should be cut just below the base of the petioles or leaf-stem,
and just enough to keep these attached."--_Thomp._

The Sea-kale season continues about six weeks. "Cutting too much will
finally destroy the plants. With one good cutting the cultivator should
be satisfied, and should avoid the practice of covering and cutting a
second time. The proper way is to cut the large, fine shoots, and leave
the smaller ones that come afterwards to grow stronger during the
summer."

_Use._--"The young shoots and stalks, when from the length of three to
nine inches, are the parts used. These, however, unless blanched, are no
better than the coarser kinds of Borecole; but, when blanched, they
become exceedingly delicate, and are much prized. The ribs of the
leaves, even after they are nearly fully developed, are sometimes used;
being peeled and eaten as asparagus. In either state, they are tied up
in small bundles, boiled, and served as cauliflowers."--_M'Int._

_To obtain Seed._--"Select some strong plants, and allow them to take
their natural growth, without cutting off their crowns, or blanching.
When the seed is ripe, collect the pods, dry them, and put them into
open canvas-bags. The seeds keep best in the pods."--_Thomp._




CHAPTER VI.

SPINACEOUS PLANTS.

Amaranthus. Black Nightshade. Leaf-beet, or Swiss Chard. Malabar
Nightshade. Nettle. New-Zealand Spinach. Orach. Patience Dock. Quinoa.
Sea-beet. Shepherd's Purse. Sorrel. Spinach. Wild or Perennial Spinach.

       *       *       *       *       *

AMARANTHUS.

Chinese Amaranthus. Chinese Spinach.

A hardy, annual plant, introduced from China; stem three feet in height,
much branched, and generally stained with red; leaves variegated with
green and red, long, and sharply pointed; the leaf-stems and nerves are
red; the flowers, which are produced in axillary spikes, are greenish,
and without beauty; the seeds are small, black, smooth, and
shining,--twenty-three thousand are contained in an ounce, and they
retain their power of germination four or five years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Any good garden-soil is adapted to the growth
of the Amaranthus. Before sowing, the ground should be thoroughly
pulverized, and the surface made smooth and even. The seed may be sown
in April, or at any time during the month of May. It should be sown in
very shallow drills, fourteen to sixteen inches apart, and covered with
fine, moist earth. When the plants are two inches high, thin to five or
six inches apart, and cultivate in the usual manner. They will yield
abundantly during most of the summer.

_Use._--The leaves are used in the manner of Spinach, and resemble it in
taste.

_Varieties._--


EARLY AMARANTHUS.

Amarante Mirza. _Vil._

This plant is a native of the East Indies; and in height, color, and
general habit, resembles the Chinese Amaranthus. It is, however,
somewhat earlier, and ripens its seed perfectly in climates where the
Chinese almost invariably fails. Its uses, and mode of cultivation, are
the same.


HANTSI SHANGHAI AMARANTHUS.

Amarante Hantsi Shanghai. _Vil._

Introduced from China by Mr. Fortune, and disseminated by the London
Horticultural Society. It differs little from the preceding species; and
is cultivated in the same manner, and used for the same purposes.
Annual.

       *       *       *       *       *

BLACK NIGHTSHADE.

Morelle, of the French. Solanum nigrum.

An unattractive, annual plant, growing spontaneously as a weed among
rubbish, in rich, waste places. Its stem is from two to three feet high,
hairy and branching; the leaves are oval, angular, sinuate, and bluntly
toothed; the flowers are white, in drooping clusters, and are succeeded
by black, spherical berries, of the size of a small pea; the seeds are
small, lens-shaped, pale yellow, and retain their vitality five
years,--twenty-three thousand are contained in an ounce.

_Propagation and Culture._--It is raised from seed, which may be sown in
April or May, or in autumn. Sow in shallow drills fifteen or eighteen
inches apart, and thin to six or eight inches in the drills; afterwards
keep the soil loose, and free from weeds, in the usual manner.

_Use._--The French, according to Vilmorin, eat the leaves in the manner
of Spinach; while Dr. Bigelow asserts that it has the aspect and
reputation of a poisonous plant.

On the authority of American botanists, it was introduced into this
country from Europe. By European botanists, it is described as a plant
of American origin.

       *       *       *       *       *

LEAF-BEET, OR SWISS CHARD.

Sicilian Beet. White Beet. Beta cicla.

The Leaf-beet is a native of the seacoasts of Spain and Portugal. It is
a biennial plant, and is cultivated for its leaves and leaf-stalks. The
roots are much branched or divided, hard, fibrous, and unfit for use.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--It is propagated, like other beets, from
seed sown annually, and will thrive in any good garden soil. The sowing
may be made at any time in April or May, in drills eighteen inches
apart, and an inch and a half deep. "When the plants are a few inches
high, so that those likely to make the best growth can be distinguished,
they should be thinned out to nine inches or a foot apart, according to
the richness of the soil; more room being allowed in rich ground. Some,
however, should be left at half that distance, to make up by
transplanting any vacancies that may occur. The ground should be kept
clean, and occasionally stirred between the rows; taking care not to
injure the roots. In dry weather, plenty of water should be given to
promote the succulence of the leaves."--_Thomp._

_Taking the Crop._--"The largest and fullest-grown leaves should be
gathered first; others will follow. If grown for Spinach, the leaves
should be rinsed in clean water, and afterwards placed in a basket to
drain dry; if for Chard, or for the leaf-stalks and veins, these should
be carefully preserved, and the entire leaves tied up in bundles of six
or eight in each."--_M'Int._

_Seed._--During the first season, select a few vigorous plants, and
allow them to grow unplucked. Just before the closing-up of the ground
in autumn, take up the roots; and, after removing the tops an inch above
the crown, pack them in dry sand in the cellar. The following spring, as
soon as the ground is in working order, set them out with the crowns
level with the surface of the ground, and about two feet and a half
apart. As the plants increase in height, tie them to stakes, to prevent
injury from wind; and in August, when the seed is ripe, cut off the
stems near the ground, and spread them entire, in an airy situation,
till they are sufficiently dried for threshing out.

The seed, or fruit, has the appearance peculiar to the family; although
those of the different varieties, like the seeds of the Red Beet, vary
somewhat in size, and shade of color.

An ounce of seed will sow a hundred feet of drill, or be sufficient for
a nursery-bed of fifty square feet.

_Use._--"This species of Beet--for, botanically considered, it is a
distinct species from _Beta vulgaris_, the Common or Red Beet--is
cultivated exclusively for its leaves; whereas the Red Beet is grown for
its roots. These leaves are boiled like Spinach, and also put into
soups. The midribs and stalks, which are separated from the lamina of
the leaf, are stewed and eaten like Asparagus, under the name of
"Chard." As a spinaceous plant, the White Beet might be grown to great
advantage in the vegetable garden, as it affords leaves fit for use
during the whole summer."--_M'Int._

The thin part of the leaves is sometimes put into soups, together with
sorrel, to correct the acidity of the latter.

The varieties are as follow:--


GREEN OR COMMON LEAF-BEET.

Stalks and leaves large, green; the roots are tough and fibrous, and
measure little more than an inch in diameter; leaves tender, and of good
quality.

If a sowing be made as soon in spring as the frost will permit, another
in June, and a third the last of July, they will afford a constant
supply of tender greens, nearly or quite equal to Spinach. For this
purpose, the rows need be but a foot apart.


LARGE-RIBBED CURLED.

Curled Leaf-beet.

Stalks white; leaves pale yellowish-green, with broad mid-ribs, large
nerves, and a blistered surface like some of the Savoys. It may be grown
as a substitute for Spinach, in the manner directed for the Common or
Green-leaved variety.


LARGE-RIBBED SCARLET BRAZILIAN.

Red Stalk Leaf-beet. Poiree a Carde rouge. _Vil._

Leaf-stalks bright purplish-red; leaves green, blistered on the surface;
nerves purplish-red. A beautiful sort, remarkable for the rich and
brilliant color of the stems, and nerves of the leaves.


LARGE-RIBBED YELLOW BRAZILIAN.

Yellow-stalked Leaf-beet. Poiree a Carde jaune. _Vil._

A variety with bright-yellow leaf-stalks and yellowish leaves. The
nerves of the leaves are yellow, like the leaf-stalks. The color is
peculiarly rich and clear; and the stalks are quite attractive, and even
ornamental. Quality tender and good.


SILVER-LEAF BEET.

Great White-leaf Beet. Swiss Chard. Sea-kale Beet. Large-ribbed
Silver-leaf Beet.

Stalks very large; leaves of medium size, erect, with strong, white ribs
and veins. The leaf-stalks and nerves are cooked and served like
Asparagus, and somewhat resemble it in texture and flavor. It is
considered the best of the Leaf-beets.

       *       *       *       *       *

MALABAR NIGHTSHADE (WHITE).

Climbing Nightshade. White Malabar Spinach. Baselle blanche. _Vil._
Basella alba.

From the East Indies. Though a biennial plant, in cultivation it is
generally treated as an annual. Stem five feet and upwards in length,
slender, climbing; leaves alternate, oval, entire on the borders, green
and fleshy; flowers in clusters, small, greenish; seeds round, with
portions of the pulp usually adhering,--eleven to twelve hundred
weighing an ounce. They retain their vitality three years.


LARGE-LEAVED CHINESE MALABAR NIGHTSHADE.

Large-leaved Malabar Spinach. Baselle a Tres Large Feuille de Chine.
_Vil._ Basella cordifolia.

A Chinese species, more vigorous and much stronger in its general habit
than the Red or the White. Leaves as large as those of Lettuce,--green,
round, very thick, and fleshy; flowers small, greenish; seeds round,
nearly of the same form and color as those of the White variety, but
rather larger.

The species is slow in developing its flower-stem, and the best for
cultivation.

       *       *       *       *       *

RED MALABAR NIGHTSHADE.

Red Malabar Spinach. Baselle Rouge. _Vil._ Basella rubra.

From China. Properly a biennial plant, but, like the White species,
usually cultivated as an annual. It is distinguished from the last named
by its color; the whole plant being stained or tinted with purplish red.
In the size and color of the seeds, and general habit of the plant,
there are no marks of distinction, when compared with the White.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--All of the species are easily grown from
seeds; which may be sown in a hot-bed in March, or in the open ground in
May. They take root readily when transplanted; and may be grown in rows
like the taller descriptions of pease, or in hills like running beans.
Wherever grown, they require a trellis, or some kind of support;
otherwise the plants will twist themselves about other plants, or
whatever objects may be contiguous. All are comparatively tender, and
thrive best, and yield the most produce, in the summer months.

_Use._--The leaves, which are put forth in great profusion, are used in
the form of Spinach. The juice of the fruit affords a beautiful but not
permanent purple color.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMON NETTLE.

Large Stinging Nettle. Urtica dioica.

The Common Nettle is a hardy, herbaceous perennial, growing naturally
and abundantly by waysides and in waste places, "but is seldom seen
where the hand of man has not been at work; and may, therefore, be
considered a sort of domestic plant." It has an erect, branching,
four-sided stem, from three to five feet in height; the leaves are
opposite, heart-shaped at the base, toothed on the borders, and thickly
set with small, stinging, hair-like bristles; the flowers are produced
in July and August, and are small, green, and without beauty; the seeds
are very small, and are produced in great abundance,--a single plant
sometimes yielding nearly a hundred thousand.

_Propagation and Culture._--The Nettle will thrive in almost any soil or
situation. Though it may be propagated from seeds, it is generally
increased by a division of the roots, which may be made in spring or
autumn. These should be set in rows two feet apart, and a foot apart in
the rows.

_Use._--"Early in April, the tops will be found to have pushed three or
four inches, furnished with tender leaves. In Scotland, Poland, and
Germany, these are gathered, as a pot-herb for soups or for dishes, like
Spinach; and their peculiar flavor is by many much esteemed. No plant is
better adapted for forcing; and, in winter or spring, it may be made to
form an excellent substitute for Cabbage, Coleworts, or Spinach. Collect
the creeping roots, and plant them either on a hot-bed or in pots to be
placed in the forcing-house, and they will soon send up an abundance of
tender tops: these, if desired, may be blanched by covering with other
pots. If planted close to a flue in the vinery, they will produce
excellent nettle-kale or nettle-spinach in January and February."

Lawson states that "the common Nettle has long been known as affording a
large proportion of fibre, which has not only been made into ropes and
cordage, but also into sewing-thread, and beautiful, white, linen-like
cloth of very superior quality. It does not, however, appear that its
cultivation for this purpose has ever been fairly attempted. The fibre
is easily separated from other parts of the stalk, without their
undergoing the processes of watering and bleaching; although, by such,
the labor necessary for that purpose is considerably lessened. Like
those of many other common plants, the superior merits of this generally
accounted troublesome weed have hitherto been much overlooked."

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW-ZEALAND SPINACH. _Loud._

Tetragonia expansa.

This plant, botanically considered, is quite distinct from the common
garden Spinach; varying essentially in its foliage, flowers, seeds, and
general habit.

It is a hardy annual. The leaves are of a fine green color, large and
broad, and remarkably thick and fleshy; the branches are numerous,
round, succulent, pale-green, thick and strong,--the stalks recline upon
the ground for a large proportion of their length, but are erect at the
extremities; the flowers are produced in the axils of the leaves, are
small, green, and, except that they show their yellow anthers when they
expand, are quite inconspicuous; the fruit is of a dingy-brown color,
three-eighths of an inch deep, three-eighths of an inch in diameter at
the top or broadest part, hard and wood-like in texture, rude in form,
but somewhat urn-shaped, with four or five horn-like points at the top.
Three hundred and twenty-five of these fruits are contained in an ounce;
and they are generally sold and recognized as the seeds. They are,
however, really the fruit; six or eight of the true seeds being
contained in each. They retain their germinative powers five years.

_Propagation and Culture._--It is always raised from seed, which may be
sown in the open ground from April to July. Select a rich, moist soil,
pulverize it well, and rake the surface smooth. Make the drills three
feet apart, and an inch and a half or two inches deep; and sow the seed
thinly, or so as to secure a plant for each foot of row. In five or six
weeks from the planting, the branches will have grown sufficiently to
allow the gathering of the leaves for use. If the season should be very
dry, the plants will require watering. They grow vigorously, and, in
good soil, will extend, before the end of the season, three feet in each
direction.

_Gathering._--"The young leaves must be pinched or cut from the
branches; taking care not to injure the ends, or leading shoots. These
shoots, with the smaller ones that will spring out of the stalks at the
points where the leaves have been gathered, will produce a supply until
a late period in the season; for the plants are sufficiently hardy to
withstand the effects of light frosts without essential injury.

"Its superiority over the Common Spinach consists in the fact, that it
grows luxuriantly, and produces leaves of the greatest succulency, in
the hottest weather."

Anderson, one of its first cultivators, had but nine plants, which
furnished a gathering for the table every other day from the middle of
June. A bed of a dozen healthy plants will afford a daily supply for the
table of a large family.

_Seed._--To raise seed, leave two or three plants in the poorest soil of
the garden, without cutting the leaves. The seeds will ripen
successively, and should be gathered as they mature.

_Use._--It is cooked and served in the same manner as Common Spinach.

There are no described varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORACH.

Arrach. French Spinach. Mountain Spinach. Atriplex hortensis.

Orach is a hardy, annual plant, with an erect, branching stem, varying
in height from two to four feet, according to the variety. The leaves
are variously shaped, tut somewhat oblong, comparatively thin in
texture, and slightly acid to the taste; the flowers are small and
obscure, greenish or reddish, corresponding in a degree with the color
of the foliage of the plant; the seeds are small, black, and surrounded
with a thin, pale-yellow membrane,--they retain their vitality three
years.

_Soil and Culture._--It is raised from seed sown annually. As its
excellence depends on the size and succulent character of the leaves,
Orach is always best when grown in a rich, deep, and moist soil. The
first sowing may be made as soon in spring as the ground is in proper
condition; afterwards, for a succession, sowings may be made, at
intervals of two weeks, until June.

When the ground has been thoroughly dug over, and the surface made fine
and smooth, sow the seed in drills eighteen inches or two feet apart,
and cover three-fourths of an inch deep. When the young plants are two
or three inches high, thin them to ten or twelve inches apart, and
cultivate in the usual manner. Orach is sometimes transplanted, but
generally succeeds best when sown where the plants are to remain. In
dry, arid soil, it is comparatively worthless.

_To raise Seed._--Leave a few of the best plants without cutting, and
they will afford a plentiful supply of seeds in September.

_Use._--Orach is rarely found in the vegetable gardens of this country.
The leaves have a pleasant, slightly acid taste, and, with the tender
stalks, are used boiled in the same manner as Spinach or Sorrel, and are
often mixed with the latter to reduce the acidity. "The stalks are good
only while the plants are young; but the larger leaves may be picked off
in succession throughout the season, leaving the stalks and smaller
leaves untouched, by which the latter will increase in size. The Orach
thus procured is very tender, and much esteemed."

A few plants will afford an abundant supply.

_Varieties._--


GREEN ORACH. _Trans._

Dark-green Orach. Deep-green Orach. _Mill._

The leaves of this variety are of a dark, grass-green color, broad, much
wrinkled, slightly toothed, and bluntly pointed; the stalk of the plant
and the leaf-stems are strong and sturdy, and of the same color as the
leaves. It is the lowest growing of all the varieties.


LURID ORACH. _Trans._

Pale-red Orach.

Leaves pale-purple, tinged with dark-green,--the under surface
light-purple, with green veins, slightly wrinkled, terminating rather
pointedly, and toothed on the borders only toward the base, which forms
two acute angles; the stalk of the plant and the stems of the leaves are
bright-red, slightly streaked with white between the furrows,--height
three feet and upwards.


PURPLE ORACH. _Trans._

Dark-purple Orach.

Plant from three to four feet in height; leaves dull, dark-purple, more
wrinkled and more deeply toothed than those of any other variety. They
terminate somewhat obtusely, and form two acute angles at the base. The
stalk of the plant and the stems of the leaves are deep-red, and
slightly furrowed. The leaves change to green when boiled.


RED ORACH. _Trans._

Dark-red Orach. Bon Jardinier.

Leaves oblong-heart-shaped, somewhat wrinkled, and slightly toothed on
the margin: the upper surface is very dark, inclining to a dingy purple;
the under surface is of a much brighter color. The stems are deep-red
and slightly furrowed; height three feet and upwards.

This is an earlier but a less vigorous sort than the White. The leaves
of this variety, as also those of most of the colored sorts, change to
green in boiling.


RED-STALKED GREEN ORACH. _Trans._

Leaves dark-green, tinged with dull-brown, much wrinkled, toothed,
somewhat curled, terminating rather obtusely, and forming two acute
angles at the base; the stalk and the stems of the leaves are deep-red,
and slightly furrowed; the veins are very prominent. It is of tall
growth.


RED-STALKED WHITE ORACH. _Trans._

Purple-bordered Green Orach. _Miller._

Leaves somewhat heart-shaped, of a yellowish-green, tinged with brown.
Their margin is stained with purple, and a little dentated or toothed in
some cases, but not in all. The stalk and the stems of the leaves are of
a palish-red, and are slightly furrowed, as well as streaked with
pale-white between the furrows. The plant is of dwarfish growth.


WHITE ORACH. _Trans._

Pale-green Orache. _Neill._ White French Spinach. Yellow Orach.

Leaves pale-green or yellowish-green, much wrinkled, with long, tapering
points, strongly cut in the form of teeth towards the base, which forms
two acute angles; the stalk of the plant and the stems of the leaves are
of the same color as the foliage. It is comparatively of low growth.

       *       *       *       *       *

PATIENCE.

Herb Patience. Patience Dock. Garden Patience. Rumex patientia.

This plant is a native of the south of Europe. It is a hardy perennial,
and, when fully grown, from four to five feet in height. The leaves are
large, long, broad, pointed; the leaf-stems are red; the flowers are
numerous, small, axillary, and of a whitish-green color,--they are put
forth in June and July, and the seeds ripen in August. The latter are
triangular, of a pale-brownish color, and will keep three years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--"The plant will grow well in almost any soil,
but best in one that is rich and rather moist. It may easily be raised
from seed sown in spring, in drills eighteen inches asunder; afterwards
thinning out the young plants to a foot apart in the rows. It may also
be sown broadcast in a seed-bed, and planted out; or the roots may be
divided, and set at the above distances.

"The plants should not be allowed to run up to flower, but should be cut
over several times in the course of the season, to induce them to throw
out young leaves in succession, and to prevent seed from being ripened,
and scattered about in all directions; for, when this takes place, the
plant becomes a troublesome weed."--_Thomp._

It is perfectly hardy, and, if cut over regularly, will continue healthy
and productive for several years. In the vicinity of gardens where it
has been cultivated, it is frequently found growing spontaneously.

_Use._--"The leaves were formerly much used as Spinach; and are still
eaten in some parts of France, where they are also employed in the early
part of the season as a substitute for Sorrel; being produced several
days sooner than the leaves of that plant."--_Thomp._

Its present neglect may arise from a want of the knowledge of the proper
method of using it. The leaves are put forth quite early in spring. They
should be cut while they are young and tender, and about a fourth part
of Common Sorrel mixed with them. In this way, Patience Dock is much
used in Sweden, and may be recommended as forming an excellent spinach
dish.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUINOA (WHITE). _Law._

White-seeded Quinoa. Goose-foot. Chenopodium quinoa.

An annual plant from Mexico or Peru. Its stem is five or six feet in
height, erect and branching; the leaves are triangular, obtusely toothed
on the borders, pale-green, mealy while young, and comparatively smooth
when old; flowers whitish, very small, produced in compact clusters;
seeds small, yellowish-white, round, a little flattened, about a line in
diameter, and, on a cursory glance, might be mistaken for those of
millet; they retain their vegetative powers three years; about twelve
thousand are contained in an ounce.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--It is propagated from seeds which are sown in
April or May, in shallow drills three feet apart. As the seedlings
increase in size, they are gradually thinned to a foot apart in the
rows. The seeds ripen in September. In good soil, the plants grow
vigorously, and produce seeds and foliage in great abundance.

_Use._--The leaves are used as Spinach or Sorrel, or as greens. In some
places, the seeds are employed as a substitute for corn or wheat in the
making of bread, and are also raised for feeding poultry.

_Varieties._--


BLACK-SEEDED QUINOA.

The stalks of this variety are more slender, and the leaves smaller,
than those of the White-seeded. The plant is also stained with
brownish-red in all its parts. Seeds small, grayish-black.

It is sown, and in all respects treated, like the White. The seeds and
leaves are used in the same manner.


RED-SEEDED QUINOA. _Law._

Chenopodium sp.

This variety, or perhaps, more properly, species, is quite distinct from
the White-seeded. It grows to the height of six or eight feet, and even
more, with numerous long, spreading branches. The leaves are more
succulent than those of the last named, and are produced in greater
abundance. When sown at the same time, it ripens its seeds nearly a
month later.

Its foliage and seeds are used for the same purposes as the White. Sow
in rows three feet apart, and thin to fifteen inches in the rows.

       *       *       *       *       *

SEA-BEET. _Trans._

Beta maritima.

The Sea-beet is a hardy, perennial plant. The roots are not eaten; but
the leaves, for which it is cultivated, are an excellent substitute for
Spinach, and are even preferred by many to that delicate vegetable. If
planted in good soil, it will continue to supply the table with leaves
for many years. The readiest method of increasing the plants is by
seeds; but they may be multiplied to a small extent by dividing the
roots.

The early-produced leaves are the best, and these are fit for use from
May until the plants begin to run to flower; but they may be continued
in perfection through the whole summer and autumn by cutting off the
flower-stems as they arise, and thus preventing the blossoming.

There are two varieties:--


ENGLISH SEA-BEET.

The English Sea-beet is a dwarfish, spreading or trailing plant, with
numerous angular, leafy branches. The lower leaves are ovate, three or
four inches in length, dark-green, waved on the margin, and of thick,
fleshy texture; the upper leaves are smaller, and nearly sessile.

Sow in April or May, in rows sixteen or eighteen inches apart, and an
inch in depth; thin to twelve inches in the rows. The leaves should not
be cut from seedling plants during the first season, or until the roots
are well established.


IRISH SEA-BEET.

This differs from the preceding variety in the greater size of its
leaves, which are also of a paler green: the stems are not so numerous,
and it appears to be earlier in running to flower. The external
differences are, however, trifling; but the flavor of this, when
dressed, is far superior to that of the last named.

It requires the same treatment in cultivation as the English Sea-beet.

       *       *       *       *       *

SHEPHERD'S PURSE.

Thlaspi Bursa pastoris.

A hardy, annual plant, growing naturally and abundantly about gardens,
roadsides, and in waste places. The root-leaves spread out from a common
centre, are somewhat recumbent, pinnatifid-toothed, and, in good soil,
attain a length of eight or ten inches; the stem-leaves are oval,
arrow-shaped at the base, and rest closely upon the stalk. When in
blossom, the plant is from twelve to fifteen inches in height; the
flowers are small, white, and four-petaled; the seeds are small, of a
reddish-brown color, and retain their vitality five years.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--It is easily raised from seed, which
should be sown in May, where the plants are to remain. Sow in shallow
drills twelve or fourteen inches apart, and cover with fine mould. Thin
the young plants to four inches asunder, and treat the growing crop in
the usual manner during the summer. Late in autumn, cover the bed with
coarse stable-litter, and remove it the last of February. In March and
April, the plants will be ready for the table.

_Use._--It is used in the manner of Spinach. "When boiled, the taste
approaches that of the Cabbage, but is softer and milder. The plant
varies wonderfully in size, and succulence of leaves, according to the
nature and state of the soil where it grows. Those from the gardens and
highly cultivated spots near Philadelphia come to a remarkable size, and
succulence of leaf. It may be easily bleached by the common method; and,
in that state, would be a valuable addition to our list of delicate
culinary vegetables."

In April and May it may be gathered, growing spontaneously about
cultivated lands; and, though not so excellent as the cultivated plants,
will yet be found of good quality.

       *       *       *       *       *

SORREL.

Rumex. sp. et var.

Sorrel is a hardy perennial. The species, as well as varieties, differ
to a considerable extent in height and general habit; yet their uses and
culture are nearly alike.

_Soil and Cultivation._--All of the sorts thrive best in rich, moist
soil; but may be grown in almost any soil or situation. The seeds are
sown in April or May, in drills fifteen or eighteen inches apart, and
covered half an inch in depth. The young plants should be thinned to
twelve inches apart; and, in July and August, the leaves will be
sufficiently large for gathering.

The varieties are propagated by dividing the roots in April or May; and
this method must be adopted in propagating the dioecious kinds, when
male plants are required. "The best plants, however, are obtained from
seed; but the varieties, when sown, are liable to return to their
original type. All the care necessary is to hoe the ground between the
rows, when needed to fork it over in spring and autumn, and to take up
the plants, divide and reset them every three or four years, or less
frequently, if they are growing vigorously and produce full-sized
leaves."

All of the sorts, whether produced from seeds or by parting the roots,
will send up a flower-stalk in summer; and this it is necessary to cut
out when first developed, in order to render the leaves larger and more
tender.

The plants will require no special protection or care during the winter;
though a slight covering of strawy, stable litter may be applied after
the forking-over of the bed in the autumn, just before the closing-up of
the ground.

_Use._--It enters into most of the soups and sauces for which French
cookery is so famed, and they preserve it in quantities for winter use.
It forms as prominent an article in the markets of Paris as does Spinach
in those of this country; and it has been asserted, that, amongst all
the recent additions to our list of esculent plants, "we have not one so
wholesome, so easy of cultivation, or one that would add so much to the
sanitary condition of the community, particularly of that class who live
much upon salt provisions."

The species and varieties are as follow:--


ALPINE SORREL.

Oseille des Neiges. _Vil._ Rumex nivalis.

A new, perennial species, found upon the Alps, near the line of
perpetual snow. The root-leaves are somewhat heart-shaped, thick, and
fleshy; stem simple, with verticillate branches; flower dioecious.

It is one of the earliest as well as the hardiest of the species,
propagates more readily than Alpine plants in general, and is said to
compare favorably in quality with the Mountain Sorrel or Patience Dock.


COMMON SORREL.

R. acetosa.

This is a hardy perennial, and, when fully grown, is about two feet in
height. The flowers--which are small, very numerous, and of a reddish
color--are dioecious, the fertile and barren blossoms being produced
on separate plants; the seeds are small, triangular, smooth, of a
brownish color, and retain their germinative properties two years. An
ounce contains nearly thirty thousand seeds.

Of the Common Sorrel, there are five varieties, as follow:--


BELLEVILLE SORREL.

Broad-leaved. Oseille Large de Belleville. _Vil._

Leaves ten or twelve inches long by six inches in diameter; leaf-stems
red at the base. Compared with the Common Garden Sorrel, the leaves are
larger and less acid.

The variety is considered much superior to the last-named sort, and is
the kind usually grown by market-gardeners in the vicinity of Paris.

It should be planted in rows eighteen inches apart, and the plants
thinned to a foot apart in the rows.


BLISTERED-LEAF SORREL. _Trans._

Radical leaves nine inches long, four inches wide, oval-hastate or
halberd-shaped, growing on long footstalks. The upper leaves are more
blistered than those attached to the root; the flower-stems are short.
The principal difference between this variety and the Common, or
Broad-leaved, consists in its blistered foliage.

It is slow in the development of its flower-stem, and consequently
remains longer in season for use. The leaves are only slightly acid in
comparison with those of the Common Sorrel. It is a perennial, and must
be increased by a division of its roots; for being only a variety, and
not permanently established, seedlings from it frequently return to the
Belleville, from whence it sprung.


FERVENT'S NEW LARGE SORREL.

Oseille de Fervent. _Vil._

An excellent sort, with large, yellowish-green, blistered leaves and red
leaf-stems. It is comparatively hardy, puts forth its leaves early, and
produces abundantly.

The rows should be eighteen inches apart.


GREEN OR COMMON GARDEN SORREL.

Root-leaves large, halberd-shaped, and supported on stems six inches in
length. The upper leaves are small, narrow, sessile, and clasping. A
hardy sort; but, on account of its greater acidity, not so highly
esteemed as the Belleville.

Sow in rows fifteen inches apart, and thin to eight or ten inches in the
rows.


SARCELLE BLOND SORREL.

Blond de Sarcelle. _Vil._

This is a sub-variety of the Belleville, with longer and narrower leaves
and paler leaf-stems. It puts forth its leaves earlier in the season
than the Common Sorrel, and is of excellent quality. The seed rarely
produces the variety in its purity, and it is generally propagated by
dividing the roots.


ROUND-LEAVED ON FRENCH SORREL. _Thomp._

Roman Sorrel. Oseille rond. _Vil._ R. scutatus.

This is a hardy perennial, a native of France and Switzerland. Its stem
is trailing, and from twelve to eighteen inches in height or length; the
leaves vary in form, but are usually roundish-heart-shaped or
halberd-shaped, smooth, glaucous, and entire on the borders; the flowers
are hermaphrodite, yellowish; the leaves are more acid than those of the
varieties of the preceding species, and for this reason are preferred by
many.

The variety is hardy and productive, but not much cultivated.

It requires eighteen inches' space between the rows, and a foot in the
rows. There is but one variety.


MOUNTAIN SORREL.

Oseille verge. _Vil._ R. montanus.

The leaves of this variety are large, oblong, of thin texture, and of a
pale-green color; the root-leaves are numerous, about nine inches long
and four inches wide, slightly blistered. It is later than the Common
Garden Sorrel in running to flower; and is generally propagated by
dividing the roots, but may also be raised from seeds. The leaves are
remarkable for their acidity.

This is the _Rumex montanus_ of modern botanists, though formerly
considered as a variety of _R. acetosa_.


BLISTERED-LEAVED MOUNTAIN SORREL.

This variety is distinguished from the Green Mountain Sorrel by its
larger, more blistered, and thinner leaves. The leaf-stems are also
longer, and, as well as the nerves and the under surface of the leaf,
finely spotted with red. It starts early in spring, and is slow in
running up to flower.


GREEN MOUNTAIN SORREL.

This is an improved variety of the Mountain Sorrel, and preferable to
any other, from the greater size and abundance of its leaves, which
possess much acidity. It is also late in running to flower.

The leaves are large, numerous, ovate-sagittate, from ten to eleven
inches long, and nearly five inches in width; the radical leaves are
slightly blistered, and of a dark, shining green color. It can only be
propagated by dividing the roots.

The plants require a space of eighteen inches between the rows, and a
foot from plant to plant in the rows.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPINACH.

Spinacia oleracea.

Spinach is a hardy annual, of Asiatic origin. When in flower, the plant
is from two to three feet in height; the stem is erect, furrowed,
hollow, and branching; the leaves are smooth, succulent, and oval-oblong
or halberd-shaped,--the form varying in the different varieties. The
fertile and barren flowers are produced on separate plants,--the former
in groups, close to the stalk at every joint; the latter in long,
terminal bunches, or clusters. The seeds vary in a remarkable degree in
their form and general appearance; those of some of the kinds being
round and smooth, while others are angular and prickly: they retain
their vitality five years. An ounce contains nearly twenty-four hundred
of the prickly seeds, and about twenty-seven hundred of the round or
smooth.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Spinach is best developed, and most tender and
succulent, when grown in rich soil. For the winter sorts, the soil can
hardly be made too rich.

It is always raised from seeds, which are sown in drills twelve or
fourteen inches apart, and three-fourths of an inch in depth. The seeds
are sometimes sown broadcast; but the drill method is preferable, not
only because the crop can be cultivated with greater facility, but the
produce is more conveniently gathered. For a succession, a few seeds of
the summer varieties may be sown, at intervals of a fortnight, from
April till August.

_Taking the Crop._--"When the leaves are two or three inches broad, they
will be fit for gathering. This is done either by cutting them up with a
knife wholly to the bottom, drawing and clearing them out by the root,
or only cropping the large outer leaves; the root and heart remaining to
shoot out again. Either method can be adopted, according to the season
or other circumstances."--_Rogers._

_To raise Seed._--Spinach seeds abundantly; and a few of the fertile
plants, with one or two of the infertile, will yield all that will be
required for a garden of ordinary size. Seeds of the winter sorts should
be saved from autumn sowings, and from plants that have survived the
winter.

_Use._--The leaves and young stems are the only parts of the plant used.
They are often boiled and served alone; and sometimes, with the addition
of sorrel-leaves, are used in soups, and eaten with almost every
description of meat. "The expressed juice is often employed by cooks and
confectioners for giving a green color to made dishes. When eaten
freely, it is mildly laxative, diuretic, and cooling. Of itself, it
affords little nourishment. It should be boiled without the addition of
water, beyond what hangs to the leaves in rinsing them; and, when
cooked, the moisture which naturally comes from the leaves should be
pressed out before being sent to the table. The young leaves were at one
period used as a salad."--_M'Int._

_Varieties._--


FLANDERS SPINACH. _Trans._

This is a winter Spinach, and is considered superior to the Prickly or
Common Winter Spinach, which is in general cultivation during the winter
season in our gardens. It is equally hardy, perhaps hardier.

The leaves are doubly hastate or halberd shaped, and somewhat wrinkled:
the lower ones measure from twelve to fourteen inches in length, and
from six to eight in breadth. They are not only larger, but thicker and
more succulent, than those of the Prickly Spinach. The whole plant grows
more bushy, and produces a greater number of leaves from each root; and
it is sometimes later in running to seed. The seeds are like those of
the Round or Summer Spinach, but larger: they are destitute of the
prickles which distinguish the seeds of the Common Winter Spinach.

For winter use, sow at the time directed for sowing the Large
Prickly-seeded, but allow more space between the rows than for that
variety; subsequent culture, and treatment during the winter, the same
as the Prickly-seeded.


LARGE PRICKLY-SEEDED SPINACH.

Large Winter Spinach. Epinard d'Angleterre. _Vil._

Leaves comparatively large, rounded at the ends, thick and succulent. In
foliage and general character, it is similar to some of the round-seeded
varieties; but is much hardier, and slower in running to seed. It is
commonly known as "Winter Spinach," and principally cultivated for use
during this portion of the year. The seeds are planted towards the last
of August, in drills a foot apart, and nearly an inch in depth. When
well up, the plants should be thinned to four or five inches apart in
the drills; and, if the weather is favorable, they will be stocky and
vigorous at the approach of severe weather. Before the closing-up of the
ground, lay strips of joist or other like material between the rows,
cover all over with clean straw, and keep the bed thus protected until
the approach of spring or the crop has been gathered for use.


LETTUCE-LEAVED SPINACH.

Epinard a Feuille de Laitue. _Vil._ Epinard Gaudry.

Leaves very large, on short stems, rounded, deep-green, with a bluish
tinge, less erect than those of the other varieties, often blistered on
the surface, and of thick substance. It is neither so early nor so hardy
as some others; but it is slow in the development of its flower-stalk,
and there are few kinds more productive or of better quality. The seeds
are round and smooth. For a succession, a sowing should be made at
intervals of two weeks.

"A variety called 'Gaudry,' if not identical, is very similar to this."


SORREL-LEAVED SPINACH.

Leaves of medium size, halberd-formed, deep-green, thick, and fleshy. A
hardy and productive sort, similar to the Yellow or White Sorrel-leaved,
but differing in the deeper color of its stalks and leaves.


SUMMER OR ROUND-LEAVED SPINACH.

Round Dutch. Epinard de Hollande. _Vil._

Leaves large, thick, and fleshy, rounded at the ends, and entire, or
nearly entire, on the borders.

This variety is generally grown for summer use; but it soon runs to
seed, particularly in warm and dry weather. Where a constant supply is
required, a sowing should be made every fortnight, commencing as early
in spring as the frost leaves the ground. The seeds are round and
smooth. Plants from the first sowing will be ready for use the last of
May or early in June.

In Belgium and Germany, a sub-variety is cultivated, with smaller and
deeper-colored foliage, and which is slower in running to flower. It is
not, however, considered preferable to the Common Summer or
Round-leaved.


WINTER OR COMMON PRICKLY SPINACH.

Epinard ordinaire. _Vil._

Leaves seven or eight inches long, halberd-shaped, deep-green, thin in
texture, and nearly erect on the stalk of the plant; seeds prickly.

From this variety most of the improved kinds of Prickly Spinach have
been obtained; and the Common Winter or Prickly-seeded is now considered
scarcely worthy of cultivation.


YELLOW SORREL-LEAVED SPINACH.

White Sorrel-leaved Spinach. Blond a Feuille d'Oseille. _Vil._

The leaves of this variety are similar in form and appearance to those
of the Garden Sorrel. They are of medium size, entire on the border,
yellowish-white at the base, greener at the tips, and blistered on the
surface.

New. Represented as being hardy, productive, slow in the development of
its flower-stalk, and of good quality.

       *       *       *       *       *

WILD OR PERENNIAL SPINACH.

Good King Henry. Tota Bona. Goose-foot. Blitum Bonus Henricus.

A hardy perennial plant, indigenous to Great Britain, and naturalized to
a very limited extent in this country. Its stem is two feet and a half
in height; the leaves are arrow-shaped, smooth, deep-green, undulated
on the borders, and mealy on their under surface; the flowers are
numerous, small, greenish, and produced in compact groups, or clusters;
the seeds are small, black, and kidney-shaped.

_Propagation and Culture._--"It may be propagated by seed sown in April
or May, and transplanted, when the plants are fit to handle, into a
nursery-bed. In August or September, they should be again transplanted
where they are to remain, setting them in rows a foot apart, and ten
inches asunder in the rows, in ground of a loamy nature, trenched to the
depth of fifteen or eighteen inches, as their roots penetrate to a
considerable depth. The following spring, the leaves are fit to gather
for use; and should be picked as they advance, taking the largest first.
In this way, a bed will continue productive for several years.

"Being a hardy perennial, it may also be increased by dividing the plant
into pieces, each having a portion of the root and a small bit of the
crown, which is thickly set with buds, which spring freely on being
replanted.

"Most of the species of this genus, both indigenous and exotic, are
plants of easy cultivation, and may be safely used as articles of
food."--_M'Int._

_Use._--The same as Spinach.




CHAPTER VII.

SALAD PLANTS.

Alexanders. Brook-lime. Buckshorn Plantain. Burnet. Caterpillar. Celery.
Celeriac, or Turnip-rooted Celery. Chervil. Chiccory, or Succory.
Corchorus. Corn Salad. Cress, or Peppergrass. Cuckoo Flower. Dandelion.
Endive. Horse-radish. Lettuce. Madras Radish. Mallow, Curled-leaf.
Mustard. Nasturtium. Garden Picridium. Purslain. Rape. Roquette, or
Rocket. Samphire. Scurvy-grass. Snails. Sweet-scented Chervil, or Sweet
Cicely. Tarragon. Valeriana. Water-cress. Winter-cress, or Yellow
Rocket. Wood-sorrel. Worms.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALEXANDERS.

Alisanders. Smyrnium olusatrum.

A hardy, biennial plant, with foliage somewhat resembling that of
Celery. Stem three to four feet high, much branched; radical leaves
pale-green, compound,--those of the stem similar in form, but of smaller
size. The branches of the plant terminate in large umbels, or spherical
bunches of yellowish flowers; which are succeeded by roundish fruits,
each of which contains two crescent-shaped seeds.

_Sowing and Culture._--It thrives best in light, deep loam; and is
raised from seed sown annually. Make the drills two and a half or three
feet apart, and cover the seeds an inch deep. When the plants are two or
three inches high, thin to twelve inches apart; or sow a few seeds in a
nursery-bed, and transplant.

_Blanching._--When the plants are well advanced, they should be
gradually earthed up about the stems in the process of cultivation, in
the manner of blanching Celery or Cardoons; like which, they are also
gathered for use, and preserved during winter.

_To raise Seed._--Leave a few plants unblanched; protect with
stable-litter, or other convenient material, during winter; and they
will flower, and produce an abundance of seeds, the following summer.

_Use._--It was formerly much cultivated for its leaf-stalks; which,
after being blanched, were used as a pot-herb and for salad. They have a
pleasant, aromatic taste and odor; but the plant is now rarely grown,
Celery being almost universally preferred.


PERFOLIATE ALEXANDERS.

Smyrnium perfoliatum.

A hardy, biennial species, from Italy; stem three feet in height,
grooved or furrowed, hollow; leaves many times divided, and of a
yellowish-green color; flowers, in terminal bunches, yellowish-white;
seeds black, of the form of those of the common species, but smaller.

It is considered superior to the last named, as it not only blanches
better, but is more crisp and tender, and not so harsh-flavored.

       *       *       *       *       *

BROOK-LIME.

American Brook-lime. Marsh Speedwell. Veronica beccabunga.

Brook-lime is a native of this country, but is also common to Great
Britain. It is a hardy perennial, and grows naturally in ditches, and
streams of water, but is rarely cultivated. The stem is from ten to
fifteen inches in height, thick, smooth, and succulent, and sends out
roots at the joints, by which the plant spreads and is propagated; the
leaves are opposite, oval, smooth, and fleshy; the flowers are produced
in long bunches, are of a fine blue color, and stand upon short
stems,--they are more or less abundant during most of the summer, and
are followed by heart-shaped seed-vessels, containing small, roundish
seeds.

_Cultivation._--It may be propagated by dividing the roots, and setting
the plants in wet localities, according to their natural habit. It will
thrive well when grown with Water-cress.

_Use._--The whole plant is used as a salad, in the same manner and for
the same purposes as Water-cress. It is considered an excellent
anti-scorbutic.

       *       *       *       *       *

BUCKSHORN PLANTAIN.

Star of the Earth. Plantago coronopus.

A hardy annual, indigenous to Great Britain, France, and other countries
of Europe. The root-leaves are put forth horizontally, and spread
regularly about a common centre somewhat in the form of a rosette; the
flower-stem is leafless, branching, and from eight to ten inches high;
flowers yellow; the seeds are quite small, of a clear, brown color, and
retain their power of germination three years,--nearly two hundred and
thirty thousand are contained in an ounce.

_Soil and Cultivation._--It succeeds best in a soil comparatively light;
and the seed should be sown in April. Sow thinly, broadcast, or in
shallow drills eight inches apart. When the plants are about an inch
high, thin them to three or four inches apart.

_Use._--The plant is cultivated for its leaves, which are used as a
salad. They should be plucked while still young and tender, or when
about half grown.

       *       *       *       *       *

BURNET. _Mill._

Poterium sanguisorba.

Burnet is a hardy, perennial plant, indigenous to England, where it is
found on dry, upland, chalky soils. When fully developed, it is from a
foot and a half to two feet in height. The leaves proceeding directly
from the root are produced on long stems, and are composed of from
eleven to fifteen smaller leaves, which are of an oval form, regularly
toothed, and generally, but not uniformly, smooth. The branches, which
are somewhat numerous, terminate in long, slender stems, each of which
produces an oval or roundish bunch of purplish-red, fertile and
infertile flowers. The fertile flowers produce two seeds each, which
ripen in August or September. These are oblong, four-sided, of a
yellowish color, and retain their vitality two years. Thirty-five
hundred are contained in an ounce.

_Sowing and Culture._--The plant is easily propagated by seeds, which
may be sown either in autumn or spring. Sow in drills ten inches apart,
half or three-fourths of an inch deep; and thin, while the plants are
young, to six or eight inches in the row. If the seeds are allowed to
scatter from the plants in autumn, young seedlings will come up
plentifully in the following spring, and may be transplanted to the
distances before directed. In dry soil, the plants will continue for
many years; requiring no further care than to be occasionally hoed, and
kept free from weeds. It may also be propagated by dividing the roots;
but, as it is easily grown from seeds, this method is not generally
practised.

_Use._--The leaves have a warm, piquant taste, and, when bruised,
resemble cucumbers in odor. They are sometimes used as salad, and
occasionally form an ingredient in soups. The roots, after being dried
and pulverized, are employed in cases of internal hemorrhage.

It is very little used in this country, and rarely seen in gardens.

_Varieties._--There are three varieties; the distinctions, however,
being neither permanent nor important.


HAIRY-LEAVED BURNET.

Leaves and stems comparatively rough or hairy; in other respects,
similar to the Smooth-leaved. Either of the varieties may be propagated
by dividing the roots.


LARGE-SEEDED BURNET.

This, like the others, is a sub-variety, and probably but a seminal
variation.


SMOOTH-LEAVED BURNET.

Leaves and stems of the plant comparatively smooth, but differing in no
other particular from the Hairy-leaved. Seeds from this variety would
probably produce plants answering to both descriptions.

       *       *       *       *       *

CATERPILLAR.

Chenille, of the French. _Vil._ Scorpiurus.

All of the species here described are hardy, annual plants, with
creeping or recumbent stems, usually about two feet in length. The
leaves are oblong, entire on the borders, broadest near the ends, and
taper towards the stem; the flowers are yellow, and quite small; the
seeds are produced in caterpillar-like pods, and retain their vitality
five years.

_Cultivation._--The seeds may be planted in the open ground in April or
May; or the plants may be started in a hot-bed, and set out after
settled warm weather. The rows should be fifteen inches apart, and the
plants twelve or fifteen inches apart in the rows; or the plants may be
grown in hills two feet and a half apart, and two or three plants
allowed to a hill.

_Use._--No part of the plant is eatable; but the pods, in their green
state, are placed upon dishes of salads, where they so nearly resemble
certain species of caterpillars as to completely deceive the uninitiated
or inexperienced.

_Species._--The species cultivated are the following; viz.:--


COMMON CATERPILLAR.

Chenille grosse. _Vil._ Scorpiurus vermiculata.

Pod, or fruit, comparatively large. The interior grooves, or furrows,
are indistinct, or quite wanting: the exterior grooves are ten in
number, and well defined. Along the summit of these furrows are produced
numerous, small, pedicelled tubercles, quite similar to those of some
species of worms or caterpillars; and these small tufts, in connection
with the brownish-green color and peculiar coiling of the pods, make the
resemblance nearly perfect, especially if seen from a short distance.
The seeds are large, oblong, flattened at the ends, and of a yellowish
color. A well-developed fruit will measure about three-eighths of an
inch in diameter; and, when uncoiled, nearly an inch and a half in
length.


FURROWED CATERPILLAR.

Chenille rayee. _Vil._ Scorpiurus sulcata.

Fruit rather slender, furrowed, grayish-green within the furrows, and
brown along the summits. Four of the exterior furrows are surmounted
with numerous small, obtuse, or rounded tubercles; and the pods are
coiled in the manner peculiar to the class. The seeds resemble those of
the Prickly Caterpillar, but are of larger size.


PRICKLY CATERPILLAR. _Vil._

Small Caterpillar. Scorpiurus muricata.

Pod, or fruit, a fourth of an inch in diameter, curved or coiled;
longitudinally furrowed, with numerous, small, erect, tufted points,
regularly arranged along the surface. It is of a brownish-red color,
with shades of green; and, when well grown, bears a remarkable
resemblance to some species of hairy worms or caterpillars. The seeds
are large, long, wrinkled, and of a yellowish color.


VILLOUS OR HAIRY CATERPILLAR.

Chenille velue. _Vil._ Scorpiurus subvillosa.

This species resembles the Prickly Caterpillar, but is a little larger.
The most marked distinction, however, is in the small points, or
tubercles, placed along the longitudinal ridges, which in this species
are recurved, or bent at the tips. The seeds are larger than those of
the foregoing species.

       *       *       *       *       *

CELERY.

Smallage. Apium graveolens.

Celery, or Smallage, is a hardy, umbelliferous, biennial plant, growing
naturally "by the sides of ditches and near the sea, where it rises with
wedge-shaped leaves and a furrowed stalk, producing greenish flowers in
August." Under cultivation, the leaves are pinnatifid, with triangular
leaflets; the leaf-stems are large, rounded, grooved, succulent, and
solid or hollow according to the variety. The plant flowers during the
second year, and then measures from two to three feet in height; the
flowers are small, yellowish-white, and are produced in umbels, or
flat, spreading groups, at the extremities of the branches; the seeds
are small, somewhat triangular, of a yellowish-brown color, aromatic
when bruised, and of a warm, pleasant flavor. They are said to retain
their germinative powers ten years; but, by seedsmen, are not considered
reliable when more than five years old. An ounce contains nearly seventy
thousand seeds.

_Soil._--Any good garden soil, in a fair state of cultivation, is
adapted to the growth of Celery.

_Propagation._--It is always propagated by seed; one-fourth of an ounce
of which is sufficient for a seed-bed five feet wide and ten feet long.
The first sowing is usually made in a hot-bed in March: and it may be
sown in the open ground in April or May; but, when so treated, vegetates
slowly, often remaining in the earth several weeks before it comes up.
"A bushel or two of stable manure, put in a hole in the ground against a
wall or any fence facing the south, and covered with a rich, fine mould
three or four inches deep, will bring the seed up in two weeks." If this
method is practised, sprinkle the seed thinly over the surface of the
loam, stir the soil to the depth of half an inch, and press the earth
flat and smooth with the back of a spade. Sufficient plants for any
family may be started in a large flower-pot or two, placed in the
sitting-room, giving them plenty of light and moisture.

_Cultivation._--As soon as the young plants are about three inches high,
prepare a small bed in the open air, and make the ground rich and the
earth fine. Here set out the plants for a temporary growth, placing them
four inches apart. This should be done carefully; and they should be
gently watered once, and protected for a day or two against the sun. "A
bed ten feet long and four feet wide will contain three hundred and
sixty plants; and, if they be well cultivated, will more than supply the
table of a common-sized family from October to May."

"In this bed the plants should remain till the beginning or middle of
July, when they should be removed into trenches. Make the trenches a
foot or fifteen inches deep and a foot wide, and not less than five feet
apart. Lay the earth taken out of the trenches into the middle of the
space between the trenches, so that it may not be washed into them by
heavy rains; for it will, in such case, materially injure the crop by
covering the hearts of the plants. At the bottom of the trench put some
good, rich, but well-digested compost manure; for, if too fresh, the
Celery will be rank and pipy, or hollow, and will not keep nearly so
long or so well. Dig this manure in, and make the earth fine and light;
then take up the plants from the temporary bed, and set them out
carefully in the bottom of the trenches, six or eight inches
apart."--_Corb._

It is the practice of some cultivators, at the time of setting in the
trenches, to remove all the suckers, to shorten the long roots, and to
cut the leaves off, so that the whole plant shall be about six inches in
length. But the best growers in England have abandoned this method, and
now set the plants, roots and tops, entire.

_Blanching._--"When the plants begin to grow (which they will quickly
do), hoe on each side and between them with a small hoe. As they grow
up, earth their stems; that is, put the earth up against them, but not
too much at a time, and always when the plants are dry; and let the
earth put up be finely broken, and not at all cloddy. While this is
being done, keep the stalks of the outside leaves close up, to prevent
the earth getting between the stems of the outside leaves and inner
ones; for, if it gets there, it checks the plant, and makes the Celery
bad. When the earthing is commenced, take first the edges of the
trenches, working backwards, time after time, till the earth is reached
that was taken from the trenches; and, by this time, the earth against
the plants will be above the level of the land. Then take the earth out
of the middle, till at last the earth against the plants forms a ridge;
and the middle of each interval, a sort of gutter. Earth up very often,
not putting up much at a time, every week a little; and by the last of
September, or beginning of October, it will be blanched sufficient for
use."--_Corb._

Another (more recent) method of cultivation and blanching is to take the
plants from the temporary bed, remove the suckers, and set them with the
roots entire, ten inches apart in the trenches. They are then allowed to
grow until they have attained nearly their full size, when the earth for
blanching is more rapidly applied than in the previous method.

"Many plant on the surface,--that is, marking out the size of the bed on
ground that has been previously trenched; digging in at least six or
eight inches of rich, half-decayed manure, and planting either in single
lines four feet apart, or making beds six feet broad, and planting
across them, setting the rows fourteen inches apart, and the plants
eight inches apart in the lines. They may be earthed up as they advance,
or not, until they have attained the height of a foot."--_M'Int._

M'Intosh gives the following method, practised by the Edinburgh
market-gardeners: "Trenches, six feet wide and one foot deep, are dug
out; the bottom is loosened and well enriched, and the plants set in
rows across the bed, fourteen inches asunder, and the plants nine inches
apart in the rows. By this means, space is economized, and the plants
attain a fair average size and quality. The same plan is very often
followed in private gardens; and, where the new and improved sorts are
grown, they arrive at the size most available for family use. This is
one of the best methods for amateurs to grow this crop. They should grow
their plants in the temporary or nursery beds until they are ten inches
or a foot high, before planting in the trenches; giving plenty of water,
and afterwards earthing up once a fortnight."

Some allow the plants to make a natural growth, and earth up at once,
about three weeks before being required for use. When so treated, the
stalks are of remarkable whiteness, crisp, tender, and less liable to
russet-brown spots than when the plants are blanched by the more common
method.

_Taking the Crop._--Before the closing-up of the ground, the principal
part of the crop should be carefully taken up (retaining the roots and
soil naturally adhering), and removed to the cellar; where they should
be packed in moderately moist earth or sand, without covering the ends
of the leaves.

A portion may be allowed to remain in the open ground; but the hearts of
the plants must be protected from wet weather. This may be done by
placing boards lengthwise, in the form of a roof, over the ridges. As
soon as the frost leaves the ground in spring, or at any time during the
winter when the weather will admit, Celery may be taken for use directly
from the garden.

_Seed._--Two or three plants will produce an abundance. They should be
grown two feet apart, and may remain in the open ground during the
winter. The seeds ripen in August.

_Use._--The stems of the leaves are the parts of the plant used. These,
after being blanched, are exceedingly crisp and tender, with an
agreeable and peculiarly aromatic flavor. They are sometimes employed in
soups; but are more generally served crude, with the addition of oil,
mustard, and vinegar, or with salt only. The seeds have the taste and
odor of the stems of the leaves, and are often used in their stead for
flavoring soups.

With perhaps the exception of Lettuce, Celery is more generally used in
this country than any other salad plant. It succeeds well throughout the
Northern and Middle States; and, in the vicinity of some of our large
cities, is produced of remarkable size and excellence.

_Varieties._--


BOSTON-MARKET CELERY.

A medium-sized, white variety; hardy, crisp, succulent, and mild
flavored. Compared with the White Solid, the stalks are more numerous,
shorter, not so thick, and much finer in texture. It blanches quickly,
and is recommended for its hardiness and crispness; the stalks rarely
becoming stringy or fibrous, even at an advanced stage of growth. Much
grown by market-gardeners in the vicinity of Boston, Mass.


COLE'S SUPERB RED. _M'Int._

This is comparatively a new sort, of much excellence, and of remarkable
solidity. It is not of large size, but well adapted for cultivation in
the kitchen-garden and for family use; not so well suited for marketing
or for exhibition purposes. It has the valuable property of not piping
or becoming hollow or stringy, and remains long without running to seed.
The leaf-stalks are of a fine purple color, tender, crisp, and fine
flavored. A well-grown plant will weigh about six pounds.


COLE'S SUPERB WHITE.

Much like Cole's Superb Red; differing little, except in color. An
excellent sort, hardy, runs late to seed, and is one of the most crisp
and tender of the white sorts. Stalks short and thick.


DWARF CURLED WHITE.

Celeri Nain frise. _Vil._

Leaves dark-green, curled, resembling those of Parsley, and, like it,
might be employed for garnishing. Leaf-stalks rounded and grooved,
comparatively crisp and solid, but not fine flavored. It is quite hardy,
and, in moderate winters, will remain in the open ground without
injury, and serve for soups in spring. Its fine, curled foliage,
however, is its greatest recommendation.


EARLY DWARF SOLID WHITE. _Thomp._

Celeri plein, blanc, court, hatif. _Vil._

Rather dwarf, but thick-stemmed. The heart is remarkably full; the
leaf-stalk solid, blanching promptly. There is, in fact, much more
finely blanched substance in a plant of this variety than in one of the
tall sorts, and the quality is excellent. It comes into use rather
early, and is one of the hardiest of the White varieties.


ITALIAN CELERY. _Thomp._

Large Upright. Giant Patagonian.

A tall, strong-growing, erect sort; leaf-stems deeply furrowed,
sometimes a little hollow; leaves large, deep-green, with coarse, obtuse
serratures. It is not so crisp as the Common White Solid; and is
suitable only for soups, or where very tall Celery is desirable.


LAING'S IMPROVED MAMMOTH RED CELERY.

This is considered the largest variety yet produced; specimens having
attained, in England, the extraordinary weight of eight or ten pounds,
and at the same time perfectly solid. It is nearly perennial in its
habit, as it will not run to seed the first year; and is with difficulty
started to blossom even during the second, when planted out for the
purpose. Color bright-red; flavor unsurpassed, if equalled.


MANCHESTER RED CELERY. _Thomp._

Manchester Red Giant.

This variety scarcely differs from the Red Solid. It has, however, a
coarser habit, with a somewhat rounder stalk; and, this being the case,
the heart is not so compact. It is grown largely for marketing, and is
excellent for soups and stewing.


NUTT'S CHAMPION WHITE CELERY. _M'Int._

Originated with Mr. Nutt, of Sheffield.

It attains, under good management, in good soil, a large size, and, this
considered, is of excellent quality; very white, and not apt to run to
seed.


RED SOLID. _Thomp._

New Large Red. New Large Purple. Tours Purple. Celeri violet de Tours.

The plant grows to a large size, full-hearted, with a thick stem.
Leaf-stalks thick, deeply furrowed, and very solid, of a dark-red or
purplish hue where exposed, rose-colored where partially blanched; but
the perfectly blanched portion is pure white, more so than the blanched
part of the White varieties of Celery. It is also crisp, of excellent
flavor, and unquestionably the best variety of Red Celery.


SEYMOUR'S SUPERB WHITE. _Thomp._

Seymour's Superb White Solid.

A large-sized, vigorous-growing variety; in good soils, often attaining
a height of nearly three feet. The stalks are solid; flat at the base,
where they overlap, and form a compact, crisp, and, with ordinary care,
a well-blanched heart of excellent quality. It succeeds best, as most
other sorts do, in rich, moist soil; and when so grown, and properly
blanched, will yield a large proportion of Celery, of a pure white
color, and of the best quality.

It is one of the best sorts for extensive culture for the markets, as it
is also one of the best varieties for small gardens for family use. It
blanches readily; and, with little care, will supply the table, from the
last of September, through most of the winter.


SEYMOUR'S WHITE CHAMPION.

A variety represented as being superior to Seymour's Superb White. The
stalks are broad, flat at the base, and form a compact, well-blanched,
crisp heart.


SHEPHERD'S RED. _Thomp._

Shepherd's Giant Red.

Much like the Manchester Red, but has flatter stems: consequently, it is
more compact, and blanches sooner and more perfectly, than that variety;
to which, for these reasons, it is preferred by growers for competition.


SMALL DUTCH CELERY.

Celeri a couper. _Vil._

Leaf-stems small, hollow, crisp, and succulent; sprouts, or suckers,
abundant. It is seldom blanched; but the leaves are sometimes used for
flavoring soups.

The seeds should be sown thickly, and on level beds. The plants often
resprout after being cut. Not much cultivated.


SUTTON'S WHITE SOLID. _M'Int._

A very large yet solid-growing variety, exceedingly white and crisp.


TURKEY OR PRUSSIAN CELERY.

Giant White. Celeri turc. _Vil._ Turkish Giant Solid.

A remarkably large variety, resembling the Common White Solid.
Leaf-stalks long, large, erect, fleshy, and solid; leaves large, with
rounded serratures, and of a glossy-green color.

It is one of the largest of the White sorts, and is considered superior
to the Common White Solid.


WALL'S WHITE CELERY. _Thomp._

An improved variety of the Italian, esteemed by growers for competition,
where quantity, not quality, is the principal consideration.


WHITE LION'S-PAW CELERY. _M'Int._

Lion's-paw.

A short, broad, flat-stalked variety, of excellent quality; crisp and
white. Its short, flat, spreading habit gave rise to its name.


WHITE SOLID. _Thomp._

Celeri plein, blanc. _Vil._ Fine White Solid.

This variety is of strong and rather tall growth; leaf-stalks generally
solid, but when grown in rich, highly manured soil, they sometimes
become slightly hollow; leaves large, smooth, bright-green; serratures
large and obtuse. It blanches readily, is crisp, of excellent quality,
and comes into use earlier than the Red sorts. It is generally
cultivated in the Northern States, not only on account of its hardiness,
but for its keeping qualities. As a market variety, it is one of the
best.

       *       *       *       *       *

CELERIAC, OR TURNIP-ROOTED CELERY.

This variety forms at the base of the leaves, near the surface of the
ground, a brownish, irregular, rounded root, or tuber, measuring from
three to four inches in diameter. The leaves are small, with slender,
hollow stems. In favorable exposures and rich soil, the roots sometimes
attain a weight of more than three pounds. It is much hardier than the
common varieties of Celery.

_Propagation._--It is propagated from seeds, which may be sown in the
open ground in April or May, in shallow drills six or eight inches
apart. "When the young plants are three inches high, they should be
removed, and set on the surface (not in trenches), in moderately
enriched soil. They should be set in rows eighteen inches apart, and a
foot from each other in the line. At the time of transplanting, all of
the small suckers, or side-shoots, should be rubbed off,--a precaution
to be kept in view throughout its growth,--as the energies of the whole
plant ought to be directed to the formation of the bulb-like
root."--_M'Int._

_Subsequent Cultivation._--The growing crop will require no peculiar
treatment. When the bulbs are two-thirds grown, they are earthed over
for the purpose of blanching, and to render the flesh crisp and tender.
Cool and humid seasons are the most favorable to their growth. In warm
and dry weather, the bulbs are small, comparatively tough, and strong
flavored.

_Taking the Crop._--Some of the bulbs will be ready for use in
September; from which time, till the last of November, the table may be
supplied directly from the garden. Before severe weather, the quantity
required for winter should be drawn, packed in damp earth or sand, and
stored in the cellar.

_To save Seed._--Give to a few plants, taken up in the autumn, as much
light and air as possible during the winter, keeping them cool, but not
allowing them to freeze; and, in April, set them in the open ground,
eighteen inches apart. The seed will ripen the last of the season. It is
often used in the manner of the seed of the Common Celery for seasoning
soups.

_Use._--The root, or bulb, is the part of the plant eaten: the flesh of
this is white, and comparatively tender, with the flavor of the stalks
of Common Celery, though generally less mild and delicate. It is
principally valued for its remarkable hardiness and for its keeping
properties. Where the common varieties of Celery are grown or preserved
with difficulty, this might be successfully grown, and afford a
tolerable substitute. The bulbs are sometimes eaten boiled, and the
leaves are occasionally used in soups.


CURLED-LEAVED CELERIAC.

Curled-leaved Turnip-rooted. Celeri-rave frise. _Vil._

This is a variety of the Common Celeriac, or Turnip-rooted Celery; like
which, it forms a sort of bulb, or knob, near the surface of the ground.
It is, however, of smaller size; usually measuring about three inches in
diameter. The skin is brown, and the flesh white and fine-grained;
leaves small, spreading, curled.

It is in no respect superior to the Common Turnip-rooted, and possesses
little merit aside from the peculiarity of its foliage. Cultivate,
preserve during winter, and use as directed for the common variety.


EARLY ERFURT CELERIAC.

Celeri-rave d'Erfurt. _Vil._

A very early variety. Root, or bulb, not large, but regular in form. Its
earliness is its principal merit.


CHERVIL.

Chaerophyllum cerefolium. Common or Plain-leaved.

A hardy, annual plant, from the south of Europe. Stem eighteen inches to
two feet in height; the leaves are many times divided, and are similar
to those of the Common Plain Parsley; the flowers are small, white, and
produced in umbels at the extremities of the branches; the seeds are
black, long, pointed, longitudinally grooved, and retain their vitality
but two years,--nearly nine thousand are contained in an ounce.

"This is the most common sort; but, except that it is hardier than the
Curled varieties, is not worthy of cultivation."


CURLED CHERVIL. _M'Int._

A variety of the Common Chervil, with frilled or curled leaves; the
distinction between the sorts being nearly the same as that between the
Plain-leaved and Curled-leaved varieties of Parsley. The foliage is
delicately and beautifully frilled; and, on this account, is much
employed for garnishing, as well as for the ordinary purposes for which
the plain sort is used.

Being a larger grower, it requires more room for its development; and
the plants should stand a foot apart each way. When intended for winter
use, it should have the protection of hand-glasses, frames, or branches
of trees placed thickly around or amongst it. In very unfavorable
situations, it is well to pot a dozen or two plants, and shelter them
under glass during the winter.


FRIZZLED-LEAVED OR FRENCH CHERVIL. _M'Int._

Double-curled. Cerfeuil frise. _Vil._

An improved variety of the Curled Chervil,--even more beautiful; but
wanting in hardiness. It succeeds best when grown in the summer months.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--Chervil is raised from seeds; and, where
it is much used, sowings should be made, at intervals of three or four
weeks, from April till July. The seeds should be sown thinly, in drills
a foot apart, and covered nearly an inch in depth.

_Use._--It is cultivated for its leaves, which have a pleasant, aromatic
taste; and, while young and tender, are employed for flavoring soups and
salads.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHICCORY, OR SUCCORY.

Wild Endive. Cichorium intybus.

A hardy, perennial plant, introduced into this country from Europe, and
often abounding as a troublesome weed in pastures, lawns, and
mowing-lands. The stem is erect, stout, and branching, and, in its
native state, usually about three feet in height,--under cultivation,
however, it sometimes attains a height of five or six feet; the radical
leaves are deep-green, lobed, and, when grown in good soil, measure ten
or twelve inches in length, and four inches in width; the flowers are
large, axillary, nearly stemless, of a fine blue color, and generally
produced in pairs; the seeds somewhat resemble those of Endive, though
ordinarily smaller, more glossy, and of a deeper-brown color,--they will
keep ten years. The plants continue in blossom from July to September;
and the seeds ripen from August to October, or until the plants are
destroyed by frost.

_Soil, Sowing, and Cultivation._--As the roots of Chiccory are long and
tapering, it should be cultivated in rich, mellow soil, thoroughly
stirred, either by the plough or spade, to the depth of ten or twelve
inches. The seed should be sown in April or May, in drills fifteen
inches apart, and three-fourths of an inch deep. When the young plants
are two or three inches high, thin them to eight inches apart in the
rows; and, during the summer, cultivate frequently, to keep the soil
light, and the growing crop free from weeds.

_Blanching._--Before using as a salad, the plants are blanched, either
by covering with boxes a foot in depth, or by strips of boards twelve or
fourteen inches wide, nailed together at right angles, and placed
lengthwise over the rows. They are sometimes blanched by covering with
earth; the leaves being first gathered together, and tied loosely at the
top, which should be left exposed to light.

_To save Seed._--In the autumn, leave a few of the best plants
unblanched; let them be about eighteen inches asunder. Protect with
stable litter; or, if in a sheltered situation, leave them unprotected
during winter, and they will yield abundantly the ensuing summer.

_Taking the Crop._--When the leaves are properly blanched, they will be
of a delicate, creamy white. When they are about a foot high, they will
be ready for use; and, as soon as they are cut, the roots should be
removed, and others brought forward to succeed them. "In cutting, take
off the leaves with a thin slice of the crown, to keep them together, as
in cutting sea-kale. When washed, and tied up in small bundles of a
handful each, they are fit for dressing."--_M'Int._

_Use._--It is used as Endive; its flavor and properties being much the
same. Though rarely grown in this country, it is common to the gardens
of many parts of Europe, and is much esteemed. The blanched leaves are
known as _Barbe de Capucin_, or "Friar's Beard."

_Varieties._--


IMPROVED CHICCORY, OR SUCCORY.

Chicoree sauvage amelioree. _Vil._

Leaves larger than those of the Common Chiccory, and produced more
compactly; forming a sort of head, or solid heart, like some of the
Endives. The plant is sometimes boiled and served in the manner of
Spinach.


VARIEGATED OR SPOTTED CHICCORY. _Vil._

This is a variety of the preceding, distinguished by the color of the
leaves, which are veined, and streaked with red. In blanching, the red
is not changed, but retains its brilliancy; while the green becomes
nearly pure white,--the two colors blending in rich contrast. In this
state they form a beautiful, as well as tender and well-flavored, salad.


IMPROVED VARIEGATED CHICCORY. _Vil._

A sub-variety of the Spotted Chiccory, more constant in its character,
and more uniform and distinct in its stripes and variegations. When
blanched, it makes an exceedingly delicate and beautiful garnish, and a
tender and excellent salad.

Either of the improved sorts are as hardy, and blanch as readily, as the
Common Chiccory.


LARGE-ROOTED OR COFFEE CHICCORY.

Turnip-rooted Chiccory.

This variety is distinguished by its long, fleshy roots, which are
sometimes fusiform, but generally much branched or divided: when well
grown, they are twelve or fourteen inches in length, and about an inch
in their largest diameter. The leaves have the form of those of the
Common Chiccory, but are larger, and more luxuriant.

Though the variety is generally cultivated for its roots, the leaves,
when blanched, afford a salad even superior to some of the improved
sorts before described.

Vilmorin mentions two sub-varieties of the Large-rooted or Coffee
Chiccory; viz.:--


BRUNSWICK LARGE-ROOTED.

Roots shorter than those of the Magdebourg, but of greater diameter;
leaves spreading.


MAGDEBOURG LARGE-ROOTED.

Roots long, and comparatively large; leaves erect.

After several years' trial, preference was given to this variety, which
proved the more productive.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--For raising Coffee Chiccory, the ground
should first be well enriched, and then deeply and thoroughly stirred by
spading or ploughing. The seeds should be sown in April or May, in
shallow drills a foot apart, and the young plants thinned to three or
four inches apart in the rows. Hoe frequently; water, if the weather is
dry; and in the autumn, when the roots have attained sufficient size,
draw them for use. After being properly cleaned, cut them into small
pieces, dry them thoroughly in a kiln or spent oven, and store for use
or the market. After being roasted and ground, Chiccory is mixed with
coffee in various proportions, and thus forms a pleasant beverage; or,
if used alone, will be found a tolerable substitute for genuine coffee.

The roots of any of the before-described varieties may be used in the
same manner; but as they are much smaller, and consequently less
productive, are seldom cultivated for the purpose.

It is an article of considerable commercial importance; large quantities
being annually imported from the south of Europe to different seaports
of the United States. As the plant is perfectly hardy, of easy culture,
and quite productive, there appears to be no reason why the home demand
for the article may not be supplied by home production. Of its perfect
adaptedness to the soil and climate of almost any section of this
country, there can scarcely be a doubt.

       *       *       *       *       *

CORCHORUS.

Corette potagere, of the French. Corchorus olitorius.

An annual plant from Africa; also indigenous to the West Indies. Stem
about two feet high, much branched; leaves deep-green, slightly toothed,
varying in a remarkable degree in their size and form,--some being
spear-shaped, others oval, and some nearly heart-shaped; leaf-stems long
and slender; flowers nearly sessile, small, yellow, five-petaled; seeds
angular, pointed, and of a greenish color,--fourteen thousand are
contained in an ounce, and they retain their vitality four years.

_Soil, Propagation, and Culture._--The plant requires a light, warm
soil; and should have a sheltered, sunny place in the garden. It is
grown from seed sown annually. The sowing may be made in March in a
hot-bed, and the plants set in the open ground in May; or the seed may
be sown the last of April, or first of May, in the place where the
plants are to remain. The drills, or rows, should be fifteen inches
apart, and the plants five or six inches apart in the rows. No further
attention will be required, except the ordinary labor of keeping the
soil loose and the plants clear from weeds.

_Use._--The leaves are eaten as a salad, and are also boiled and served
at table in the form of greens or spinach. They may be cut as soon as
they have reached a height of five or six inches.

       *       *       *       *       *

CORN SALAD.

Fetticus. Lamb's Lettuce. Mache, of the French. Valeriana locusta.

This is a small, hardy, annual plant, said to derive its name from its
spontaneous growth, in fields of wheat, in England. It is also
indigenous to France and the south of Europe.

When in flower, or fully grown, it is from twelve to fifteen inches in
height. The flowers are small, pale-blue; the seeds are rather small, of
a yellowish-brown color, unequally divided by two shallow, lengthwise
grooves, and will keep six or eight years.

_Soil and Culture._--It is always grown from seed, and flourishes best
in good vegetable loam, but will grow in any tolerably enriched garden
soil. Early in April, prepare a bed four feet wide, and of a length
according to the quantity of salad required; having regard to the fact,
that it is better to sow only a small quantity at a time. Rake the
surface of the bed even, make the rows across the bed about eight inches
apart, sow the seed rather thinly, and cover about one-fourth of an inch
deep with fine, moist soil. If dry weather occurs after sowing, give the
bed a good supply of water. When the young plants are two inches high,
thin them to four inches apart, and cut or draw for use as soon as the
leaves have attained a suitable size.

As the peculiar value of Corn Salad lies in its remarkable hardiness, a
sowing should be made the last of August or beginning of September, for
use during the winter or early in spring; but, if the weather is severe,
the plants must be protected by straw or some other convenient material.
Early in March, or as soon as the weather becomes a little mild, remove
the covering, and the plants will keep the table supplied until the
leaves from fresh sowings shall be grown sufficiently for cutting.

_Seed._--To raise seed, allow a few plants from the spring sowing to
remain without cutting. They will grow up to the height and in the
manner before described, and blossom, and ripen their seed during the
summer. An ounce of seed will sow a row two hundred feet in length, and
about five pounds will be required for an acre.

_Use._--The leaves, while young, are used as a salad; and in winter, or
early in spring, are considered excellent. They are also sometimes
boiled and served as Spinach.

_Varieties._--


COMMON CORN SALAD.

Root-leaves rounded at the ends, smooth, three or four inches long by
about an inch in width. The younger the plants are when used, the more
agreeable will be their flavor.


LARGE ROUND-LEAVED.

Leaves larger, of a deeper green, thicker, and more succulent, than
those of the foregoing variety. It is the best sort for cultivation. The
leaves are most tender, and should be cut for use while young and small.


LARGE-SEEDED ROUND. _Vil._

This is a sub-variety of the Large Round, and is much cultivated in
Germany and Holland. The leaves are longer, narrower, and thinner, and
more tender when eaten; but the Large Round is preferred by gardeners
for marketing, as it bears transportation better. The seeds are about
twice as large.


ITALIAN CORN SALAD. _Vil._

Valerianella eriocarpa.

The Italian Corn Salad is a distinct species, and differs from the
Common Corn Salad in its foliage, and, to some extent, in its general
habit. It is a hardy annual, about eighteen inches high. The radical
leaves are pale-green, large, thick, and fleshy,--those of the stalk
long, narrow, and pointed; the flowers are small, pale-blue, washed or
stained with red; the seeds are of a light-brown color, somewhat
compressed, convex on one side, hollowed on the opposite, and retain
their vitality five years,--nearly twenty-two thousand are contained in
an ounce.

It is cultivated and used in the same manner as the species before
described. It is, however, earlier, milder in flavor, and slower in
running to seed. The leaves are sometimes employed early in spring as a
substitute for Spinach; but their downy or hairy character renders them
less valuable for salad purposes than those of some of the varieties of
the Common Corn Salad.

       *       *       *       *       *

CRESS, OR PEPPERGRASS.

Lepidium sativum.

The Common Cress of the garden is a hardy annual, and a native of
Persia. When in flower, the stem of the plant is smooth and branching,
and about fifteen inches high. The leaves are variously divided, and are
plain or curled, according to the variety; the flowers are white, very
small, and produced in groups, or bunches; seeds small, oblong, rounded,
of a reddish-brown color, and of a peculiar, pungent odor,--about
fourteen thousand are contained in an ounce, and they retain their
germinative properties five years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Cress will flourish in any fair garden soil,
and is always best when grown early or late in the season. The seed
vegetates quickly, and the plants grow rapidly. As they are milder and
more tender while young, the seed should be sown in succession, at
intervals of about a fortnight; making the first sowing early in April.
Rake the surface of the ground fine and smooth, and sow the seed rather
thickly, in shallow drills six or eight inches apart. Half an ounce of
seed will be sufficient for thirty feet of drill.

_To raise Seed._--Leave a dozen strong plants of the first sowing uncut.
They will ripen their seed in August, and yield a quantity sufficient
for the supply of a garden of ordinary size.

_Use._--The leaves, while young, have a warm, pungent taste; and are
eaten as a salad, either separately, or mixed with lettuce or other
salad plants. The leaves should be cut or plucked before the plant has
run to flower, as they then become acrid and unpalatable. The curled
varieties are also used for garnishing.


BROAD-LEAVED CRESS.

A coarse variety, with broad, spatulate leaves. It is sometimes grown
for feeding poultry, and is also used for soups; but it is less
desirable as a salad than most of the other sorts.


COMMON OR PLAIN-LEAVED CRESS.

This is the variety most generally cultivated. It has plain leaves, and
consequently is not so desirable a sort for garnishing. As a salad kind,
it is tender and delicate, and considered equal, if not superior, to the
Curled varieties.


CURLED CRESS.

Garnishing Cress.

Leaves larger than those of the common plain variety, of a fine green
color, and frilled and curled on the borders in the manner of some kinds
of Parsley. It is used as a salad, and is also employed as a garnish.
It is very liable to degenerate by becoming gradually less curled. To
keep the variety pure, select only the finest curled plants for seed.


GOLDEN CRESS. _Trans._

This variety is of slower growth than the Common Cress. The leaves are
of a yellowish-green, flat, oblong, scalloped on the borders, sometimes
entire, and of a much thinner texture than any of the varieties of the
Common Cress. It is very dwarf; and is consequently short, when cut as a
salad-herb for use. It has a mild and delicate flavor. When run to
flower, it does not exceed eighteen inches in height.

It deserves more general cultivation, as affording a pleasant addition
to the varieties of small salads.

The seeds are of a paler color, or more yellow, than those of the other
sorts.


NORMANDY CURLED CRESS. _M'int._

A very excellent variety, introduced by Mr. Charles M'Intosh, and
described as being hardier than the other kinds, and therefore better
adapted for sowing early in spring or late in summer.

The leaves are finely cut and curled, and make not only a good salad,
but a beautiful garnish. The seed should be sown thinly, in good soil,
in drills six inches apart. In gathering, instead of cutting the plants
over, the leaves should be picked off singly. After this operation,
fresh leaves are soon put forth.

It is difficult to procure the seed true; the Common Curled being, in
general, substituted for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

CUCKOO FLOWER.

Small Water-cress. Cardamine pratensis.

A hardy, perennial plant, introduced from Europe, and naturalized to a
limited extent in some of the Northern States. Stem about fifteen inches
high, erect, smooth; leaves deeply divided,--the divisions of the
radical or root leaves rounded, those of the stalk long, narrow, and
pointed; the flowers are comparatively large, white, or rose-colored,
and produced in erect, terminal clusters; the seeds are of a brown
color, small, oblong, shortened on one side, rounded on the opposite,
and retain their vegetating powers four years,--nearly thirty thousand
are contained in an ounce.

_Soil._--It succeeds best in moist, loamy soil; and should have a shady
situation.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--It may be propagated from seeds, or by a
division of the roots. The seeds are sown in April or May, in shallow
drills a foot asunder. The roots may be divided in spring or autumn.

_Use._--The leaves have the warm, pungent taste common to the Cress
family; and are used in their young state, like Cress, as a salad.
Medically, they have the reputation of being highly antiscorbutic and of
aiding digestion. There are four varieties:--

_White Flowering._--A variety with white, single flowers.

_Purple Flowering._--Flowers purple, single. Either of these varieties
may be propagated from seeds, or by a division of the roots.

_Double Flowering White._--Flowers white, double.

_Double Flowering Purple._--A double variety, with purple blossoms.
These varieties are propagated by a division of the roots.
Double-flowering plants are rarely produced from seeds.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANDELION.

Leontodon taraxacum.

The Dandelion, though spontaneously abundant, is not a native of this
country. Introduced from Europe, it has become extensively naturalized,
abounding in gardens, on lawns, about cultivated lands; and, in May and
June, often, of itself alone, constituting no inconsiderable portion of
the herbage of rich pastures and mowing-fields.

It is a hardy, perennial plant, with an irregular, branching, brownish
root. The leaves are all radical, long, runcinate, or deeply and sharply
toothed; the flower-stem is from six to twelve inches and upwards in
height, leafless, and produces at its top a large, yellow, solitary
blossom; the seeds are small, oblong, of a brownish color, and will keep
three years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Although the Dandelion will thrive in almost
any description of soil, it nevertheless produces much the largest, most
tender, and best-flavored leaves, as well as the greatest crop of root,
when grown in mellow, well-enriched ground. Before sowing, stir the
soil, either by the spade or plough, deeply and thoroughly; smooth off
the surface fine and even; and sow the seeds in drills half an inch
deep, and twelve or fifteen inches apart. If cultivated for spring
greens, or for blanching for salad, the seed must be sown in May or
June. In July, thin out the young plants to two or three inches apart;
cultivate during the season in the usual form of cultivating other
garden productions; and, in April and May of the ensuing spring, the
plants will be fit for the table.

For very early use, select a portion of the bed equal to the supply
required; and, in November, spread it rather thickly over with coarse
stable-manure. About the beginning of February, remove the litter, and
place boards or planks on four sides, of a square or parallelogram, in
the manner of a common hot-bed, providing for a due inclination towards
the south. Over these put frames of glass, as usually provided for
hot-beds; adding extra protection by covering with straw or other
material in intensely cold weather. Thus treated, the plants will be
ready for cutting two or three weeks earlier than those in the open
ground.

When grown for its roots, the ground must be prepared in the manner
before directed; and the seeds should be sown in October, in drills
fourteen or fifteen inches asunder. In June following, thin out the
young plants to two or three inches apart; keep the ground loose, and
free from weeds, during the summer; and, in October, the roots will have
attained their full size, and be ready for harvesting, which is usually
performed with a common subsoil plough. After being drawn, they are
washed entirely clean, sliced, and dried in the shade; when they are
ready for the market.

_Use._--The Dandelion resembles Endive, and affords one of the earliest,
as well as one of the best and most healthful, of spring greens. "The
French use it bleached, as a salad; and if large, and well bleached, it
is better than Endive, much more tender, and of finer flavor." The
roots, after being dried as before directed, constitute an article of
considerable commercial importance; being extensively employed as a
substitute for, or mixed in various proportions with, coffee.

It may be grown for greens at trifling cost; and a bed twelve or
fourteen feet square will afford a family an abundant supply.

Under cultivation, and even in its natural state, the leaves of
different plants vary in a marked degree from each other, not only in
size, and manner of growth, but also in form. Judicious and careful
cultivation would give a degree of permanency to these distinctions; and
varieties might undoubtedly be produced, well adapted for the various
purposes for which the plant is grown, whether for the roots, for
blanching, or for greens.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENDIVE.

Chicorium endivia.

Endive is a hardy annual, said to be a native of China and Japan. When
fully developed, it is from four to six feet in height. The leaves are
smooth, and lobed and cut upon the borders more or less deeply,
according to the variety; the flowers are usually of a blue color, and
rest closely in the axils of the leaves; the seeds are small, long,
angular, and of a grayish color; their germinative properties are
retained for ten years; nearly twenty-five thousand are contained in an
ounce.

_Soil._--All of the varieties thrive well in any good, mellow garden
soil. Where there is a choice of situations, select one in which the
plants will be the least exposed to the effects of drought and heat.

_Propagation._--The plants can be raised only from seed. This may be
sown where the plants are to remain; or it may be sown broadcast, or in
close drills in a nursery-bed for transplanting. If sown where the
plants are to remain, sow thinly in shallow drills a foot apart for the
smaller, curled varieties, and fifteen inches for the larger,
broad-leaved sorts. Thin out the plants to a foot asunder as soon as
they are large enough to handle, and keep the ground about them, as well
as between the rows, loose, and free from weeds, by repeated hoeings. If
required, the plants taken out in thinning may be reset in rows at the
same distances apart.

If sown in a nursery-bed, transplant when the young plants have eight or
ten leaves; setting them at the distances before directed. This should
be done at morning or evening; and the plants should afterwards be
watered and shaded for a few days, until they are well established.

The first sowing may be made as early in spring as the weather will
permit; and a sowing may be made a month or six weeks after, for a
succession: but as it is for use late in autumn, or during the winter
and spring, that Endive is most required, the later sowings are the most
important. These are usually made towards the end of July.

_Blanching._--Before using, the plants must be blanched; which is
performed in various ways. The common method is as follows: When the
root-leaves have nearly attained their full size, they are taken when
entirely dry, gathered together into a conical form, or point, at the
top, and tied together with matting, or any other soft, fibrous
material; by which means, the large, outer leaves are made to blanch the
more tender ones towards the heart of the plant.

After being tied in this manner, the plants are sometimes blanched by
earthing, as practised with Celery or Cardoons. This process is
recommended for dry and warm seasons: but in cold, wet weather, they are
liable to decay at the heart; and blanching-pots, or, in the absence of
these, common flower-pots, inverted over the plants, will be found a
safe and effectual means of rendering them white, crisp, and mild
flavored.

"Some practise setting two narrow boards along each side of the row;
bringing them together at the top in the form of a triangle, and
afterwards drawing earth over them to keep them steady. Some cover the
dwarfish sorts with half-decayed leaves, dry tanner's bark, sand,
coal-ashes, and even sawdust; but all of these methods are inferior to
the blanch-pot or the tying-up process."

_Time required for Blanching._--In summer weather, when vegetation is
active, the plants will blanch in ten days; but in cool weather, when
the plants have nearly attained their growth or are slowly developing,
three weeks will be required to perfect the operation.

_Harvesting, and Preservation during Winter._--"Before frost sets in,
they must be tied up in a conical form, as before directed; and all dead
or yellow leaves must be taken off. Then take them up with a ball of
soil to each, and put them into light earth in a cellar or some warm
building. Put only the roots into the earth. Do not suffer the plants to
touch each other; and pour a little water round the roots after they are
placed in the earth. If they are perfectly dry when tied up, they will
keep till spring."--_Corb._

_Seed._--Two or three vigorous plants, left unblanched, will yield
sufficient to supply a garden of ordinary size for years. Half an ounce
will sow a seed-bed of forty square feet.

_Use._--"The leaves are the parts used, and these only when blanched to
diminish their natural bitterness of taste. It is one of the best
autumn, winter, and spring salads."--_M'Int._

_Varieties._--The descriptions of many of the varieties have been
prepared from an interesting paper read before the London Horticultural
Society by Mr. Matthews, clerk of the society's garden.

The different sorts are divided into two classes,--the "Batavian" and
the "Curled-leaved."


BATAVIAN ENDIVES.

Under the Batavian Endives are included all the varieties with broad
leaves, generally rounded at the points, with the margin slightly ragged
or torn, but not curled. These are called, by the French, _Scarolles_.
As most of the sorts require more room than the Curled-leaved kinds, the
rows should be about fourteen inches apart, and the plants thinned out
from nine to twelve inches in the rows.


BROAD-LEAVED BATAVIAN ENDIVE.

Common Yellow Endive, of the Dutch.

Leaves yellowish-green, large, long and broad, thick and fleshy, the
edges slightly ragged: when fully grown, they are about ten inches
long, and an inch wide at the base; increasing regularly in width
towards the end, and measuring five or six inches in diameter at the
broadest part. The leaves of the centre of the plant are of the same
form, but shorter, and much paler. The plants form but little heart of
themselves; but the length of the outer leaves is such, that they tie up
well for blanching. In quality, as well as in appearance, it is inferior
to the Curled sorts; and its flavor is not so mild and agreeable as that
of some of the other kinds of Batavian endives.


CURLED BATAVIAN ENDIVE. _Thomp._

The leaves of this variety are neither so large nor so broad as those of
the Broad-leaved Batavian Endive: they grow flat on the ground, and are
curled at their edges. The whole appearance of the plant is very
different from the Common Broad-leaved; approaching the Curled endives,
in general character. The heart, which forms of itself, is small, and
lies close to the ground.

The plants require twelve or fourteen inches' space between the rows,
and eight or ten inches in the row.


LARGE BATAVIAN ENDIVE.

Scarolle grande, of the French.

This differs from the Small Batavian Endive in the size and shape of its
leaves, which are broader and more rounded: they are a little darker,
but yet pale. The inner ones are turned over like the small variety,
though not so regularly; but form a large, well-blanched heart, of good
flavor. This and the Small Batavian will blanch perfectly if a mat is
laid over them, and do not require to be tied up. Both the Small and the
Large sorts are considered hardier than the Curled varieties.


LETTUCE-LEAVED OR WHITE BATAVIAN ENDIVE.

Scarolle blonde. _Vil._

Leaves broad and large, obtuse, ragged at the edges, of a paler color
and thinner texture than either of the other Batavian sorts; the
exterior leaves are spreading, fourteen inches long, two inches wide at
the base, and, growing regularly broader to the end, measure six or
seven inches in diameter at the widest part; the central leaves are
short, and the head is less compact than that of the Common
Broad-leaved; the seeds are of a paler color than those of the Green
Curled Endive.

To blanch it, the leaves must be tied up; and it should be grown for
summer use, as it is comparatively tender, and will not endure severe
weather. It is best if used while young; for, when fully developed, the
leaves are not tender, and, if not well blanched, are liable to have a
slightly bitter taste.

Sow in May or June, in rows fifteen inches apart, and thin to a foot in
the rows; or transplant, giving the plants the same space.


SMALL BATAVIAN ENDIVE.

Scarolle courte, of the French.

Leaves whitish-green, broad, of moderate length, and slightly cut at the
edges. The inner leaves are numerous, and turn over like a hood at the
end; forming a larger head than any of the other kinds. It is one of the
best of the endives, and a valuable addition to our winter salads. It
blanches with little trouble; and is mild and sweet, without being
bitter.


CURLED ENDIVES.

Curled endives are those with narrow leaves, more or less divided, and
much curled. They are usually full in the heart. The French call them,
by way of distinction, _Chicorees_.


DUTCH GREEN CURLED ENDIVE.

This approaches the Large Green Curled Endive in appearance and growth;
but the divisions of the leaves are deeper, the outer leaves are
broader, not so much curled, and the inner ones more turned into the
heart: the outer leaves are about ten inches long. It blanches well, and
is hardy.


GREEN CURLED ENDIVE.

Small Green Curled Endive.

Leaves six or seven inches long, finely cut, and beautifully curled; the
outer leaves lying close to the ground, the inner ones thickly set,
forming a compact heart. Easily blanched, very hardy, and well adapted
for winter use. The leaves are longer, and of a darker-green color, than
those of the Green Curled Summer Endive, and will tie up much better for
blanching. It is a fortnight later.

Sow in rows a foot or fourteen inches apart, and thin to six or eight
inches in the row.

It may be quickly blanched by simply covering the plant with a deep
flower-pot saucer. In summer, while the plants are growing vigorously,
the process will be completed in about a week: later in the season,
two-weeks, or even more, may be necessary.


GREEN CURLED SUMMER ENDIVE.

Leaves not quite so large as those of the Green Curled; finely and
deeply cut: the outer ones are five or six inches long, and grow close
to the ground; the inner are short, numerous, curled, and form a close,
full heart. It is much the smallest of any of the kinds, and is somewhat
tender. The outer leaves are so short, that they will not tie up; but
blanch well by being covered simply with a flat garden-pan, as directed
for the Green Curled.

This variety is distinguished from the last named by its shorter,
broader, deeper cut, and less curled leaves: the head is more solid at
the centre, and is also much harder. The seeds should be sown early;
for, if sown late, the plants are liable to be affected by dampness and
wet weather, and to rot at the heart.

Cultivate in rows twelve or fourteen inches apart, and eight or ten
inches apart in the rows.


ITALIAN GREEN CURLED ENDIVE.

Leaves from ten to twelve inches long, deep-green, narrow, and divided
to the mid-rib. They grow erect, and the segments are much cut and
curled.

It is a well-marked variety; readily distinguished by the length of the
leaf-stalks, and the pinnatifid character of the leaves. It blanches
well, and is of good quality.


LARGE GREEN CURLED ENDIVE.

A sub-variety of the Common Green Curled, of stronger growth, and larger
hearted. The exterior leaves are ten or twelve inches long, looser and
more erect than those of the last named: the inner ones are less
numerous, and not so much divided.

It is hardy, blanches quickly, and is not liable to decay at the heart.


LONG ITALIAN GREEN CURLED.

Leaves long, deeply divided, and more upright in their growth than those
of the Large Green Curled; the divisions of the leaves are large, and
toothed, or cut, but are not curled; the heart-leaves are few and
short. The variety is quite distinct; and, though not so neat and
regular as some others, it is of excellent quality, and recommended for
cultivation.


PICPUS FINE CURLED ENDIVE. _Vil._

Exterior leaves seven or eight inches long, deeply lobed; the lobes
divided in the same manner as those of the Common Green Curled. The
inside leaves are finely cut, and much curled; and form a kind of head
more compact than that of the Green Curled, but comparatively
loose-hearted.

It blanches well and quickly, and is a good variety; though neither its
foliage nor its general habit presents any very distinctive
peculiarities.


RUFFEC CURLED.

Chicoree frisee de Ruffec. _Vil._

This variety attains a remarkable size, much exceeding that of the
Common Green Curled. The leaves sometimes measure nearly a foot and a
half in length. Quality tender and good.


STAGHORN ENDIVE.

Early Fine Curled Rouen. _Vil._

A recently introduced variety. The leaves are deep-green, divided into
numerous segments, not frilled or curled, but much cut or jagged at the
points, the borders having a branched appearance; whence the name. The
leaves gradually shorten towards the centre of the plant, are more
finely cut, and become closer together; thus forming a moderately firm
heart, or head; less compact, however, than that of the Green Curled
Summer Endive.

It is well adapted to humid climates, is hardier than the Common Green
Curled, and is preferred by market-gardeners for cultivation in autumn
and winter.


TRIPLE-CURLED MOSS ENDIVE. _M'int._

Winter Moss Endive. Chicoree mousse. _Vil._

This is a sub-variety of the Staghorn Endive, and comparatively of
recent introduction. It is a unique sort, exceedingly well curled; and,
when the variety is genuine and the plant well developed, has an
appearance not unlike a tuft of moss.

It is liable to degenerate; and, though sometimes classed as a Winter
Endive, is less hardy than many other sorts.

It may be grown in rows a foot apart, six inches being allowed between
the plants in the rows.


WHITE CURLED OR EVER-BLANCHED ENDIVE. _Vil._

Leaves pale yellowish-green, nearly white when young, ten inches long,
rather narrow, lobed, cut, and beautifully frilled, or curled, on the
borders; the upper surface of the mid-ribs generally tinged with red.
The leaves of the centre are not numerous, and much curled: resting upon
those of the exterior, they form no head, but leave the heart loose and
open.

It is distinguished from all others by its color; both the leaves and
the seeds being paler than those of any other sort. Its principal
recommendation is signified in the name; but it should be used while
young, cut and served in the form of lettuce. It is then tender and of
good quality; though the plants yield a small amount of salad, compared
with many other sorts. When fully grown, the leaves become tough, and
often bitter. As a variety for winter culture, it is of little value.

       *       *       *       *       *

HORSE-RADISH.

Cochlearia armoracia. Nasturtium armoracia.

Horse-radish is a hardy perennial, introduced from Europe, growing
naturally along old roads, and about gardens and waste places in long
settled towns. The root is white within and without, long, nearly
cylindrical, and from an inch to two inches and a half in diameter;
stalk two feet or more in height, smooth and branching; the radical
leaves are from fifteen to eighteen inches in length, oval-oblong, and
toothed on the margin,--those of the stalk narrow, pointed, smooth, and
shining; the flowers are white, and are put forth in June; the seed-pods
are globular, but are very rarely formed, the flowers being usually
abortive.

There is but one variety.

_Propagation and Culture._--"Propagation is always effected by planting
portions of the roots, which grow readily. The soil most conducive to it
is a deep, rich, light sand, or alluvial deposit, free from stones or
other obstructions; as, the longer, thicker, and straighter the roots
are, the more they are valued. There is scarcely another culinary
vegetable, of equal importance, in which cultivation is, in general, so
greatly neglected as in this. It is often found planted in some obscure
corner of the garden, where it may have existed for years; and is only
visited when needed for the proprietor's table. The operation of hastily
extracting a root or two is too often all that is thought of; and the
crop is left to fight its way amongst weeds and litter as best it
may."--_M'Int._

A simple method of cultivation is as follows: Trench the ground eighteen
inches or two feet deep, and set the crowns or leading buds of old
roots, cut off about three inches in length, in rows a foot apart, and
nine inches from each other in the rows; cover six inches deep, and
cultivate in the usual manner during the summer. The shoots will soon
make their appearance, and the large leaves of the plant completely
occupy the surface of the bed. After two seasons' growth, the roots will
be fit for use.

_Taking the Crop._--Its season of use is from October till May; and,
whenever the ground is open, the table may be supplied directly from the
garden.

For winter use, take up the requisite quantity of roots in November,
pack them in moist sand or earth, and store in the cellar, or in any
situation out of reach of frost.

_Use._--The root shredded or grated, with the addition of vinegar, is
used as a condiment with meats and fish. It has an agreeable, pungent
flavor; and, besides aiding digestion, possesses other important
healthful properties.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTUCE.

Lactuca sativa.

Lettuce is said to be of Asiatic origin. It is a hardy, annual plant,
and, when fully developed, from two to three feet in height, with an
erect, branching stem. The flowers are compound, yellow, usually about
half an inch in diameter; the seeds are oval, flattened, and either
white, brown, or black, according to the variety,--nearly thirty
thousand are contained in an ounce, and their vitality is retained five
years.

_Soil._--Lettuce succeeds best in rich and comparatively moist soil; and
is also best developed, and most crisp and tender, if grown in cool,
moist weather. A poor soil, and a hot, dry exposure, may produce a
small, tolerable lettuce early in spring, or late in autumn; but, if
sown in such situations during the summer months, it will soon run to
seed, and prove nearly, if not entirely, worthless for the table. The
richer the soil may be, and the higher its state of cultivation, the
larger and finer will be the heads produced; and the more rapidly the
plants are grown, the more tender and brittle will be their quality.

_Propagation._--It is always grown from seeds, which are small and
light; half an ounce being sufficient to sow a nursery-bed of nearly a
hundred square feet. It is necessary that the ground should be well
pulverized and made smooth before it is sown, and the seeds should not
be covered more than a fourth of an inch deep.

_Cultivation._--Some recommend sowing where the plants are to remain, in
drills from ten to fifteen inches apart, and thinning the plants to
nearly the same distance in the lines; adapting the spaces between the
drills, as well as between the plants in the drills, to the habit and
size of the variety in cultivation. Others recommend sowing in a small
nursery-bed, and transplanting. The process of transplanting
unquestionably lessens the liability of the plants to run to seed, and
produces the largest and finest heads. The first sowing in the open
ground may be made as soon in March or April as the frost leaves the
ground; and, if a continued supply is desired, a sowing should
afterwards be made, at intervals of about four weeks, until September.
"During spring, the young crops must be protected from frost, and in
summer from drought by copious manure-waterings and frequent stirring of
the ground between the plants. In the growing season, every stimulant
should be applied; for much of the excellence of the crop depends on the
quickness of its growth."

_Forcing._--Lettuce is now served at table the year round; not, of
course, of equal excellence at all seasons. Sowings are consequently
required for each month: those intended for the spring supply being made
from December to February; about twelve weeks being required for its
full development, when reared in the winter months. The seed is sown
rather thinly, broadcast, in a hot-bed; and, when the plants have made
two or three leaves, they are pricked out to three or four inches apart
in another portion of the bed,--thus affording them more space for
growth, and opportunity to acquire strength and hardiness. When two or
three inches high, they are finally transplanted into yet another part
of the bed, at distances corresponding with the size of the variety,
varying from ten to fourteen inches in each direction. As the plants
increase in size, the quantity of air should be increased; and water
should be given, whenever the surface of the bed becomes dry. In severe
cold or in cloudy weather, and almost always at night, straw matting
(made thick and heavy for the purpose), woollen carpeting, or a similar
substitute, should be extended over the glass, for the retention of
heat.

Some practise transplanting directly from the nursery-bed to where the
plants are to remain; but the finest Lettuce is generally obtained by
the treatment above described.

"Lettuces are sometimes required for cutting young, or when about two
inches high. These are termed, by the French, _Laitues a couper_. The
small, early sorts (such as the Hardy Hammersmith and Black-seeded
Gotte) are preferred for this purpose; but any sort that is green or
pale-green, and not brown or otherwise colored, will do. They should be
sown in the open ground about once a week, or every ten days, from
April, throughout the season. In winter, they are best raised on heat.
They should be sown rather thickly in drills six inches
apart."--_Thomp._

_To save Seed._--"This should be done from plants raised from early
sowings. The finest specimens should be selected; avoiding, however,
those that show a disposition to run quickly to seed. Those that heart
readily, and yet are slow to run up, are to be preferred. Care should be
taken that no two different varieties be allowed to seed near each
other, in order that the sorts may be kept true. The seed which ripens
first on the plant is the best: therefore it should be secured, rather
than wait for the general ripening. The branchlets which first ripen
their seed should be cut of-f, and laid on a cloth in the sun; or, when
the forward portion of the seed is as near maturity as will safely bear
without shaking of-f, the plants should be carefully pulled up, and
placed upright against a south wall, with a cloth under them to perfect
their ripening. The seed should in no case be depended on without trial.
Plants from seeds two years old heart more readily than those from
one-year-old seed."--_Thomp._

_Use._--"Lettuce is well known as one of the best of all salad plants.
It is eaten raw in French salads, with cream, oil, vinegar, salt, and
hard-boiled eggs. It is also eaten by many with sugar and vinegar; and
some prefer it with vinegar alone. It is excellent when stewed, and
forms an important ingredient in most vegetable soups. It is eaten at
almost all meals by the French; by the English after dinner, if not
served as adjuncts to dishes during the repast; and by many even at
supper. In lobster and chicken salads, it is indispensable; and some of
the varieties furnish a beautiful garnish for either fish, flesh, or
fowl.

"In a raw state, Lettuce is emollient, cooling, and in some degree
laxative and aperient, easy of digestion, but containing no
nourishment."

_Varieties._--These are exceedingly numerous. Some are of English
origin; many are French and German; but comparatively few are American.
The number of kinds grown to any considerable extent in this country is
quite limited. Cultivators generally select such as appear to be best
adapted to the soil and climate of their particular locality; and, by
judicious management, endeavor to give vigor and hardiness to the
plants, and to increase the size, compactness, and crispy quality of the
head. Some of the varieties have thus been brought to a remarkable
degree of perfection; the plants producing heads with as much certainty,
and nearly as well proportioned and solid, as those of the Common
Cabbage. They are generally divided into two classes; viz., Cabbage
lettuces and Cos lettuces.

_Cabbage Lettuces._--


BROWN DUTCH.

Black-seeded. _Vil._

Head of medium size, rather long and loose; the leaves, which coil or
roll back a little on the borders about the top of the head are
yellowish-green, washed or stained with brownish-red,--the surplus
leaves are large, round, waved, green, washed with bronze-red, and
coarsely, but not prominently, blistered; diameter twelve to fourteen
inches; weight about eight ounces.

This Lettuce cabbages readily, forms a good-sized head, is tender, of
good quality, hardy, and tolerably early. It does not, however, retain
its head well in dry and warm weather; and, as it is little affected by
cold, seems best adapted to winter or very early culture. It resembles
the Yellow-seeded Brown Dutch, but is not so early, and the head is
looser and larger.


BROWN SILESIAN OR MARSEILLES CABBAGE. _Vil._

Brown Batavian.

Head green, tinted with brown, remarkably large,--not compactly, but
regularly, formed; ribs and nerves of the leaves large and prominent;
the leaves disconnected with the head are large, bronze-green, coarsely
blistered, and frilled and curled on the margin. The diameter of a
well-grown plant is about eighteen inches, and its weight twenty-eight
ounces. The seeds are white.

This Lettuce, though somewhat hard, is brittle and mild flavored, but is
better when cooked than when served in its crude state as a salad. It is
a hardy, late sort; succeeds well in winter, and retains its head a long
period; but is rarely employed for forcing, on account of its
size,--one of the plants occupying, in a frame or hot-bed, the space of
two plants of average dimensions.


BROWN WINTER CABBAGE. _Vil._

Large Brown Winter.

Head of medium size, green, washed or stained with brownish-red,
regularly formed, and moderately compact; the exterior leaves are round
and short, much wrinkled, and coarsely blistered. When grown in winter
or in cool weather, the plants measure fourteen inches in diameter, and
weigh from fourteen to sixteen ounces. The seeds are white.

Hardy, and well adapted for winter culture. The heads are not so firm as
those of some varieties; but they are well retained, blanch white and
tender, and are of excellent flavor.


EARLY OR SUMMER CAPE.

Royal Cape.

Head roundish, usually well formed, and moderately close and firm; the
outer leaves are large, loose, golden-green, undulated, and coarsely
blistered; the interior leaves are more finely blistered, and nearly of
the same color as those of the outside; head, when divided, yellowish to
the centre; the plants, when fully grown, measure nearly a foot in
diameter, and weigh from six to ten ounces.

The variety is not well adapted for forcing or for early culture in the
open ground. As a summer Lettuce, it is one of the best; enduring the
heat well, and not running soon to seed. Though not so crisp and brittle
as some of the winter or spring grown varieties, it is comparatively
well flavored and of good quality. It is similar to the Summer or Royal
Cabbage.


EARLY SIMPSON.

Hative de Simpson. _Vil._

Head large, pale-green, a little irregular in its form, and only of
medium solidity; the outside leaves are large and broad, plaited, and
much blistered; diameter fourteen or fifteen inches; weight twelve or
fourteen ounces; seeds white.

This Lettuce is brittle, and of excellent flavor; but its head is not
compactly formed. Its season is near that of the Versailles Cabbage; but
it runs quicker to seed. It is said to be an American variety, and is
much grown in the vicinity of New York City for marketing.


EARLY WHITE SPRING OR BLACK-SEEDED GOTTE. _Trans._

A small spring Cabbage Lettuce, growing close to the ground. Its heart
is hard and firm, and measures about four inches in diameter when
stripped of its outer leaves; color pale-green; the leaves are thin,
nearly round, rugose, and waved on the margin.

This Lettuce comes early into use, and, besides, is of excellent flavor;
but its chief merit is, that it remains longer than almost any other
sort before running to seed, and even sometimes bursts before the
flower-stem is formed. It is one of the smallest of the Cabbage
lettuces, and somewhat resembles the Tennis-ball; from which, however,
it differs in the leaves being more curled and of a lighter-green color,
and by not running to seed so soon by three weeks or a month.

The variety has black seeds; and this fact should be particularly
attended to in obtaining it from seedsmen, as the White-seeded Gotte
lettuces run much sooner to flower. Various other Gotte lettuces are
described by authors. "All are of great merit, but are little cultivated
in the United States. Where small, hard, compact, and delicate sorts are
required, this class should be selected."


ENDIVE-LEAVED. _Vil._

Laitue chicoree.

This variety forms no head. The leaves are finely frilled and curled,
and spread regularly from a common centre in the form of a rosette. A
well-developed plant resembles Curled Endive. It appears to be nearly
identical with the Green Curled Lettuce.

The seeds are black, and smaller than those of any other variety.


ENGLISH ENDIVE-LIKE CURLED-LEAVED. _Vil._

Like the Common Green Curled Lettuce, this variety forms no head. The
plant has the form of a rosette, and the foliage a silvery-gray
appearance. The leaves are short, undulated on the border, but not
frilled and curled like the Common variety; nerves purplish; the heart
of the plant is large and full; seeds black.

This Lettuce is hardy, tender, and well flavored, and equal, if not
superior, to the Common Green Curled, both in respect to quality and its
adaptation to winter culture.


GREEN CURLED.

Curled. Endive-leaved. Boston Curled.

The Green Curled strongly resembles, if it is not identical with, the
Endive-leaved. When well grown, the plant measures about ten inches in
diameter, and is one of the most beautiful of all the lettuces. The
exterior leaves are finely frilled and curled, and of a rich,
golden-green color; the central leaves are smaller, but frilled and
curled like those of the exterior. When in perfection, the plants have
the form of a rosette, and make an excellent garnish. The seeds are
white.

It is hardy, well adapted for forcing, and is extensively grown in the
vicinity of Boston, Mass., for early marketing. As respects its value
for the table, it cannot be considered equal to many of the Cabbage
varieties, as it is deficient in crispness, and tenderness of
texture,--qualities essential in all salad plants. Its recommendations
are its hardiness, its adaptation to early culture and forcing, and
particularly its beautiful appearance.

Market-gardeners and cultivators make three sub-varieties, which are
known as "Single-curled," "Double-curled," and "Triple-curled;" the
difference consisting in the finer frilling, or curling, of the last
named. A well-grown plant resembles some varieties of Endive; whence the
term "Endive-leaved."


GREEN WINTER CABBAGE.

Hardy Winter Cabbage. Morine. _Vil._

Head pale-green, of medium size, round and regular, firm and solid;
leaves of the head much wrinkled, and coarsely blistered; the outside
leaves are broad and large, glossy-green, wrinkled and blistered like
those composing the head. Winter-grown plants will measure in their full
diameter about twelve inches, and weigh from fourteen to sixteen ounces.
Seeds white.

The Green Winter Cabbage Lettuce is tender, and of excellent flavor,
particularly if cultivated in cool weather. It is hardy, forms its head
promptly and uniformly, is slow in the development of its flowers, and
must be classed as one of the best of the hardy, winter varieties.


HAMMERSMITH HARDY. _M'Int._

Hardy Green Hammersmith. Early Frame. Early Dwarf Dutch. Green Dutch.

A popular, old variety, with a comparatively small, dark-green head. The
leaves are much wrinkled, concave, thick, and fleshy; the seeds are
white. It is considered the hardiest sort in cultivation, and is one of
the best for growing in winter or for forcing. When raised in spring,
late in autumn, or in cool, moist weather, the plants attain a diameter
of nearly ten inches, and weigh from six to eight ounces; but
summer-grown specimens are much smaller, rarely measuring more than six
or seven inches in diameter, or weighing above three or four ounces. In
warm, dry weather, it soon runs to seed.


ICE CABBAGE. _Trans._

This variety belongs to the division of the Silesian or Batavian
lettuces, and must not be confounded with the White Cos. The leaves are
of a light shining green, blistered on the surface, much undulated, and
slightly jagged on the edges, nearly erect, eight inches long, and five
or six inches broad; the outer leaves spread a little at the top, but
grow close at the heart. It blanches without tying up, and becomes
white, crisp, and tender.

The Ice Cabbage Lettuce comes into use with the White Silesian, from
which it differs, as it also does from any other of its class, in being
much more curled, having a lucid, sparkling surface (whence probably its
name), and not turning in so much at the heart. It lasts as long in crop
as the White Silesian.


IMPERIAL HEAD.

Turkey Cabbage. Union.

A large and excellent variety, but inferior to the Versailles or the Ice
Cabbage. Head large, regular, a little oblong, of a dull, pale-green
color, and not compactly formed; the outside leaves are large, rounded,
undulated or waved on the borders, thin in texture, and of a soiled or
tarnished light-green color; diameter fourteen inches; weight twelve to
fifteen ounces; seeds white.

This is a crisp and tender lettuce, though sometimes slightly bitter. It
is not early, and soon shoots up to seed; but is quite hardy, and well
adapted for winter cultivation.

The Imperial Head, or Imperial Cabbage Lettuce, with white seeds, was at
one period more generally cultivated in small gardens than any other
variety; and though some of the recently introduced sorts excel it, not
only in size, but in tender consistency and flavor, the Imperial is
still extensively cultivated and much esteemed.

With the exception of the color of its seeds, it resembles the Turkey
Cabbage.


INDIA.

Large India.

Head large, moderately compact; leaves large, with coarse and hard
mid-ribs and veins. Its recommendation is its remarkable adaptedness to
summer culture; as it withstands heat and drought, and retains its head
to a remarkable degree before running to seed. For the table, it is
inferior to many other sorts; although the large ribs and veins of the
leaves are comparatively brittle, and of tender texture.


LARGE BROWN CABBAGE OR MOGUL.

Grosse brune paresseuse. _Vil._ Large Gray Cabbage. Mammoth.

Head remarkably large, round, regularly formed, grayish-green, tinted or
washed with reddish-brown at the top: the leaves not composing the head
are large, plaited, coarsely blistered, of a grayish-green color,
stained here and there with spots of pale-brown. The diameter of a
well-grown plant is about fourteen inches, and its weight nearly a
pound; seeds black.

The Large Brown Cabbage Lettuce is crisp and tender, but is sometimes
slightly bitter. Its season is near that of the Versailles; but it is
slower in forming its head, and sooner runs to flower. It is hardy,
good for forcing and well adapted for cultivation during winter. In
summer, the heads are comparatively small, and loosely formed.


LARGE RED CABBAGE.

Rouge charteuse. _Vil._

Head green, washed with red, of medium size, regularly but loosely
formed; the exterior leaves are large, undulated, blistered, and stained
with brownish-red, like those of the head; diameter thirteen or fourteen
inches; weight twelve ounces; seeds black.

Its season is near that of the Large Brown Cabbage. When grown in warm
weather, the head is small, and the plant soon runs to seed: in winter,
the head is much larger, more solid, and longer retained. It resembles
the Brown Dutch, but differs in the deeper color of the leaves.


LARGE WINTER CABBAGE OR MADEIRA.

Laitue passion. _Vil._

Head of medium size, regular in form, not compact, green, washed with
red at the top: the leaves not composing the head are broad and large, a
little undulated or waved on the border, plaited or folded at the base,
thin in texture, somewhat blistered, and stained with spots of clear
brown. When grown in winter, or in cool, moist weather, the plants will
measure about a foot in diameter, and weigh nearly a pound. Seeds white.

It is quite brittle, though not remarkable for tenderness of texture;
hardy; succeeds well when grown in cold weather; and remains long in
head before shooting up to seed. Season, the same with that of the Green
Winter Cabbage.


MALTA OR ICE CABBAGE.

Ice Cos. Drumhead. White Cabbage. De Malte. _Vil._

In its general character, this variety resembles the White Silesian. The
head is remarkably large, somewhat flattened, compact, pale-green
without, and white at the centre; the outer leaves are large and broad,
glossy-green, and coarsely blistered; the mid-ribs and nerves are large
and prominent. The extreme diameter of a full-grown plant is about
sixteen inches, and the weight from twenty to twenty-four ounces. The
seeds are white.

The variety heads readily, blanches naturally, and is crisp, tender, and
well flavored. It is hardy, but not early; and remains long in head
without running to seed.

It is extensively cultivated in England; and in some localities succeeds
better, and is of finer quality, than the White Silesian or Marseilles
Cabbage. The name is derived from the glazed or polished surface of the
leaves.


NEAPOLITAN.

Naples Cabbage.

Plant dwarfish; head of large size, round, regularly formed,
solid,--when in perfection, resembling a well-developed cabbage; the
exterior leaves are broad and large, green, frilled on the margin, and
coarsely blistered. If well grown, the plants will measure sixteen
inches in diameter, and weigh from twenty to twenty-four ounces. Seeds
white.

The Neapolitan Lettuce blanches naturally, is well flavored, and so slow
in the development of its flower-stalk, that the heads are sometimes
artificially divided at the top to facilitate its growth, and to secure
the seeds, a supply of which is always obtained with difficulty; as,
aside from the tardiness of the plant in flowering, the yield is never
abundant.

It is not so good for forcing as many others, and must be classed as a
summer rather than as a winter variety.


PALATINE. _Vil._

Brown Cabbage.

A variety of medium size, with a round, somewhat depressed head, stained
with red about the top. The foliage is yellowish-green, strongly marked
or clouded with brownish-red. Extreme diameter of the plant ten or
eleven inches; weight about twelve ounces. The seeds are black.

It is remarkably crisp and tender; of excellent flavor; yields a large
quantity of salad in proportion to its size; flourishes well at all
seasons, even during winter; and must be classed as one of the best, and
recommended for general cultivation.


SPOTTED CABBAGE (BLACK-SEEDED).

Sanguine a graine noire. _Vil._

The heads of this variety are of medium size, round and regular in their
form, and comparatively solid; the sides are brownish-red, but at the
crowns the color is changed to clear, bright-red; the outer leaves are
short, broad, and round, and strongly marked or clouded with
brownish-red, like those composing the head. If grown in winter or in
cool weather, the plants attain a diameter of about twelve inches, and
will weigh twelve ounces.

It retains its head longer than almost any other variety; and, though
sometimes slightly bitter, is considered superior to the White-seeded.
Compared with the last-named, the head is not so well formed, the
foliage is deeper colored, and it is not so well adapted for forcing or
for cultivation during winter.


SPOTTED CABBAGE (WHITE-SEEDED).

Sanguine a graine blanche. _Vil._

Head yellowish-green, spotted and clouded with brownish-red, of medium
size, round and regular. The surplus leaves are small and numerous,
round, prominently blistered, copper-green, streaked and variegated
with brownish-red. Summer-grown plants will measure ten inches in
diameter, and weigh about eight ounces. Winter-grown plants, or those
grown in cool and moist weather, will give an increase of the diameter,
and weigh nearly a pound.

It is a brittle, well-flavored lettuce, hardy, and well adapted for
growing in frames during winter. When grown in the summer months, the
head is seldom well formed, and the plants soon run to seed.


STONE TENNIS-BALL.

Gotte lente a monter. _Vil._

Plant quite small, with a uniformly green, regular, solid head; all of
the leaves to the heart being strongly wrinkled and coarsely blistered.
The exterior leaves are comparatively few and small, green, undulated,
and prominently blistered. Summer-grown plants measure six or seven
inches in diameter, and weigh about three ounces. When grown early or
late in the season, or under the influence of cool and moist weather,
the plants attain a larger size; often measuring nine or ten inches in
diameter, and weighing eight ounces. The seeds are black.

The Stone Tennis-ball hearts well, is of excellent quality, and, in
proportion to its size, yields a large quantity of salad. It retains its
head a long period, even in warm weather, without shooting up to seed;
and, as most of the leaves of the plant are embraced in the head, it
occupies but a small space of ground in cultivation. Hardy and early.


SUMMER CABBAGE.

Large White Cabbage. Royal Cabbage. Summer Blond. _Vil._ Sugar Cabbage.

Foliage pale yellowish-green; head of medium size, round, somewhat
flattened, firm and close; the leaves composing it are wrinkled and
blistered,--those of the outside being frequently torn and broken on the
margins about the crown. The entire diameter of a well-grown plant is
about twelve inches, and the weight from ten to twelve ounces. The seeds
are white.

It is one of the best sorts for summer cultivation, as it not only forms
its head readily in warm and dry weather, but remains long in head
before running to flower. For forcing, or for sowing early in the
season, some other varieties would succeed better. Though sometimes
slightly bitter, it is crisp, tender in texture, appears to be adapted
to our climate, and is recommended for cultivation.


TENNIS-BALL.

Green Ball. Button. Capuchin. Hardy Hammersmith. _Vil._

One of the oldest and most esteemed of the Cabbage lettuces. The head is
below medium size, dark-green, remarkably solid if grown in cool
weather, but often loose and open-hearted if cultivated during the
summer months; the surplus leaves are few in number, deep-green,
slightly curled, and broadly, but not prominently, blistered; the seeds
of the genuine variety are black.

The Tennis-ball Lettuce is remarkable for its extreme hardiness.
Winter-grown plants, or those raised in cool, moist weather, will
measure about ten inches in diameter, and weigh eight ounces; whilst
those raised under opposite conditions rarely exceed seven or eight
inches in diameter, or weigh more than four or five ounces.

It is slow in running to seed, and the head blanches white and tender.
"It requires little room in frames in winter, and yields a great return
in spring, as almost the whole plant is eatable." A large Cabbage
Lettuce, tinted with brown about the head, is erroneously known in some
localities as the "Tennis-ball."


TURKEY CABBAGE.

Similar to the Imperial Head; the principal if not the only difference
consisting in the color of the seeds, which are black.


VERSAILLES. _Vil._

Swedish. Blond Versailles. Sugar-lettuce.

Head pale yellowish-green, large, long, and compactly formed; the
exterior leaves are large, numerous, wrinkled, and coarsely blistered.
When in its greatest perfection, the extreme diameter of the whole plant
is about fourteen inches, and its weight twelve or fourteen ounces. The
seeds are white.

This variety forms its head quickly and uniformly; cabbages white and
crisp; is slow in shooting up to seed; flourishes in almost every
description of soil, and at all seasons, except, perhaps, in extreme
cold; and, though sometimes slightly bitter to the taste, is crisp,
tender, and of good quality.

With the exception of its paler color, it resembles the Neapolitan. It
is one of the best of all varieties for summer cultivation.


VICTORIA OR RED-BORDERED. _Vil._

An excellent early and hardy variety. The head is of medium size, tinted
or washed with red at the top, round and regular in form, and
comparatively solid; leaves large, yellowish-green, wrinkled, and
blistered. If grown in summer, the plants measure eight or nine inches
in diameter, and weigh four ounces. In cool weather, the plants attain a
diameter of twelve inches, and weigh from ten to twelve ounces; seeds
white.

The Victoria Lettuce is larger than the Tennis-ball, heads freely, and
is crisp and well flavored. When sown in summer, it soon runs to flower;
but, in cool weather, the heads are well retained.


WHITE GOTTE (BLACK-SEEDED). _Vil._

A small, low-growing, yellowish-green Cabbage Lettuce, with a
comparatively loose head. The plants rarely measure more than six inches
in their full diameter, or weigh above four ounces.

It is one of the earliest of all the lettuces, crisp, of good flavor,
and well adapted for forcing or for frame culture. Besides the
distinction in the color of the seeds, it differs from the White-seeded
White Gotte in its smaller and more loosely formed heads.


WHITE GOTTE (WHITE-SEEDED). _Vil._

White Tennis-ball.

This variety has a small, long, firm, and close head; and is uniformly
of a yellowish-green color. The outer leaves are small, light
greenish-yellow, waved on the borders, and prominently blistered. The
plant is of small dimensions; rarely measuring more than six or seven
inches in diameter, or weighing above three ounces. The variety is
early, crisp, and well flavored, but soon runs to seed, and is much
better adapted for growing in winter, or for forcing, than for
cultivation in the summer months.


WHITE SILESIAN, OR WHITE BATAVIAN. _Vil._

Drumhead Cabbage. Large Drumhead. Spanish.

One of the largest of the Cabbage lettuces. Head golden-green, tinted
with brownish-red about the top, regularly but not compactly formed. The
outer leaves are large and broad, yellowish-green, bordered with brown,
wrinkled, and coarsely blistered. When well grown, the entire diameter
of the plant is about eighteen inches, and its weight twenty ounces. The
seeds are white.

This variety appears to be adapted to all seasons. It is hardy, retains
its head well, withstands heat and drought, blanches white and crisp,
and is of excellent flavor. It succeeds well in frames; but, on account
of its large size, is not a profitable sort for forcing.

A variety, known as the "Tennis-ball" in some localities, is very
similar to this; and the "Boston Cabbage" of New England, if not
identical, seems to be but an improved form of the White Silesian.


WHITE STONE CABBAGE.

Large Golden Summer Cabbage.

Head of medium size, yellowish-green, stained with brownish-red, firm
and solid. When fully developed, the entire diameter of the plant is
about fourteen inches, and its weight sixteen ounces. The seeds are
white.

This lettuce is brittle, of tender texture and good quality, though it
is sometimes slightly bitter. It is hardy, heads readily, is slow in
running to flower, succeeds well in warm and dry weather, and is also
well adapted for frame-culture or for forcing.


YELLOW-SEEDED BROWN DUTCH. _Vil._

White Dutch. American Brown Dutch.

Head of medium size, yellowish-green, variegated with red, rounded at
the top, and tapering to a point at the base; compact; seeds yellow.

A half-early sort, of good quality, hardy, and well adapted for winter
culture, or for sowing early in spring. It somewhat resembles the
Black-seeded Brown Dutch: but, apart from the difference in the color of
the seeds, its foliage is more blistered, and more colored with red; and
the plant produces numerous sprouts, or shoots, about the base of the
head.

       *       *       *       *       *

COS LETTUCES.

These are quite distinct from the Cabbage lettuces before described. The
heads are long, erect, largest at the top, and taper towards the
root,--the exterior leaves clasping or coving over and around the head
in the manner of a hood, or cowl. As a class, they are remarkable for
hardiness and vigor; but the midribs and nerves of the leaves are
comparatively coarse and hard, and most of the kinds will be found
inferior to the Cabbage lettuces in crispness and flavor. They are ill
adapted for cultivation in dry and hot weather; and attain their
greatest perfection only when grown in spring or autumn, or in cool and
humid seasons.

_Varieties._--


ALPHANGE OR FLORENCE COS (BLACK-SEEDED). _Vil._

In the form of the head, and in its general character, this variety
resembles the White-seeded. Both of the sorts are remarkable for size,
for hardiness and healthy habit, for the length of time they remain in
head before running to seed, and for the brittle and tender character of
the ribs and nerves of the leaves.

Besides the difference in the color of the seeds, the head of this
variety is smaller, and the foliage paler, than that of the
White-seeded.


ALPHANGE OR FLORENCE COS (WHITE-SEEDED). _Vil._

Magnum Bonum Cos.

Head large, long, not compact, and forming well only when the exterior
leaves are tied loosely together. The midribs and nerves of the leaves
are large, but brittle, and of tender texture.

It is ten or twelve days later than the Green Paris Cos, retains its
head well, is hardy and of healthy habit, but is deficient in flavor,
and inferior to either of the Paris sorts.


ARTICHOKE-LEAVED. _Vil._

This variety forms no head; and, in its foliage and general habit, is
quite distinct from all of the Cos varieties. The leaves are numerous,
twelve or fourteen inches long; of a lively-green color, often stained
with brownish-red; erect, narrow, pointed, and toothed on the margin,
like those of the Artichoke. Before blanching, the leaves are slightly
bitter; but mild, crisp, and tender, with no savor of bitterness, after
being blanched. The seeds are black.

The plant grows uprightly, groups its leaves together, and thus blanches
the interior parts spontaneously; but a much larger portion will be fit
for use, if the leaves are collected, and tied loosely about the tips in
the manner of treating Cos lettuces.

It is remarkably hardy, slow in running to flower, and the seeds may be
sown till August. Late in the season, it is mild and pleasant, and
furnishes a tender salad when most of the Cos lettuces become bitter and
strong-flavored.


BATH GREEN COS. _M'Int._

This variety has much merit as a hardy, winter, green sort; and is
nearly related to the Brown Cos, but is less brown on the outer leaves:
but, while that has white seeds, the seeds of this variety are black.
Hence there are found, upon the catalogues of seedsmen, Black-seeded
Bath, or Brown Cos; and White-seeded Bath, or Brown Cos; the latter
seeming to be the hardiest, while the former appears to be the best.


BROWN COS.

Bath Cos. Sutton's Berkshire Brown Cos. Wood's Improved Bath Cos.
Bearfield Cos. White-seeded Brown Cos.

This is one of the oldest of the Cos lettuces, and considered the
hardiest of the class. The head is of large size, pointed, not compact,
and requires to be tied in order to obtain it in its greatest
perfection; the leaves are of a copper-green color, stiff and firm,
toothed and blistered; the seeds are white.

The Brown Cos blanches white and tender, and is exceedingly crisp and
well flavored; but the dark-brownish color of the exterior leaves is
deemed an objection, and it is often displaced by really inferior
varieties. In weight and measurement, it differs little from the Green
Paris Cos. Extensively cultivated and much esteemed in England.


GRAY PARIS COS. _Vil._

Head of the form of an inverted cone; green, with a grayish tone about
the top; compact, and forming well without tying. The exterior leaves
are numerous, deep-green, erect, firm, and prominently blistered. The
full diameter of the plant is nearly twelve inches, and its weight about
twenty ounces; the seeds are white.

The Gray Paris Cos is brittle, and of tender texture; but is considered
inferior to the other Paris Cos sorts, and is but little cultivated.


GREEN PARIS COS. _Vil._

Kensington Cos. Sutton's Superb Green Cos. Wellington. Ady's Fine Large.

Head inversely conical, compact; leaves deep-green, erect, firm, hooded
or cowl-formed towards the ends, and serrated on the margin; the ribs
and nerves are large and prominent. When fully grown, the entire
diameter of the plant is fifteen or sixteen inches, and its weight
twenty-four ounces; the seeds are white.

It is considered one of the best of the Cos lettuces; and, though not so
hardy as the Brown Cos, is a good variety for forcing, and furnishes a
tender, well-flavored head during summer. Whether for spring, summer, or
autumn, it is an excellent sort. It attains a large size, is of a fine
green color, and, "from the manner in which the outer leaves cove over
the interior ones, blanches well without having to be tied together."

It has a tender, brittle leaf; is some days earlier than the White
Paris; and is the principal variety employed by the market-gardeners of
Paris for cultivating under glass.


GREEN WINTER COS. _Vil._

Head elongated, somewhat of the form of the preceding variety;
deep-green, and not forming well, unless the exterior leaves are tied
together at the tips; the outer leaves are large, erect, concave,
toothed on the margin, and prominently blistered; the seeds are black.

It blanches well; but the ribs and nerves of the leaves are
comparatively coarse and hard. Well adapted to winter culture; but, as a
summer lettuce, of little value.


MONSTROUS BROWN COS. _Vil._

Two-headed.

Head of remarkable size, long, loose, and open; leaves large, equalling
in size those of the Alphange or Florence Cos; green, washed with brown;
pointed; seeds white.

The plant sends out numerous side-shoots, or suckers; and sometimes
produces several distinct heads: these, however, are generally loosely
formed, and not of the fine, tender quality of the Paris varieties.


OAK-LEAVED COS.

Romaine a Feuille de Chene. _Vil._

The Oak-leaved Lettuce produces no head, but forms a loose and open
heart at the centre of the plant. The leaves are numerous, bronze-green,
and deeply cut, or lobed, on the margin, in the form of the leaves of
some species of the oak; the seeds are black.

The plants put forth fresh sprouts after having been cut; but the
quality is inferior, and the variety is rarely cultivated.


RED WINTER COS.

Foliage deep-brown, smooth, and glossy,--gathered at the centre of the
plant into a loose heart, rather than head; seeds black.

The hardiness of this lettuce is its principal merit. It is little
affected by severe weather; and, as a sort for winter culture, is
desirable. When grown in summer, it is of poor quality.


SPOTTED COS (BLACK-SEEDED).

Red-spotted. Bloody. Aleppo. Panachee a Graine noire. _Vil._

This variety is similar to the White-seeded, and, like it, forms no
head: the leaves are green, much stained or clouded with brownish-red,
erect, firm, rounded at the ends, concave or spoon-shaped, and grouped
at the centre into a long and comparatively close heart.

It is crisp and well flavored, but attains its greatest perfection only
when the outer leaves are tied loosely together about the top of the
plant.


SPOTTED COS (WHITE-SEEDED). _Vil._

Like the preceding, this variety forms no head; but the interior leaves
are formed into an erect, oblong, close heart, which, by tying the
exterior leaves together, becomes white, crisp, and of excellent flavor.

Though late, it is hardy, remains long in head before running to seed,
and is well worthy of cultivation.


WAITE'S WHITE COS. _M'Int._

An excellent variety, apparently intermediate between the Green Paris
and White Paris; not of quite so deep a green as the former, yet deeper
than the latter. With regard to its comparative excellence, it is
considered fully equal to the Paris Cos varieties; as it is grown as
easily, and is equally crisp and tender. Size and weight nearly the
same.


WHITE BRUNOY COS (BLACK-SEEDED). _Vil._

Leaves of large size, yellowish-green, pointed, slightly undulated,
entire on the borders, and often revoluted like those of the
White-seeded. It rarely produces a head; or, if so, it is loose and
open. Its greatest perfection is obtained by collecting the exterior
leaves about the top of the plant, and tying them loosely together.

The variety is not considered superior to the White-seeded, though both
of the sorts are inferior to the Paris Cos or Florence sorts.


WHITE BRUNOY COS (WHITE-SEEDED). _Vil._

The heads of this variety are long and loose, and rarely form well
unless the exterior leaves are tied loosely together. It somewhat
resembles the Alphange in the form and character of its foliage, though
the head is longer and larger.

The plant attains a remarkable size, is hardy, and of good quality; but
soon runs to seed, and appears to be a winter rather than a summer
lettuce.


WHITE PARIS COS. _Vil._ _M'Int._

London White Cos. Sutton's Superb White Cos.

The head of this variety has the form of the Green Paris, and blanches
well without tying; the outside leaves are erect, yellowish-green, and
rather numerous. The extreme diameter of the entire plant, when well
grown, is about fourteen inches, and its weight nearly twenty-four
ounces. The seeds are white.

This is the sort most generally grown by the London market-gardeners,
millions of it being produced annually within a few miles of London
alone; and it has been adopted almost exclusively, by the gardeners of
Paris, for cultivation in the open air. Next to the Green Paris Cos,
this is the best, the largest, and the longest in running to seed, of
all the summer lettuces. It is tender, brittle, and mild flavored, less
hardy and a few days later than the Green Paris Cos.


ENDIVE-LEAVED LETTUCE. _Trans._

Lactuca intybacea.

The leaves of this species have the form of those of some of the
varieties of Endive; whence the name. They are small, pale-green, broad
towards the ends, cut and irregularly lobed on the borders. While young,
the plants have the appearance of Green Curled Endive.

As it runs to flower much earlier than the Spinach Lettuce, it is less
esteemed than that variety. The seeds should be sown thickly, in shallow
drills ten or twelve inches apart; and the plants should be cut for use
when they are three or four inches high.


PERENNIAL LETTUCE. _Vil._

Lactuca perennis.

This species is a native of Europe; and, in habit and duration, is
distinct from all others. The leaves are about ten inches long, of a
glaucous or sea green color, thick and fleshy, deeply cut or divided on
the margin, and spread regularly from the centre of the plant in the
form of a rosette. When fully developed, the plant is two feet and a
half high; separating into numerous branches, which terminate in large
purple flowers.

The seeds, which are of a brownish-black color, are sown in drills
fifteen inches apart; and the plants should be thinned to six inches
apart in the drills.

The leaves are eaten as salad; but, when so used, they should be
blanched, either by earthing up or by tying the plant together. They are
also sometimes eaten boiled as Spinach or Endive.


SPINACH LETTUCE. _Trans._

Oak-leaved Lettuce. Lactuca quercina.

The leaves of this species are six inches long, pale yellowish-green,
lyrate, with obtuse and entire divisions: when fully developed, they
somewhat resemble those of the oak, as implied by the name. The plants
form no heart, or head; and are never cultivated singly like the Cabbage
or Cos lettuces. The leaves are produced in moderate abundance, and are
crisp and well flavored.

The seeds should be sown, like those of the Endive-leaved, thickly, in
drills; and, when the lower leaves are four or five inches long, they
may be cut for use. If not taken off too closely, the plants will afford
a second cutting. The seeds are sown early with other spring salads.

       *       *       *       *       *

MADRAS RADISH.

Raphanus sp.

The roots of the Madras Radish are sometimes eaten while they are quite
young and small; but they soon become fibrous, strong flavored, and
unfit for use. The plant is generally cultivated for its pods, which
sometimes measure ten or twelve inches in length: these are solid,
crisp, and tender, and, while young, are used for pickling and for
salad; being much superior for these purposes to those of the Common
Radish.

When cultivated for its pods, the seeds should be sown in drills two
feet apart, and the plants thinned to nine inches in the drills.

       *       *       *       *       *

MALLOW, CURLED-LEAVED.

Malva crispa.

An annual plant, introduced from Europe, and occasionally found growing
spontaneously in the vicinity of gardens where it has been once
cultivated. The stem is frequently more than six feet in height; the
leaves are nearly five inches in diameter, smooth, and of a rich green
color, lobed, and beautifully frilled or curled on the borders; flowers
axillary, white, and small; the seeds are somewhat kidney-shaped, of a
yellowish-brown color, and retain their powers of germination five
years.

_Cultivation._--The seeds are sown the last of April or beginning of
May, and covered about an inch deep. The plants require much space, and
should be grown at least eighteen inches asunder. The best method is to
drop a few seeds where the plants are to grow; or to rake in a few seeds
sown broadcast, and transplant.

_Use._--No part of the plant is considered suitable for food; but the
elegantly curled leaves are employed for garnishing desserts.

       *       *       *       *       *

MUSTARD.


BLACK MUSTARD.

Brown Mustard. Red Mustard. Sinapis nigra.

Black Mustard is a hardy, annual plant, introduced from Europe. In some
localities, it grows naturally in great abundance; and is regarded as a
troublesome weed, though its seeds furnish the common table mustard. Its
stem is four or five feet in height, round, smooth, and branching; the
leaves are lobed and toothed on the margin,--the radical or lower ones
rough, those of the upper portion of the stalk smooth; the flowers are
numerous, rather large, bright-yellow; the pods are erect, somewhat
four-sided, and are set closely against the sides of the stalk; the
seeds are small, round, brownish-black, and retain their germinative
powers many years; nearly eighteen thousand are contained in an ounce.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--It is raised from seeds, about four
quarts of which will be required for sowing an acre. It is sometimes
grown in the vegetable garden, but is generally cultivated in fields for
its seeds, which, as before remarked, furnish the common table mustard.
The sowing is usually made from the middle of April to the middle of
May. After making the surface of the ground fine and smooth, sow
broadcast, or thinly in shallow drills fourteen or fifteen inches apart;
cultivate during the season in the usual manner; and, in August, the
crop will be ready for harvesting. Cut the stalks at the ground before
the pods shed their seeds; and spread in a dry, light, and airy
situation, till they are sufficiently dried for threshing.

When grown for salad in the vegetable garden, it should be sown, and cut
for use, as directed for White Mustard.

"If the seed is covered to the depth of three inches or more, it will
lie dormant, and retain its powers of vegetation for ages: from which
circumstance, together with the liability of the seed to become shaken
out in the harvesting of the crop, such lands as are once employed for
the growing of Mustard cannot be fairly cleaned of it for a considerable
length of time, and only by judicious fallowing or fallow-cropping, with
repeated hoeing and weeding."--_Law._

_Use._--Besides the use of the flour of the seeds as a condiment, the
seed-leaves are used as salad, in the manner of those of the White
species; and the young plants, cut to the ground, are used as spring
greens, either boiled alone, or mixed with Spinach.


CHINESE OR PEKIN MUSTARD. _Vil._

Sinapis Pekinensis.

A hardy annual, introduced from China. Stem four feet high, with
remarkably large leaves; the flowers, which are produced in loose,
terminal spikes, are yellow and showy; the seeds are small, and retain
their vitality five years.

_Cultivation._--The seeds are sown in April or May, in shallow drills
ten or twelve inches apart. If cultivated for its seeds, the drills
should be eighteen inches or two feet apart, and the plants thinned to
six or eight inches in the drills.

_Use._--The leaves are employed in salads, in the manner of Cress; and
they are also sometimes boiled and served as Spinach.


CABBAGE-LEAVED MUSTARD.

Moutarde a feuilles de Chou. _Vil._ Sinapis sp.

A hardy, annual, Chinese plant, similar in habit to the species last
described. Stem from three to four feet high; leaves large, roundish,
lobed, and wrinkled; flowers yellow; the seeds are small, reddish-brown
or black, and retain their powers of germination a long period.

_Cultivation and Use._--This species is cultivated in the same manner,
and is used for the same purpose, as the Chinese Mustard.


CURLED MUSTARD.

West-India Cress.

A comparatively small species. Stem two feet and a half high; flowers
bright-yellow; seeds small, blackish-brown,--scarcely distinguishable
from those of the Black Mustard. The leaves are of medium size,
greenish-yellow, broadest near the ends, deeply and finely cut on the
borders, and beautifully frilled, or curled: they make an excellent
garnish; and, when used as salad, have a pleasant, cress-like flavor.


CUT-LEAVED MUSTARD.

Moutarde lacinee. _Vil._

In its general character, this species resembles the Chinese or Pekin
Mustard: the leaves, however, are much smaller, and divided quite to the
mid-rib.

When young, the leaves make an excellent small salad; having the warm,
pleasant flavor of Cress.


WHITE MUSTARD.

Sinapis alba.

White Mustard is a hardy annual, introduced from Europe, and
occasionally found growing spontaneously in the vicinity of fields and
gardens where it has been once cultivated. The stem is three feet and
upwards in height; the leaves are large, deeply lobed, and of a rich,
deep-green color; the flowers are large, yellow, produced in loose,
terminal spikes; the seeds are yellow, much larger than those of the
preceding species, and retain their vitality five years,--seventy-five
hundred are contained in an ounce.

_Propagation._--White Mustard is always raised from seeds; about four
quarts of which will be necessary for seeding an acre. When grown for
salad, an ounce will sow forty feet of drill.

_Soil and Cultivation._--It succeeds best in rich, loamy soil; which,
previously to sowing, should be thoroughly pulverized. When cultivated
in the vegetable garden for salad or greens, the first sowing may be
made as early in the season as the frost will admit. Sow the seeds
thickly, in drills eight or ten inches apart; and cover half an inch
deep with fine mould. Remove all weeds as they make their appearance;
and, in continued dry weather, water freely.

The plants should be cut for use while in the seed-leaf; as, when much
developed, they become strong, rank, and ill-flavored.

For a succession, a small sowing may be made every week until September.

In field culture, the seeds are sometimes sown broadcast; but the more
common method is to sow in drills fifteen or eighteen inches apart. When
the crop is ready for harvesting, the plants are cut to the ground,
stored and threshed, as directed for Black Mustard.

_Use._--The plants, before the development of the rough leaves, are used
as salad: when more advanced, they are boiled and eaten as Spinach. The
flour of the seeds furnishes a table mustard of good quality; though the
seeds of the Black species possess greater piquancy, and are generally
employed for the purpose. The seeds of both species are much used in
medicine, and are considered equally efficacious.

       *       *       *       *       *

NASTURTIUM.

Indian Cress. Capucine, of the French. Tropaeolum, sp. et var.

This plant is a native of Peru; and, though generally treated as an
annual, is a tender perennial. When cultivated for its flowers or seeds,
it should be planted in poor, light soil; but when foliage and
luxuriant growth are desired, for the covering of arbors, trellises, and
the like, the soil can hardly be made too rich.

The planting should be made in April or May. As the seeds are quite
large, they should be covered two inches deep. When planted in drills,
they are made three feet apart, and the young plants thinned to six
inches apart in the drills. The growing crop may be supported by staking
or bushing, as practised with pease; or the taller-growing sorts may be
shortened in, which will induce a strong, stocky habit of growth.

While the plants are young, they will require some attention, in order
that they may be properly attached to the stakes or trellises provided
for their support; after which, little care need be bestowed, beyond the
ordinary stirring of the soil, and keeping the ground free from weeds.

_Use._--The unexpanded flower-buds, and the seeds while young and
succulent, have a warm, aromatic taste, and are pickled and used as
capers. The young shoots are eaten as salad; and the flowers, which are
large and richly colored, are used for garnishing. Few ornamental plants
are better known or more generally cultivated than the Nasturtium.

The species and varieties are as follow:--


TALL NASTURTIUM.

Tropaeolum majus.

Stem from six to eight feet high, succulent; leaves alternate, smooth,
rounded,--the leaf-stems being attached to the disc, or under-surface;
flowers large, on long stems, yellow,--the two upper petals streaked and
marked with purple; the seeds are large, somewhat triangular, convex on
one of the sides, of a drab or pale-brown color, and retain their
germinative properties five years,--from a hundred and eighty to two
hundred are contained in an ounce.


DARK-FLOWERING.

A variety of the preceding; differing only in the brown color of the
flowers. Cultivation and uses the same.


VARIEGATED.

Also a sub-variety of the Tall Nasturtium, with orange-yellow flowers;
each of the petals being stained or spotted with purple.

Other varieties occur, differing in color, but equally useful for the
purposes before described.


SMALL NASTURTIUM.

Dwarf Capucine. Tropaeolum minus.

Much smaller, in all respects, than the common Dwarf variety of
_Tropaeolum majus_; the stem rarely measuring more than two feet in
length, or rising above a foot in height. The flowers are yellow; the
lower petals with a blotch of scarlet at their base, and the upper ones
delicately striped with the same color.

It yields abundantly; and, though the pods are comparatively small, they
are generally preferred to those of the Tall Nasturtium for pickling.

       *       *       *       *       *

PICRIDIUM.

Garden Picridium. Picridium vulgare.

A hardy, annual plant, from the south of Europe. Stem eighteen inches
high; leaves six to eight inches long, irregular in form, but generally
broad at the ends, and heart-shaped and clasping at the base; flowers
yellow, compound, produced in clusters; the seeds are long, slightly
curved, four-sided, brown or blackish-brown, and retain their vitality
five years.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--The seeds should be sown in April or May, in
drills a foot apart, and half an inch in depth. As the plants, when
allowed to run to seed, produce but little foliage, it is necessary, in
order to secure a continued supply of fresh leaves, to cut or nip off
the flowering-shoot as it makes its appearance. Under proper management,
the leaves grow rapidly, and are produced in great abundance.

_Use._--The leaves have a pleasant, agreeable flavor; and, while young
and tender, are mixed in salads.

       *       *       *       *       *

PURSLAIN.

Portulaca.

Purslain is a hardy, annual plant. Most of the cultivated kinds are but
improved forms of the Common Purslain (_P. oleracea_), introduced into
this country from Europe, and so troublesome as a weed in most vegetable
gardens.

Stem usually about a foot in length, succulent and tender; leaves
fleshy, broad and round at the ends, and tapering to the stalk; flowers
yellow, resting closely in the axils of the leaves; the seeds are black,
exceedingly small, and retain their germinating powers ten years.

_Soil, Propagation, and Culture._--Purslain thrives well in all
soils,--dry, wet, or intermediate; and is propagated by seeds sown in
shallow drills at any time from April to July.

_Use._--The plants may be cut for use when they have made a growth of
four or five inches. They are mixed in salads, eaten boiled as Spinach,
or pickled.

The species and varieties are as follow:--


COMMON PURSLAIN.

Portulaca oleracea.

Abundant in gardens, cultivated fields, and waste grounds. The Green and
the Golden Purslain are improved sub-varieties. The Common Purslain is
used in all the forms in which the cultivated sorts are used; and,
though some of the latter are considered more succulent, the difference
in quality will scarcely repay the cost of cultivation, where the
present variety would be the ceaseless competitor for the supremacy.


GOLDEN PURSLAIN.

Pourpier dore. _Vil._ P. oleracea var. aurea.

Similar to the Green Purslain, but differing in the paler or yellowish
color of the stalks and leaves.


GREEN PURSLAIN.

Pourpier vert. _Vil._

Leaves an inch and three-fourths in length, and upwards of an inch in
width, deep-green.


LARGE-LEAVED GOLDEN PURSLAIN.

P. sativa.

Leaves pale yellowish-green, larger than those of the preceding sorts.
The plant is a strong grower, and the leaves attain a remarkable size;
but the stalks are often comparatively tough and hard, and, for salad
purposes, much inferior to those of the Green or Golden varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

RAPE.

This plant is generally cultivated for its seeds, like Mustard. It is,
however, sometimes grown for salad; the seeds being sown in April, and,
for a succession, once in three or four weeks till August or September.
Sow thickly, in drills ten or twelve inches apart, and cover half an
inch deep. The soil should be rich and moist, in order to induce a rapid
growth, and thus to give a tender, succulent character to the young
leaves; these being the parts eaten. They are served like Lettuce, or
boiled and treated as Coleworts or Spinach. For mixing with Cress or
Lettuce, the plants are cut to the ground before the development of the
second leaves.

The species are as follow:--


ANNUAL ROUGH-LEAVED SUMMER RAPE. _Law._

Turnip Rape. Brassica rapa.

Root fusiform, small, hard, and woody; radical leaves lyrate, vivid
green, and without any appearance of the glaucous bloom for which the
biennial sorts are so distinguished; the stem-leaves are slightly
glaucous, smooth, or nearly so,--the lower ones cut on the borders, the
upper entire; the seeds are small, and similar to those of the common
field turnip, of which it seems to be either a variety, or the source
from which the latter has been derived.


COMMON OR WINTER RAPE. _Law._

Cole-seed. Brassica napus.

Biennial; root long, tapering, hard, and woody, like that of the species
before described. The leaves are smooth, thick, and fleshy, and of much
the same form as those of the Annual Rough-leaved Summer Rape; this
species, however, being readily distinguished, when young, by its
uniformly smooth leaves. The seeds, also, are larger than those of the
last-named species; but this is not to be relied upon as a
distinguishing characteristic, as the size of the seeds, in this as in
most other plants, is liable to be materially altered by the soil as
well as by the previous culture of the seed-stock.

The seeds are sown in summer, and the crop ripens the following year. It
is not adapted to the climate of the Northern States.

In England, the foregoing species are extensively cultivated both for
forage and for seed; the latter being used to a limited extent for
feeding birds, but chiefly for the production of rape-seed oil.


GERMAN RAPE. _Law._

Annual or Early Rape. Smooth-leaved Summer Rape. Brassica praecox.

The German Rape somewhat resembles the Common or Winter. It differs in
being of annual duration; in its more deeply divided leaves, more erect
pods, and smaller seeds.

It would unquestionably succeed well in almost any part of the Northern
or Middle States, and might prove as remunerative a crop as corn or
wheat. The seeds should be sown in May; and the plants should be treated
and the crop harvested, in all respects, as Mustard. It is sometimes
sown broadcast, but generally in drills. When sown broadcast, eight or
ten pounds of seed will be required for an acre; if in drills, three or
four pounds will be sufficient. The yield varies from twenty to forty
bushels per acre.

SUMMER RAPE. _Law._

Colza. Wild Navew. Brassica campestris.

A biennial plant, with a tapering, hard, and fibrous root. The radical
leaves are lyrate and roughish when young; those of the stem clasping,
or heart-shaped, at base, and of an oblong form,--all somewhat fleshy,
of a dark-green color, with a glaucous bloom. The seeds are larger than
those of the Ruta-baga, or Swedish Turnip, but in other respects not
distinguishable.

This species is sometimes termed _Brassica campestris olifer_, or
Oil-rape, from its being considered the best sort of rape for
cultivating for oil; and to distinguish it from the _Campestris
Ruta-baga_, or Swedish Turnip, which is only a variety of this species.

It is not sufficiently hardy for cultivation in the Northern States.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKET. _Vil._

Garden Rocket. Roquette, of the French. Brassica eruca.

A hardy, annual plant, from the south of Europe. Stem about two feet
high; leaves long, lobed or lyrate, smooth and glossy, succulent and
tender; flowers pale citron-yellow, with blackish-purple veins, very
fragrant, having the odor of orange-blossoms; the seeds are small,
roundish, brown, or reddish-brown, and retain their vitality two
years,--fifteen thousand are contained in an ounce.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--The seed is sown thinly, in shallow drills a
foot asunder. The first sowing may be made as early in spring as the
frost will permit; afterwards, for a succession, a few seeds may be sown
at intervals of three or four weeks. In poor soil and dry seasons, the
leaves are liable to be tough and acrid: the seeds should, therefore, be
sown in rich loam, and the plants thoroughly watered in dry weather; as,
the more rapid and vigorous the growth, the more succulent and
mild-flavored will be the foliage.

_Use._--The leaves, while young and tender, are eaten as salad.

       *       *       *       *       *

SAMPHIRE. _Thomp._ _Mill._

Sea-fennel. Parsley-pert. St. Peter's Herb. Crithmum maritimum.

This is a half-hardy, perennial plant, common to rocky localities on the
seacoast of Great Britain. Stalk from a foot to two feet in height,
tender and succulent; leaves half an inch long, somewhat linear,
glaucous-green, fleshy; flowers in terminal umbels,--small, white, or
yellowish-white; the seeds are oblong, yellowish, and, though somewhat
larger, resemble those of Fennel,--they retain their germinative power
but one year.

The plant blossoms in July and August, and the seeds ripen in September
and October.

_Cultivation._--"It is rather difficult to cultivate in gardens; and the
produce is never so good as that obtained from the places where it
naturally grows. It may be propagated either by dividing the plant, or
by sowing the seed in April or in autumn, soon after it is ripe. The
latter period is preferable; for, if kept till spring, the seed does not
germinate so well.

"It succeeds best in a light, sandy, or gravelly soil, kept constantly
moist, and sprinkled occasionally with a little sea-salt or barilla, or
watered with a solution of these substances, in order to supply the
plant with soda, which is a necessary element of its food. It will grow
still better if planted or sown among stones at the foot of walls, with
a south or east aspect. This, and an occasional watering, with a
solution of sea-salt, will give conditions nearly the same as those
under which the plant naturally grows. As it is rather delicate, and
liable to be injured by frost, it should be protected by dry litter or
leaves during the winter. Towards the end of summer, the leaves may be
cut for use."--_Thomp._

_Use._--The leaves have a warm, pleasant, aromatic flavor; and, when
pickled in vinegar, are used in salads and as a seasoning.


GOLDEN SAMPHIRE. _Thomp._

Inula crithmifolia.

A hardy perennial, growing, like the preceding, naturally, on the
marshes and seacoast of Great Britain. The stalk is a foot and a half in
height, erect, with clusters of small, fleshy leaves; flowers yellow, in
small, umbel-like clusters.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--It may be propagated by seeds, or by a
division of the roots. It thrives best in a shady situation, and
requires frequent watering. If salt be occasionally dissolved in the
water, it will promote the growth of the plants, and render the branches
and foliage more succulent and tender.

_Use._--The fleshy leaves and the young branches are pickled in vinegar,
and added to salads as a relish. The plant, however, has none of the
pleasant aromatic flavor of the true Samphire, though often sold under
the name, and used as a substitute.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCURVY-GRASS.

Cochlearia officinalis.

This is a hardy, annual, maritime plant, common to the seacoast of
France and Great Britain. The root-leaves spread regularly from a common
centre, are heart-shaped, fleshy, smooth, and glossy,--those of the stem
sessile, oblong, and toothed on the margin; the stalks are numerous, and
from six inches to a foot in height; the flowers are small, white, and
produced in compact groups, or clusters; the seeds are small, oval, a
little angular, and retain their vitality three years.

_Soil, Sowing, and Cultivation._--It succeeds best in moist, sandy soil;
and flourishes in shady situations. Sow the seeds in August, soon after
they ripen, in shallow drills eight or ten inches apart; and, while the
plants are young, thin them to five or six inches apart in the rows. The
plants taken up in thinning may be transplanted, and new beds formed if
occasion require. The growing crop should be kept free from weeds, and
liberally watered in dry weather. In the following spring, the leaves
will be fit for the table. Those plants not cut for use will flower in
June, and the seeds will ripen in July. The seeds seldom vegetate well
if sown late in spring, or during warm, dry weather.

_Use._--The radical leaves are used as a salad, and are sometimes mixed
with Cress. When bruised, they emit an unpleasant odor; and have an
acrid, bitter taste when eaten. The plant is more generally used for
medicinal purposes than as an esculent.

       *       *       *       *       *

SNAILS.

Snail Trefoil. Medicago orbicularis.

From the south of Europe. It is a hardy, annual plant, with reclining
steins, compound or winged leaves, and yellow flowers. The pods, or
seed-vessels, are smooth, and coiled in a singular and remarkably
regular manner. As they approach maturity, they gradually change to a
dark-brown color; and, seen from a short distance, have the appearance
of snails feeding on the plant.

The seeds are large, flat, somewhat kidney-shaped, of a yellowish-brown
color, and retain their powers of germination five years. They are
usually sold in the pods, but should be taken out before planting.

_Sowing and Culture._--It is propagated by seeds, which should be sown
in April or May where the plants are to remain. Sow in drills fifteen
inches apart. The plants should be thinned out where they are too close,
and kept clean from weeds; which is all the culture they require. They
will blossom in July, and the seeds will ripen in autumn.

_Use._--Though entirely inoffensive, no part of the plant is used for
food. The pods resemble some species of snails in a remarkable degree,
and are placed on dishes of salad for the purpose of exciting curiosity,
or for pleasantly surprising the guests at table.

       *       *       *       *       *

SWEET CICELY.

Sweet-scented Chervil. Osmorrhiza odorata. Scandix odorata.

A hardy perennial. When fully grown, the stalk is three feet or more in
height; the leaves are large, and many times divided; the stems and
nerves downy; the flowers are white, fragrant, and terminate the stalks
in flat, spreading bunches, or umbels; the seeds are large, brown, and
retain their vitality but one year.

_Sowing and Culture._--It is usually grown from seeds; and is of easy
cultivation, as it thrives in almost any soil or situation. When allowed
to scatter its seeds after ripening in the autumn, the plants will
spring up spontaneously in great numbers in the following April or May,
and may then be transplanted where they are to remain; or the seed may
be sown in October, in beds, making the rows fifteen or eighteen inches
apart, and thinning the plants to a foot apart in the rows. When
practicable, the seed should be sown in the autumn; as it seldom
vegetates well, unless subjected to the action of the winter. After the
plants have become established, they will require only ordinary
treatment, and yield abundantly.

_Use._--"In England, the leaves were formerly put into salads; but the
strong flavor of aniseed, which the whole plant possesses, renders them
disagreeable to most persons. It is now not cultivated in Britain; but
the leaves and roots are still used in France: the former for the same
purposes as those of Chervil; the latter in soups, to which they are
said to communicate an agreeable taste."--_Thomp._

In this country, it is sometimes cultivated with other aromatic plants;
but its use in soups, or as a seasoner or garnish, is very limited.

       *       *       *       *       *

TARRAGON.

Artemesia dracunculus.

A hardy, perennial plant, said to be a native of Siberia. Stalk
herbaceous, about three feet in height; the leaves are long, narrow,
pointed, smooth, and highly aromatic; the flowers are small, somewhat
globular, greenish, and generally infertile. There is but one variety.

_Soil, Planting, and Culture._--As the plants seldom produce seed,
Tarragon is usually propagated by dividing the roots. Select a warm and
comparatively dry situation; stir the ground deeply and thoroughly; and,
in April, set the roots in rows fifteen inches apart, ten or twelve
inches apart in the rows, and cover two or three inches deep. They will
soon send up vigorous shoots, which may be cut for use the first season.

It is sometimes increased by cuttings, set three or four inches deep in
moist earth. If seeds can be obtained, they should be sown in April or
May, in a nursery-bed or in a common frame. Sow in shallow drills six or
eight inches apart; and, when the plants are three or four inches high,
set them out as directed for the roots. They will early become strong
and stocky, and may be used in August or September. The plants are more
healthy, yield more abundantly, and are of finer quality, when not
allowed to run to flower.

_Use._--"Tarragon is cultivated for its leaves and the points of its
young shoots; both of which are used as ingredients in salads, soups,
stews, pickles, and other compounds. Tarragon vinegar, so much esteemed
as a fish-sauce, is made by infusion of the leaves in common vinegar. It
is also added to most salads to correct their coldness. Three or four
plants will be sufficient for a family."--_M'Int._

       *       *       *       *       *

VALERIANA. _Vil._

Fedia cornucopiae. Valeriana cornucopiae.

This is an annual plant, with a smooth, branching stem about fifteen
inches high. The leaves are oblong, stemless, thick, and fleshy, and of
a bright, glossy-green color; the flowers are numerous, large,
rose-colored, showy, and ornamental; the seeds are oblong, yellowish,
somewhat vesiculous, and retain their vitality five years,--twenty-two
hundred are contained in an ounce.

_Soil and Culture._--It succeeds best in a light, warm soil. Prepare a
bed four feet and a half wide, spade it thoroughly over, rake the
surface smooth and fine, and sow the seed in drills fourteen inches
apart. The first sowing should be made the last of April, or early in
May; and afterwards, for a succession, sow a row or two every fortnight
till July.

_Use._--It is used as a salad, and is said to be superior to the Common
Fetticus, or Corn-salad.

When in blossom, the plant presents a beautiful appearance, and well
deserves a place in the flower-garden.

       *       *       *       *       *

WATER-CRESS.

Sisymbrium nasturtium. Nasturtium officinale.

Water-cress is a hardy, aquatic perennial; and is found growing
naturally, in considerable abundance, about ponds, and in ditches and
small running streams. When in blossom, the plant is about two feet in
height, or length; the leaves are winged, with five or six pairs of
rounded leaflets, and, in deep water, are often immersed, or float upon
the surface; the flowers are small, white, four-petaled, and terminate
the stalks in loose spikes; the seeds are very small, reddish-brown, and
retain their powers of germination five years,--nearly a hundred and
twenty thousand are contained in an ounce.

_Planting and Culture._--"Water-cress is of the best quality when grown
in running streams and gravelly soil." The roots may be planted in
spring, in situations where the water is from four to eight inches deep.
After they are established, the plants will rapidly increase, both from
the natural distribution of the seeds and the spreading of the roots,
and soon entirely cover the surface of the water with foliage. It may be
grown with trifling cost in any small collection of water, and can be
easily introduced by dropping a few plants about the borders at the time
of the ripening of the seeds. In many localities, it is found growing in
spontaneous abundance; and one of the best and most healthful of salads
may be obtained for the mere labor of gathering.

_Varieties._--There are three described varieties,--the Green-leaved,
the Small Brown-leaved, and the Large Brown-leaved. These differ
slightly, if at all, in flavor; though the Brown-leaved is generally
preferred: having a fine appearance, and a small proportion of stalk to
the leaves, it is most salable in the market. The variations in foliage
and habit do not appear to be caused by the quantity or quality of the
water in which the plants are grown, as the three kinds are found
growing together. "The Green-leaved is the easiest of cultivation, and
the Small Brown-leaved is the hardiest. The Large Brown-leaved is the
best, and is the only one which can be well grown in situations where
shallow water is not to be obtained."--_Trans._

_Gathering and Use._--"The shoots are _cut_ for market, not _broken_
off, as is the usual mode of gathering Cress in its natural state, and
which is found to be very injurious to the plants in the beds. After
they have been cut about three times, they begin to stock; and then, the
oftener they are cut, the better. In summer, it is necessary to keep
them very closely cut; and in water of a proper depth, and with a good
soil, each bed supplies a gathering once a week."

It is extensively employed as an early spring salad; and, on account of
its warm and pleasant taste, is by many persons preferred to all other
salad plants.

       *       *       *       *       *

WINTER-CRESS.

Barbarea. American Winter-cress. Belle-Isle Cress. Scurvy-grass, of some
localities. Barbarea praecox.

Stems from twelve to fifteen inches high; leaves lyrate, the terminal
lobe round; flowers small, in erect, loose, terminal spikes, or groups;
the seeds are small, wrinkled, of a grayish color, and retain their
vitality three years. Introduced from Europe, and naturalized in the
Northern States.


COMMON WINTER-CRESS, OR YELLOW ROCKET.

Barbarea vulgaris.

This species somewhat resembles the foregoing; and, like it, grows
naturally in moist, shady situations. It is distinguished by its longer,
more erect, and more slender pods.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Both of the species are hardy, perennial
plants; and are raised from seeds, which should be sown in April or May,
in shallow drills a foot apart. For a succession, a few seeds may be
sown at intervals of three or four weeks till August. For winter use,
sow, and subsequently cultivate, as Winter Spinach.

_Use._--As soon as the plants have made sufficient growth, they may be
cut for use. The outer leaves should be first gathered, and the
flower-stalks cut or nipped off as they make their appearance, in order
to render the plants strong and stocky, and to promote the growth of the
leaves; these being the parts of the plants used. They are served as
Cress, which they resemble in flavor.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOOD-SORREL.

Oxalis acetocella.

Wood-sorrel is a hardy, perennial plant; growing naturally in woods, in
cool and shaded situations. The leaves are radical, inversely
heart-shaped, and produced three together at the extremity of quite a
long stem, or petiole; the flower-stalk is entirely leafless, and
supports a solitary bell-shaped flower, the petals of which are white,
finely lined or striped with purple; the seed-vessels are of an oblong
form, five-angled, and, when ripe, burst open by the touch, in the
manner of those of the _Impatiens noli me tangere_, or Common Balsam, of
the flower-garden; the seeds are quite small, and of a reddish-brown
color.

The flowers are produced in May and June, and the seeds ripen in July.

_Propagation and Culture._--It may be propagated either by seeds or by
dividing the roots. The soil should be rich and moist; and the seeds may
be sown in April or May, in shallow drills ten or twelve inches apart;
or the roots may be divided in spring or autumn, and set in rows the
same distance asunder.

_Use._--The leaves possess a pleasant, acid taste; and are mixed with
salads, to which they impart an agreeable, refreshing flavor. The plant
is considered one of the most valuable of all vegetables cultivated for
their acid properties.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORMS.

Astragalus hamosus.

A hardy, annual plant, indigenous to the south of Europe. Stem ten or
twelve inches long, recumbent; leaves pinnate, with ten or twelve pairs
of quite small leaflets; flowers yellow, produced five or six together
at the extremity of quite a long stem, or peduncle; the seed-pods are
about two inches long, nearly a fourth of an inch thick, peculiarly bent
or curved, and contain ten or twelve brown seeds.

There is but one species or variety cultivated.

_Sowing and Culture._--The plants may be started by sowing the seeds in
a hot-bed in March, or the seeds may be sown in the open ground in May.
They are cultivated in rows fourteen inches apart, and ten or twelve
inches apart in the rows; and are also grown in groups, or hills, three
or four together. The plants blossom in July, and the pods attain their
growth in August and September.

_Use._--The pods, in their green state, much resemble some descriptions
of worms; and, like Caterpillars (_Scorpiurus_) and Snails (_Medicago_),
are sometimes placed on dishes of salad to excite curiosity, or for
pleasantly surprising the guests at table. Though inoffensive, they are
seldom eaten.




CHAPTER VIII.

OLERACEOUS PLANTS.

Angelica. Anise. Balm. Basil. Borage. Caraway. Clary. Coriander.
Costmary. Cumin. Dill. Fennel. Lavender. Lovage. Marigold. Marjoram.
Nigella. Parsley. Peppermint. Rosemary. Sage. Savory. Spearmint. Tansy.
Thyme.



ANGELICA.

Angelica archangelica.

Angelica is a native of Hungary and Germany, and is also indigenous to
Great Britain. It is a hardy, biennial plant, with a cylindrical,
hollow, herbaceous stem four or five feet high. The radical leaves are
from two to three feet long, compound, or divided in threes,
purplish-red at the base; flowers small, pale-yellow, in large,
terminal, spherical umbels; the seeds are of a yellowish color, oblong,
flattened on one side, convex on the opposite, ribbed, thin, and
membraneous on the borders, and retain their germinative power but a
single season,--nearly six thousand are contained in an ounce.

_Soil and Culture._--The plants thrive best in damp, and even wet,
localities; but may be grown in any good, well-enriched soil. As the
seeds soon lose their vitality, they should be sown in August,
immediately after ripening. Make a small bed, sow the seeds in drills
ten inches apart, and cover three-fourths of an inch deep. In this
seed-bed allow the young plants to remain until the following spring,
when they should be set out two feet asunder in each direction. The
stalks will be fit for use in May and June of the following year. If
the flower-stem is removed as it makes its appearance, the plants will
put forth fresh sprouts from the sides of the root, and survive three
years; but when allowed to blossom, and to perfect their seeds, the
plants soon after perish.

_Use._--Angelica was formerly used, after being blanched, as a salad,
like Celery. In the vicinity of London, it is raised to a considerable
extent for confectioners,--the tender leaf-stalks and flowering-shoots
serving as a basis for sweetmeat. The seeds are sometimes employed for
flavoring liquors.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANISE.

Pimpinella anisum.

This is an annual plant, originally from Egypt. Though but little
cultivated in this country, neither our soil nor climate is unsuitable;
and it might be successfully, if not profitably, grown in the Middle and
warmer parts of the Northern States. Large quantities of the seeds are
raised on the Island of Malta and in some parts of Spain, and thence
exported to England and America for the purpose of distillation or
expression.

The stem is from a foot and a half to two feet high, and separates into
numerous slender branches; the leaves are twice pinnate,--those of the
upper part of the stalk divided into three or four narrow segments; the
flowers are small, yellowish-white, produced in large, loose umbels, at
the extremities of the branches; the seeds are of a grayish-green color,
oblong, slightly bent or curved, convex and ribbed on one side, concave
on the opposite, and terminate in a small bunch, or knob,--nearly nine
thousand are contained in an ounce, and they retain their vitality three
years.

_Culture._--Anise is raised from seeds sown annually, and thrives best
in light, rich, comparatively dry soil, and in a warm, sunny situation.
As early in spring as the appearance of settled warm weather, lay out a
bed four feet and a half wide, and as long as may be desired; spread on
a thin dressing of well-digested compost, and spade it thoroughly in
with the soil; then rake the surface fine and even, and sow the seed
thinly in drills twelve inches apart and an inch deep, allowing an ounce
of seed for a hundred and fifty linear feet. When the plants are an inch
high, thin them to five or six inches apart; and, as they increase in
size, keep the ground between the rows loose, and the spaces between the
plants free from weeds. Towards the close of the season, the seed will
be ripened sufficiently for harvesting; when the plants should be pulled
up, and spread in a sunny place until dry. The seed should then be
threshed from the heads, riddled and winnowed, and again exposed to the
sun, or spread in a dry, airy room, to evaporate any remaining moisture;
when they will be ready for use or the market.

In field culture, the grower should follow substantially the same
method, with the exception of laying out the ground; omitting, in this
particular, its division into beds. After the land has been well
prepared, the seed can be sown with great facility by a common
sowing-machine, adjusted as when employed for sowing carrots. At the
time of harvesting, the plants may be cut near the surface of the
ground, or even mowed; thereby avoiding much of the inconvenience
arising from the soil that adheres to the roots when the plants are
pulled up.

There are no varieties.

_Use._--The seeds and leaves are used both in medicine and cookery. The
green leaves are employed in salads, and for seasoning and garnishing,
like Fennel. The seeds have a fragrant odor, a pleasant, warm taste, and
are highly carminative. Large quantities are used for distillation and
in flavoring liquors, and also for expressing for their essential oil.

       *       *       *       *       *

BALM.

Melissa officinalis.

A hardy, perennial plant, from the south of Europe. The stalk is
four-sided, branching, and from two to three feet high; leaves opposite,
in pairs, ovate, toothed on the borders; the flowers are small, nearly
white, produced in spikes, or clusters, at or near the top of the plant.

_Soil, Propagation, and Culture._--Any warm, mellow, garden soil is
suited to its growth. It is generally propagated by dividing the roots,
which may be done either in spring or in autumn. After thoroughly
stirring the soil, set the roots in rows fifteen inches apart, and a
foot apart in the rows. Under good management, the plants will soon
completely cover the surface of the ground, and the bed will not need
renewal for many years.

_Gathering._--If required for drying, the plants should be cut as they
come into flower, separating the stems at the surface of the ground.
They should not be exposed to the sun in drying, but placed in an airy,
shady place, and allowed to dry gradually. The leaves, in their green
state, may be taken directly from the plants as they are required for
use.

_Use._--The plant has a pleasant, lemon-like odor; an agreeable,
aromatic taste; and, in flavoring certain dishes, is used as a
substitute for lemon-thyme. It is beneficial in hemorrhage, and other
diseases of the lungs; and, in the form of tea, constitutes a cooling
and grateful diluent in fevers. A mixture of balm and honey, or sugar,
is sometimes applied to the interior of beehives, just previous to
receiving the swarm, for the purpose of "attaching the colony to its new
settlement."

       *       *       *       *       *

BASIL.

Ocymum.

There are two species of Basil cultivated in gardens; viz., the Common
Sweet Basil (_O. basilicum_) and the Small Bush Basil (_O. minimum_). Of
the Common Sweet Basil, there are three varieties; and of the Bush
Basil, two varieties. They are all annuals, and are grown from seeds,
which are black, small, oblong, and retain their vitality from six to
ten years.


COMMON SWEET BASIL.

Large Sweet Basil. Ocymum basilicum.

Stem from a foot to a foot and a half in height; leaves comparatively
large, green, ovate, sharply pointed; flowers white, in whorls at the
extremities of the stems and branches. The whole plant, when bruised, is
highly aromatic; having the odor and flavor of cloves.

The seeds of the Common Sweet Basil, and also those of the two following
varieties, may be sown in a hot-bed in March, and the plants set out in
May in rows a foot apart, and five or six inches apart in the rows; or
the seeds may be sown in the open ground the last of April or early in
May, and the plants thinned while young, as directed for transplanting.
In removing the plants from the hot-bed, retain as much of the earth
about the roots as possible; water freely as soon as transplanted, and
also in dry weather; and they will soon yield an abundance of tender
stems and leaves.

_Varieties._--


PURPLE BASIL.

Basilic grand violet. _Vil._

Leaves and flowers purple. When grown in sunny situations, the
leaf-stems and young branches are also purple. In other respects, the
variety is similar to the Common Sweet Basil. Its properties and uses
are the same.


LETTUCE-LEAVED BASIL. _Vil._

The leaves of this variety are large, pale-green, wrinkled and blistered
like those of some kinds of Lettuce: whence the name. It resembles the
foregoing varieties in taste and odor, and is used for the same
purposes.


BUSH BASIL.

Ocymum minimum.

The Bush Basils are small, low-growing, branching plants; and are
propagated and cultivated like the Common Sweet Basil.


GREEN BUSH BASIL.

Basilic fin vert. _Vil._

Stem about eight inches high; leaves small, green, oval; flowers white,
produced in whorls about the upper portion of the principal stalk and
towards the extremities of the branches.


PURPLE BUSH BASIL.

Basilic fin violet. _Vil._

Leaves purple. In other respects, similar to the Green Bush Basil.

_Use._--The leaves and young branches have a strong, clove-like taste
and odor, and are used in highly seasoned soups and meats. They are also
sometimes added to salads. For winter use, the stalks are cut while in
flower, dried, powdered, and preserved, like other pot-herbs.

       *       *       *       *       *

BORAGE.

Borago officinalis.

Borage is generally classed as a hardy annual, though it is sometimes
biennial. Stem two feet high; the leaves are oval, alternate, and, in
common with the stalk and branches, thickly set with stiff, bristly
hairs; the flowers are large and showy,--they are red, white, or blue,
and often measure more than an inch in diameter; the seeds are large,
oblong, slightly curved, and retain their germinative property three
years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Borage thrives best in light, dry soil. The
seeds are sown in April or May, in drills ten or twelve inches apart,
and half an inch deep. They should be sown quite thinly, or so as to
secure a plant for every six or eight inches; to which distance they
should be thinned. When a continued supply is required, a second sowing
should be made in July. The plants seed abundantly; and, when once
introduced into the garden, spring up spontaneously.

_Use._--The plant is rarely cultivated and little used in this country.
It is sometimes employed as a pot-herb, and the young shoots are
occasionally mixed in salads. They are also sometimes boiled and used as
Spinach. The flowers make a beautiful garnish, and it is well worthy
cultivation as an ornamental plant. "The stalks and foliage contain a
large proportion of nitre; and, when dried, burn like match-paper."

_Varieties._--There are several varieties, differing slightly, except in
the color of the flowers; the Red-flowering, White-flowering, and
Blue-flowering being the principal. A variety, with variegated foliage,
is described by some authors. Miller states that "they generally retain
their distinctions from seeds."

       *       *       *       *       *

CARAWAY.

Carum carui.

The Common Caraway is a hardy, biennial plant; a native of various parts
of Europe; and, to a considerable extent, naturalized in this country.
The root is long and tapering, of a yellowish-white color, and about
three-fourths of an inch in diameter near the crown or at its broadest
part; the flesh of the root is white, fine-grained, with a flavor not
unlike that of the carrot; the flower-stalks are put forth the second
season, and are about two feet and a half in height, with numerous
spreading branches; the leaves are finely cut, or divided, and of a
deep-green color; the flowers are small, white, and produced in umbels
at the ends of the branches; the seeds, which ripen quite early in the
season, are of an oblong form, somewhat curved, furrowed, slightly
tapering towards the extremities, of a clear olive-brown color, and
pleasant, aromatic flavor and odor,--nearly eight thousand five hundred
seeds are contained in an ounce, and they retain their vitality three
years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Caraway is one of the hardiest of plants, and
succeeds well in almost any soil or situation. In the coldest parts of
the United States, and even in the Canadas, it is naturalized to such an
extent about fields and mowing lands, as to be obtained in great
abundance for the mere labor of cutting up the plants as the ripening of
the seeds takes place.

When cultivated, the sowing may be made in April or May: but, if sown
just after ripening, the seeds not only vegetate with greater certainty,
but the plants often flower the ensuing season; thus saving a summer's
growth. Sow in drills twelve or fifteen inches apart, and cover half an
inch deep. When the plants are well up, thin to six or eight inches
apart, and keep the ground loose, and free from weeds. The seeds will
ripen in the July of the year after sowing. For other methods of
culture, see CORIANDER.

_Use._--It is principally cultivated for its seeds, which constitute an
article of some commercial importance; a large proportion, however, of
the consumption in this country being supplied by importation from
Europe. They are extensively employed by confectioners, and also for
distillation. They are also mixed in cake, and, by the Dutch, introduced
into cheese.

It is sometimes cultivated for its young leaves, which are used in soups
and salads; or as a pot-herb, like Parsley. The roots are boiled in the
manner of the Carrot or Parsnip, and by some preferred to these
vegetables; the flavor being considered pleasant and delicate.

There are no described varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLARY. _Loud._

Clary Sage. Salvia sclarea.

Clary is a hardy, biennial plant. It is indigenous to the south of
Europe, and has been cultivated in gardens for upwards of three
centuries. The radical leaves are large, rough, wrinkled,
oblong-heart-shaped, and toothed on the margin; stalk two feet high,
four-sided, clammy to the touch; flowers pale-blue, in loose, terminal
spikes; seeds round, brownish, and, like others of the family, produced
four together,--they retain their vitality two years.

_Sowing and Culture._--It is generally grown from seeds, which are sown
annually in April or May, in drills fifteen or eighteen inches apart,
and half or three-fourths of an inch deep. When the young plants are two
or three inches high, thin them to ten or twelve inches apart, and treat
the growing crop in the usual form during summer. The leaves will be in
perfection in the ensuing autumn, winter, and spring; and the plants
will blossom, and produce their seeds, in the following summer.

_Use._--The leaves are used for flavoring soups, to which they impart a
strong, peculiar flavor, agreeable to some, but unpleasant to most
persons. It has some of the properties of Common Sage, and is
occasionally used as a substitute.

The plant is seldom employed in American cookery, and is little
cultivated.

       *       *       *       *       *

CORIANDER. _Law._

Coriandrum sativum.

A hardy annual, supposed to have been introduced from the south of
Europe, but now naturalized in almost all temperate climates where it
has once been cultivated.

Stem about two feet in height, generally erect, but, as the seeds
approach maturity, often acquiring a drooping habit; stem-leaves more
finely cut or divided than those proceeding directly from the root, and
all possessed of a strong and somewhat disagreeable odor. The generic
name is derived from _Koris_ (a bug), with reference to the peculiar
smell of its foliage. Flowers white, produced on the top of the plant,
at the extremities of the branches, in flat, spreading umbels, or
bunches; seeds globular, about an eighth of an inch in diameter, of a
yellowish-brown color, with a warm, pleasant, aromatic taste,--they
become quite light and hollow by age, and are often affected by insects
in the manner of seed-pease. Though they will sometimes vegetate when
kept for a longer period, they are not considered good when more than
two years old.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--Like all annuals, it is propagated from
seed, which should be sown in April or May, in good, rich, mellow soil
well pulverized. Sow in drills made fourteen or sixteen inches asunder
and about three-fourths of an inch in depth, and thin to nine inches in
the rows. It soon runs to flower and seed, and will be ready for
harvesting in July or August.

In the south of England, Coriander is generally cultivated in connection
with Caraway; eighteen pounds of Caraway seed being mixed with fifteen
pounds of Coriander for an acre. The Coriander, being an annual, yields
its crop the first season. After being cut, it is left on the field to
dry, and the seeds afterwards beaten out on cloths; the facility with
which these are detached not admitting of the usual method of
harvesting.

An unquestionably preferable mode of cultivation would be to sow them
both in drills alternately, by which means the Caraway would be more
easily hoed and cleaned after the removal of the Coriander.

_Use._--It is generally cultivated for its seeds, which are used to a
considerable extent by druggists, confectioners, and distillers. In the
garden, it is sometimes sown for its leaves, which are used as Chervil
in soups and salads; but, when so required, a sowing should be made at
intervals of three or four weeks.

There are no varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

COSTMARY, OR ALECOST.

Balsamita vulgaris.

Costmary is a hardy, perennial plant, with a hard, creeping root, and an
erect, branching stem two or three feet high. The radical leaves, which
are produced on long footstalks, are oval, serrated, and of a grayish
color,--those of the stalk are sessile, smaller than the radical ones,
but similar in form; the flowers are deep-yellow, in erect, terminal,
spreading corymbs; the seeds are small, slightly curved, and of a
grayish-white color.


HOARY-LEAVED COSTMARY. _Loud._

A variety with deeply divided and hoary leaves, less fragrant than the
preceding.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--Costmary may be cultivated in almost any
description of soil or situation. It is sometimes grown from seeds, but
is generally propagated by dividing the roots, which increase rapidly,
and soon entirely occupy the ground. They are taken up for planting out
either in spring or autumn, and should be set two feet apart in each
direction. By occasionally thinning out the plants as they become too
thick, a bed may be continued many years.

_Use._--The plant has a soft, agreeable odor, and is sometimes used as a
pot-herb for flavoring soups. The leaves are used in salads, and also
for flavoring ale or beer: hence the name "Alecost."

       *       *       *       *       *

CUMIN.

Cuminum cyminum.

Cumin is a native of Egypt. It is a tender, annual plant, from nine to
twelve inches high. The leaves are deep-green, and divided into long,
linear segments, not unlike those of Fennel; the flowers are white or
pale-blue, and produced in small umbels at the extremities of the
branches; the seeds are long, furrowed, of a pale-brownish color, and
somewhat resemble those of Anise,--about seven thousand are contained in
an ounce, and they retain their power of germination three years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Cumin requires a light, warm-loamy soil. The
seed should be sown about the beginning of May, in drills fourteen
inches apart and half an inch deep. When the plants are well up, they
should be thinned to three or four inches apart in the lines. The
treatment of the growing crop, and the usual method of harvesting, are
the same as directed for Anise or Coriander.

The seed is sometimes sown broadcast; the soil being first finely
pulverized, and raked smooth and even. This may be successfully
practised upon land naturally light and warm, if free from weeds.

Though a native of a warm climate, Cumin may be successfully grown
throughout the Middle States, and in the warmer portions of the Northern
and Eastern.

_Use._--The plant is cultivated for its seeds, which are carminative,
and used as those of Caraway and Coriander. They are sometimes employed
for flavoring spirits.

The plant is rarely grown, and the seeds are but little used, in the
United States. There are no varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

DILL. _Loud._

Anethum graveolens.

Dill is a hardy, biennial plant. There is but one species cultivated,
and there are no varieties. The stem is erect and slender, and the
leaves are finely divided; the flowers are produced in June and July of
the second year, and the seeds ripen in August. The plant resembles
Fennel in its general character, though smaller and less vigorous.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--Dill flourishes best in light soil, and
is propagated from seeds sown annually. As these retain their vitality
but a single year, and, even when kept through the winter, vegetate
slowly, they are frequently sown late in summer, or early in autumn,
immediately after ripening. The drills are made a foot apart, and the
seeds covered half an inch deep. The young plants should be thinned to
six inches apart in the rows; and the leaves may be gathered for use
from July till winter, and in the following spring till the plants have
run to flower.

_Use._--"The whole plant is strongly aromatic. Its leaves are used to
give flavor to pickles, particularly cucumbers; and occasionally are
added to soups and sauces: the seeds are also employed for flavoring
pickles. All parts of the plant are used in medical preparations."

       *       *       *       *       *

FENNEL.

Foeniculum.

Three species of Fennel are cultivated, differing not only in habit,
but, to some extent, in their properties. The stems vary in height from
two to four feet, and are smooth and branching; the flowers are yellow,
in terminal umbels; the seeds are oval, ribbed, or furrowed, generally
of a light, yellowish-brown color, and retain their vitality from three
to five years.

_Soil, Sowing, and Culture._--A light, dry soil is best adapted to the
growth of Fennel; though it will thrive well in any good garden loam. It
is generally raised from seeds, which may be sown in August, just after
they ripen, or in April and May. They are generally sown in drills
fifteen or eighteen inches apart, and about three-fourths of an inch
deep,--the young plants being afterwards thinned to twelve or fifteen
inches apart in the drills; or a few seeds may be scattered broadcast on
a small seed-bed, raked in, and the seedlings, when two or three inches
high, transplanted to rows, as before directed.

Fennel is sometimes propagated by a division of the roots and by
offsets. This may be performed either in spring, summer, or autumn. Set
the roots, or shoots, fifteen inches apart in each direction; and they
will soon become stocky plants, and afford an abundance of leaves for
use. When cultivated for its foliage, the flowering-shoots should be cut
off as they may make their appearance, to encourage the production of
fresh shoots, and to give size and succulency to the leaves.

The species and their peculiar uses are as follow:--


COMMON OR BITTER FENNEL.

Foeniculum vulgare.

A perennial species, with deep, strong, fleshy roots; stem three or four
feet high, with finely divided leaves. The flowers are put forth in
July, and the seeds ripen in August: the latter are about one-sixth of
an inch long, of a greenish-brown color, and, in common with the leaves,
of a decidedly bitter taste.

_Soil, Sowing, and Culture._--This species may be grown in almost any
soil or situation. Sow the seeds soon after ripening, or early in
spring. The plants require no other care than to be kept free from
weeds.

_Use._--The young leaves are used for flavoring soups and sauces, and
are sometimes mixed in salads. The seeds are carminative, and the roots
and leaves have reputed medicinal properties.


DARK-GREEN LEAVED. _Loud._

A variety with deep-green foliage. Its uses, and modes of culture, are
the same as those of the foregoing species.


FLORENCE OR ITALIAN FENNEL. _Mill._

Finochio. Sweet Azorian Fennel. Foeniculum dulce.

Quite distinct from the Common Fennel, and generally cultivated as an
annual. The stem, which is about eighteen inches high, expands near the
surface of the ground; and, when divided horizontally, presents an oval
form, measuring four or five inches in one direction, and two inches in
the opposite. The flowers are produced in umbels, as in the other
species. The seeds are slender, yellow, somewhat curved, sweet and
pleasant to the taste, and of an agreeable, anise-like odor.

_Sowing and Culture._--The plant should be grown in well-enriched,
mellow soil. Sow the seeds in April or May, thinly, in shallow drills
from eighteen inches to two feet apart. Half an ounce of seeds will be
sufficient for fifty feet of drill; or, by transplanting when they
spring up too thickly, will furnish seedlings for a hundred feet.

The plants should be eight or ten inches apart; and, when the stems have
attained a sufficient size, they should be earthed up for blanching, in
the manner of Celery. Two or three weeks will be required to perfect
this; and, if properly treated, the stems will be found white, crisp,
tender, and excellent.

Plants from the first sowing will be ready for use in July and August.
For a succession, a few seeds may be sown in June, or early in July.

_Use._--The blanched portion of the stem is mixed in soups, and also
used as a salad. It is served like Celery, with various condiments; and
possesses a sweet, pleasant, aromatic taste.

It is a popular vegetable in some parts of Europe, but is rarely
cultivated in this country.


SWEET FENNEL. _Mill._

Malta Fennel. Foeniculum officinale.

By some writers, this has been described as a variety of the Common
Fennel; but its distinctive character appears to be permanent under all
conditions of soil and culture. The leaves are long and narrow, and,
compared with those of the last named, less abundant, and not so
pointed. The stem is also shorter, and the seeds are longer, more
slender, and lighter colored.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--It is propagated and cultivated as the Common
Fennel.

_Use._--It is used in all the forms of the last named. The seeds have a
sweet, pleasant, anise-like taste and odor, are strongly carminative,
and yield an essential oil by distillation.


LAVENDER.

Lavendula spica.

Lavender is a hardy, low-growing, shrubby plant, originally from the
south of Europe. There are three varieties; and they may be propagated
from seeds by dividing the roots, or by slips, or cuttings.

The seeds are sown in April or May. Make the surface of the soil light
and friable, and sow the seeds in very shallow drills six inches apart.
When the seedlings are two or three inches high, transplant them in rows
two feet apart, and a foot apart in the rows.

The slips, or cuttings, are set in April, two-thirds of the length in
the soil, and in rows as directed for transplanting seedlings. Shade
them for a few days, until they have taken root; after which, little
care will be required beyond the ordinary form of cultivation.

The roots may be divided either in spring or autumn. Though Lavender
grows most luxuriantly in rich soil, the plants are more highly
aromatic, and less liable to injury from severe weather, when grown in
light, warm, and gravelly situations.

_Use._--Lavender is sometimes used as a pot-herb, "but is more esteemed
for the distilled water which bears its name, and which, together with
the oil, is obtained in the greatest proportion from the flower-spikes
which have been gathered in dry weather, and just before the flowers are
fully expanded. The oil of lavender is obtained in the ratio of an ounce
to sixty ounces of dried flowers."--_Law._

"In the neighborhood of Mitcham, in Surrey, England, upwards of two
hundred acres are occupied with Lavender alone."--_Thomp._

_Varieties._--


BROAD-LEAVED LAVENDER. _Mill._

Spike Lavender.

Compared with the Common Lavender, the branches of this variety are
shorter, more sturdy, and thicker set with leaves; the latter being
short and broad.

The Broad-leaved Lavender rarely blossoms; but, when this occurs, the
leaves of the flower-stalk are differently formed from those of the
lower part of the plant, and somewhat resemble those of the Common
variety. The stalks are taller, the spikes lower and looser, and the
flowers smaller, than those of the last named.


COMMON OR BLUE-FLOWERING LAVENDER.

Narrow-leaved Blue-flowering.

A shrubby, thickly-branched plant, from a foot to upwards of three feet
high, according to the depth and quality of the soil in which it is
cultivated. The leaves are opposite, long, and narrow; flowers blue or
purple, in spikes.

The whole plant is remarkably aromatic; but the flowers have this
property in a greater degree than the foliage or branches. The plants
are in perfection in July and August, and are cut for drying or
distillation, close to the stem, as the blossoms on the lower part of
the spikes begin to change to a brown color.


NARROW-LEAVED WHITE-FLOWERING.

A sub-variety of the Common Lavender, with white flowers. It is of
smaller growth and less hardy than the last named, though not so
generally cultivated. Its properties and uses are the same.

       *       *       *       *       *

LOVAGE.

Ligusticum levisticum.

Lovage is a hardy, perennial plant, with a hollow, channelled, branching
stem six or seven feet high. The leaves are winged, smooth, deep,
glossy-green, and somewhat resemble those of Celery; the flowers are
yellow, and produced in large umbels at the extremities of the branches;
the seeds are oblong, striated, of a pale, yellowish-brown color, and
retain their germinative powers but one year.

_Soil, Propagation, and Culture._--Lovage requires a deep, rich, moist
soil; and is propagated either by seeds or dividing: the roots. The
seeds should be sown in August, or immediately after ripening; as, when
sown in spring, they seldom vegetate well. When the young plants have
made a growth of two or three inches, they should be transplanted three
feet apart in each direction; and, when well established, will require
little care, and continue for many years.

The roots may be divided in spring or autumn; and should be set three
feet apart, as directed for seedling plants; covering the crowns three
inches deep.

_Use._--Lovage was formerly cultivated as an esculent; but its use as
such has long been discontinued. It is now cultivated for its medicinal
properties; both the seeds and roots being used. The latter are large,
fleshy, dark-brown without, yellowish within, and of a peculiar, warm,
aromatic taste. They are sliced and dried, and in this state are used to
some extent by confectioners. The seeds are similar to the roots in
taste and odor, but have greater pungency. In appearance and flavor, the
plant is not unlike Celery.

There are no varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

MARIGOLD.

Pot Marigold. Calendula officinalis.

This hardy annual is a native of France and the south of Europe. Aside
from its value for culinary purposes, its large, deep, orange-yellow
flowers are showy and attractive; and it is frequently cultivated as an
ornamental plant. The stem is about a foot in height; the leaves are
thick and fleshy, rounded at the ends, and taper to the stalk; the
flowers are an inch and a half or two inches in diameter,
yellow,--differing, however, in depth of color, and single or double
according to the variety; the seeds are large, light-brown, much curved
and contorted, and very irregular both in their size and form.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--The plant is of easy culture. The seeds are
sown in autumn, just after ripening; or in April, May, or June. Make the
drills a foot apart; cover the seed three-fourths of an inch deep; and,
when the plants are an inch or two inches high, thin them to eight or
ten inches apart. Plants from the first sowing will blossom early in
July, and continue in bloom until destroyed by frost.

_Gathering._--The flowers are gathered when fully expanded, divested of
their calyxes, and spread in a light, airy, shaded situation until they
are thoroughly dried. They are gathered as they come to perfection; for,
when the plants are allowed to ripen their seeds, they become much less
productive.

_To raise Seed._--Leave one or two of the finest plants, without cutting
the flowers; and, when the heads of seed begin to change from a green to
a brownish color, cut them off, spread them a short time as directed for
drying the flowers, and pack away for use.

_Use._--The flowers are used in various parts of Europe for flavoring
soups and stews, and are much esteemed. Though often grown as an
ornamental plant, the flowers are but little used in this country for
culinary purposes. The varieties are as follow:--


COMMON ORANGE-FLOWERED.

Flowers single, deep orange-yellow, high-flavored. It is considered the
best variety for cultivation.


LEMON-FLOWERED.

This differs from the foregoing in the paler color of the flowers, which
are also less aromatic. The plants are not distinguishable from those of
the Common Orange-flowered.


DOUBLE ORANGE-FLOWERING.

Of the same color with the first named, but with fine, large, double
ornamental flowers. The petals are flat, and rest in an imbricated
manner, one on the other, as in some varieties of the Anemone. It is
more productive, but less aromatic, than the Single-flowering.


DOUBLE LEMON-FLOWERING.

A variety of the second-named sort, with double flowers like those of
the preceding.

To raise good seeds of either of the double-flowering kinds, all plants
producing single flowers must be removed as soon as their character is
known. When the single and double-flowering plants are suffered to grow
together, the latter rapidly deteriorate, and often ultimately become
single-flowering.


CHILDING, OR PROLIFEROUS MARIGOLD. _Loud._

This variety produces numerous small flowers from the margin of the
calyx of the large central flowers. It is quite ornamental, but of
little value as an esculent.

       *       *       *       *       *

MARJORAM.

Origanum.


COMMON MARJORAM.

Origanum vulgare.

A perennial species, with a shrubby, four-sided stem, a foot and a half
high; leaves oval, opposite,--at the union of the leaves with the stalk,
there are produced several smaller leaves, which, in size and form,
resemble those of the Common Sweet Marjoram; the flowers are pale-red,
or flesh-colored, and produced in rounded, terminal spikes; the plants
blossom in July and August, and the seeds ripen in September.

_Propagation and Culture._--It may be grown from seeds, but is generally
propagated by dividing the roots, either in spring or autumn. Set them
in a dry and warm situation, in rows fifteen inches apart, and ten or
twelve inches from plant to plant in the rows.

The seeds may be sown in a seed-bed in April or May, and the seedlings
transplanted to rows as directed for setting the roots; or they may be
sown in drills fifteen inches apart, afterwards thinning out the young
plants to ten inches apart in the drills.

There is a variety with white flowers, and another with variegated
foliage.

_Use._--The young shoots, cut at the time of flowering and dried in the
shade, are used as Sweet Marjoram for seasoning soups and meats. The
whole plant is highly aromatic.


SWEET MARJORAM.

Knotted Marjoram. Origanum majorana.

Sweet Marjoram is a native of Portugal. Though a biennial, it is always
treated as an annual; not being sufficiently hardy to withstand the
winters of the Middle or Northern States in the open ground. The plant
is of low growth, with a branching stem, and oval or rounded leaves. The
flowers, which appear in July and August, are of a purplish color, and
produced in compact clusters, or heads, resembling knots: whence the
term "Knotted Marjoram" of many localities. The seeds are brown,
exceedingly small, and retain their germinative properties three years.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--Sweet Marjoram is raised from seeds sown
annually in April, May, or June. Its propagation, however, is generally
attended with more or less difficulty, arising from the exceeding
minuteness of the seeds, and the liability of the young seedlings to be
destroyed by the sun before they become established. The seeds are sown
in drills ten or twelve inches apart, and very thinly covered with
finely pulverized loam. Coarse light matting is often placed over the
bed immediately after sowing, to facilitate vegetation; and, if allowed
to remain until the plants are well up, will often preserve a crop which
would otherwise be destroyed.

The seeds are sometimes sown in a hot-bed, and the plants set out in May
or June, in rows twelve inches apart, and six inches apart in the rows.

_Gathering._--The plants, when in flower or fully developed, are cut to
the ground; and, for winter use, are dried and preserved as other
pot-herbs.

_Use._--Sweet Marjoram is highly aromatic, and is much used, both in the
green state and when dried, for flavoring broths, soups, and stuffings.


POT MARJORAM.

Origanum onites.

A perennial species, from Sicily. Stem a foot or more in height,
branching; leaves oval, comparatively smooth; the flowers are small, of
a purplish color, and produced in spikes.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--The species is propagated, and the crop
in all respects should be treated, as directed for Common Marjoram. The
properties and uses of the plant are also the same. Both, however, are
much inferior to the Sweet Marjoram last described.


WINTER SWEET MARJORAM. _Corb._

Origanum heracleoticum.

A half-hardy perennial, from the south of Europe. Stem eighteen inches
high, purplish; the leaves are opposite, oval, rounded at the ends, and
resemble those of Sweet Marjoram; the flowers are white, and are put
forth in July and August, in spikelets about two inches in length; the
seeds ripen in September.

_Propagation and Culture._--It may be grown from seeds, but is generally
propagated by dividing the roots either in the spring or fall, and
planting the divisions ten inches apart, in rows eighteen inches
asunder. It succeeds best in dry localities, and requires no other
attention than to have the soil kept loose, and free from weeds.

There is a variety with variegated leaves, but differing in no other
respect from the foregoing.

_Use._--The leaves and young branches are used in soups, and stuffing
for meats; and should be cut when just coming into flower, and dried in
the shade.

       *       *       *       *       *

AROMATIC NIGELLA.

Four Spices. Allspice. Black Cumin. Quatre Epices, of the French.
Nigella saliva.

A hardy, annual plant from the East Indies. Stem twelve to eighteen
inches high, with alternate, sessile, finely divided leaves; the flowers
are large, white, variegated with blue; the seeds, which are produced
in a roundish capsule, are somewhat triangular, wrinkled, of a yellowish
color, and pungent, aromatic taste,--about thirteen thousand are
contained in an ounce, and they retain their vitality three years. There
is a species cultivated, the seeds of which are black.

_Soil and Cultivation._--It is always raised from seed, and thrives best
in light, warm soil. The seed may be sown from the middle of April to
the middle of May. Pulverize the soil well, make the surface smooth and
even, and sow in drills twelve or fourteen inches apart and about half
an inch deep. When the plants are two inches high, thin them to five or
six inches apart in the rows. During the summer, cultivate in the usual
manner, keeping the soil loose, and watering occasionally if the weather
be dry; and in August or September, or when the seed ripens, cut off the
plants at the roots, spread them in an airy situation, and, when
sufficiently dried, thresh out; after which, spread the seed a short
time to evaporate any remaining moisture, and they will be ready for
use.

_Use._--The seeds have a warm, aromatic taste; and are employed in
French cookery, under the name of _quatre epices_, or "four spices."

       *       *       *       *       *

PARSLEY.

Apium petroselinum.

Parsley is a hardy, biennial plant from Sardinia. The leaves of the
first year are all radical, compound, rich, deep-green, smooth, and
shining. When fully developed, the plant measures three or four feet in
height; the flowers are small, white, in terminal umbels; the seeds are
ovoid, somewhat three-sided, slightly curved, of a grayish-brown color
and aromatic taste,--seven thousand are contained in an ounce, and they
retain their vitality three years.

_Soil and Propagation._--Parsley succeeds best in rich, mellow soil, and
is propagated from seeds sown annually; an ounce of seed being allowed
to a hundred and fifty feet of drill.

_Sowing._--As the seed vegetates slowly,--sometimes remaining in the
earth four or five weeks before the plants appear,--the sowing should be
made as early in spring as the ground is in working condition. Lay out
the bed of a size corresponding to the supply required, spade it deeply
and thoroughly, level the surface (making it fine and smooth), and sow
the seed in drills fourteen inches apart, and half an inch deep. When
the plants are two or three inches high, thin them to eight or ten
inches apart; being careful, in the thinning, to leave only the best and
finest curled plants.

According to Lindley, the finest curled kinds will rapidly degenerate
and become plain, if left to themselves; while, on the other hand,
really excellent sorts may be considerably improved by careful
cultivation.

The best curled Parsley is obtained by repeated transplantings. When the
seedlings are two inches high, they are set in rows ten inches apart,
and six inches apart in the rows. In about four weeks, they should be
again transplanted to where they are to remain, in rows eighteen inches
apart, and fourteen inches apart in the rows. When thus treated, the
plants become remarkably close, of a regular, rosette-like form, and
often entirely cover the surface of the ground. When grown for
competition or for exhibition, this process of transplanting is thrice
and often four times repeated.

_Seed._--In autumn, select two or three of the finest curled and most
symmetrical plants; allow them to remain unplucked; give a slight
protection during winter; and, in the following summer, they will yield
abundantly. Much care is requisite in keeping the varieties true. This
is especially the case with the curled sorts. The seed-growers, who
value their stock and character, select the best and finest curled
plants, and allow no others to flower and seed. When the object is to
improve a variety, but few seeds are saved from a plant; and, in some
cases, but few seeds from a head.

_Use._--The leaves of the curled varieties afford one of the most
beautiful of garnishes: they are also used for flavoring soups and
stews. The seeds are aromatic, and are sometimes used as a substitute
for the leaves; though the flavor is much less agreeable.

_Varieties._--


DWARF CURLED PARSLEY.

Curled Parsley. Sutton's Dwarf Curled. Usher's Dwarf Curled.

A fine, dwarfish, curled variety, long cultivated in England. In some
gardens, it is grown in such perfection as to resemble a tuft of finely
curled, green moss.

It is hardy, and slow in running to seed, but liable to degenerate, as
it constantly tends to increase in size and to become less curled.

From the Dwarf Curled Parsley, by judicious cultivation and a careful
selection of plants for seed, have originated many excellent sorts of
stronger growth, yet retaining its finely curled and beautiful leaves.


MITCHELL'S MATCHLESS WINTER. _Thomp._

A fine, curled sort, larger than the Dwarf Curled; and, on account of
its remarkable hardiness, recommended as one of the best for winter
culture.


MYATT'S TRIPLE-CURLED.

Myatt's Garnishing. Myatt's Extra Fine Curled. Windsor Curled.

The leaves of this variety are large and spreading, bright-green above,
paler beneath. When true, the foliage is nearly as finely curled as that
of the Dwarf, though the plant is much larger and stronger in its
habit.


PLAIN PARSLEY. _Thomp._

Common Parsley.

The leaves of this sort are plain, or not curled; and the plant produces
them in greater quantity than the curled sorts. It is also somewhat
hardier.

For many years, it was the principal variety grown in the gardens of
this country; but has now given place to the curled sorts, which, if not
of better flavor, are generally preferred, on account of their superior
excellence for garnishing.


RENDLE'S TREBLE GARNISHING. _Trans._

A variety of the Dwarf Curled, of larger size; the leaves being as
finely curled and equally beautiful.


HAMBURG OR LARGE-ROOTED PARSLEY. _M'Int._

Turnip-rooted Parsley.

A variety of the Common Plain Parsley, with stronger foliage. Though the
leaves are sometimes used in the manner of those of the Common Parsley,
it is generally cultivated for its fusiform, fleshy roots.

To obtain these of good size and quality, the soil should not be too
rich, but deeply and thoroughly trenched. Sow the seeds in April or May,
in drills a foot or fourteen inches apart, and three-fourths of an inch
deep; and, when the seedlings are two or three inches high, thin them to
six or eight inches apart in the rows. Cultivate during the season as
carrots or parsnips; and, in October, the roots will have attained their
growth, and be suitable for use. Take them up before the ground closes,
cut off the tops within an inch or two of the crowns, pack in earth or
sand, and store in the cellar for winter.

_To raise Seeds._--Reset a few roots in April, two feet apart; or leave
a few plants in the open ground during the winter. They will blossom in
June and July, and ripen their seeds in August.

_Use._--The roots are eaten, boiled as carrots or parsnips. In
connection with the leaves, they are also mixed in soups and stews, to
which they impart a pleasant, aromatic taste and odor.


NAPLES OR CELERY-LEAVED PARSLEY.

Neapolitan Parsley. Celery Parsley.

This variety somewhat resembles Celery; and, by writers on gardening, is
described as a hybrid between some of the kinds of Celery and the
Large-rooted or Hamburg Parsley. With the exception of their larger
size, the leaves are similar to those of the Common Plain Parsley.

_Use._--The leaves are sometimes employed for garnishing; but are
generally blanched, and served as Celery.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--The plants are started in a hot-bed in March,
or the seeds may be sown in a seed-bed in the open ground in May. When
the seedlings are four or five inches high, transplant to trenches two
feet apart and six or eight inches deep, setting the plants a foot apart
in the trenches; afterwards gather the earth gradually about the stems,
in the process of cultivation; and, when they are sufficiently grown and
blanched, harvest and preserve as Celery.

_To raise Seeds._--Leave two or three plants unblanched. They should be
eighteen inches asunder, and may remain in the open ground during
winter. They will flower, and yield a plentiful supply of seeds, the
following summer.

       *       *       *       *       *

PEPPERMINT.

Mentha piperita.

Peppermint is a hardy, perennial plant, introduced from Europe, and
growing naturally in considerable abundance along the banks of small
streams, and in rich, wet localities. Where once established, it spreads
rapidly, and will remain a long period.

Stem smooth, erect, four-sided, and from two to three feet in height;
leaves opposite, ovate, pointed, toothed on the margin; flowers
purplish, or violet-blue, in terminal spikes; the seeds are small,
brown, or blackish-brown, and retain their vitality four years.

_Propagation and Culture._--It may be grown from seeds; but this method
of propagation is rarely practised, as it is more readily increased by
dividing the roots.

The agreeable odor, and peculiar, warm, pleasant flavor, of the leaves
are well known. The plant, however, is little used as a pot-herb, but is
principally cultivated for distillation. For the latter purpose, the
ground is ploughed about the middle of May, and furrowed in one
direction, as for drill-planting of potatoes; making the furrows about
eighteen inches apart. The best roots for setting are those of a year's
growth; and an acre of these will be required to plant ten acres anew.
These are distributed along the furrows in a continuous line, and
covered sometimes with the foot as the planter drops the roots, and
sometimes by drawing the earth over them with a hoe. In about four
weeks, the plants will be well established, and require hoeing and
weeding; which is usually performed three times during the season, the
cultivation being finished early in August.

"The cutting and distilling commence about the 25th of August, except in
very dry seasons, when it stands two or three weeks longer, and
continues until the 1st of October; during which period the plant is in
full inflorescence, and the lower leaves begin to grow sear. It is raked
together in small heaps; when it is suffered to wilt ten or twelve
hours, if convenient.

"The next year, little is done to the mint-field but to cut and distil
its product. During this (the second) year, a few weeds make their
appearance, but not to the injury of the crop; though the most careful
of the mint-growers go through their fields, and destroy them as much as
possible. The second crop is not so productive as the first.

"The third year, little labor is required other than to harvest and
distil the mint. The stem is coarser than before, and the leaves still
less abundant. The weeds this year abound, and are not removed or
destroyed; half or more of the product of the field often being weeds.

"The fourth year, the field is ploughed up early in the spring; and this
'renewing' is sometimes done every third year.

"The fifth year, without any further attention, produces a crop equal to
the second; after which, the field is pastured and reclaimed for other
crops.

"The first year produces the best quality of oil, the highest yield per
acre, and the greatest amount to the quantity of herbage."--_F.
Stearns._

       *       *       *       *       *

ROSEMARY.

Rosmarinus officinalis.

Rosemary is a half-hardy, shrubby plant, from three to six feet in
height. The leaves vary in form and color in the different varieties;
the flowers are small, generally blue, and produced in axillary
clusters; the seeds are brown, or blackish-brown, and retain their
vitality four years.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--Like most aromatic plants, Rosemary
requires a light, dry soil; and, as it is not perfectly hardy, should
have a sheltered situation. The Common Green-leaved and the
Narrow-leaved are best propagated by seeds; but the variegated sorts are
propagated only by cuttings or by dividing the roots. The seeds are sown
in April, in a small nursery-bed; and the seedlings, when two or three
inches high, transplanted in rows two feet apart, and eighteen inches
apart in the rows.

When propagated by cuttings, they should be taken off in May or June,
six inches long, and set two-thirds of the length in the earth, in a
moist, shady situation: when well rooted, transplant as directed for
seedlings. The roots may be divided in spring or autumn.

_Use._--It is sometimes employed, like other pot-herbs, for flavoring
meats and soups. It is used in the manufacture of "eau de Cologne," and
its flowers and calyxes form a principal ingredient in the distillation
of "Hungary Water." Infusions of the leaves are made in some drinks, and
the young stems are used as a garnish.

There are four varieties, as follow:--


COMMON OR GREEN-LEAVED.

Leaves narrow, rounded at the ends,--the upper and under surface green;
the flowers are comparatively large, and deep-colored.

The plant is of spreading habit; and, in all its parts, is more strongly
aromatic than the Narrow-leaved. It is decidedly the best sort for
cultivation.


GOLD-STRIPED.

A variety of the Common or Green-leaved, with foliage striped, or
variegated with yellow.

This and the Silver-leaved are generally cultivated as ornamental
plants. The Gold-striped is much the hardier sort, and will succeed in
any locality where the Common Green-leaved is cultivated.


NARROW-LEAVED.

The plants of this variety are smaller and less branched than those of
the Common or Green-leaved, and are also less fragrant; the leaves are
hoary beneath, and the flowers are smaller and of a paler color.

It is used in all the forms of the Common or Green-leaved, but is less
esteemed.


SILVER-STRIPED.

This is a sub-variety of the Common or Green-leaved, and the most tender
of all the sorts. It is principally cultivated for its variegated
foliage; the leaves being striped, or variegated with white.

Like the Gold-striped, it can only be propagated by slips or by dividing
the roots, and must be well protected during winter.

       *       *       *       *       *

SAGE.

Salvia.

Sage is a low-growing, hardy, evergreen shrub, originally from the south
of Europe. Stem from a foot and a half to two feet high,--the leaves
varying in form and color in the different species and varieties; the
flowers are produced in spikes, and are white, blue, red, purple, or
variegated; the seeds are round, of a blackish-brown color, and retain
their power of germination three years,--nearly seven thousand are
contained in an ounce.

_Soil and Propagation._--Sage thrives best in light, rich, loamy soil.
Though easily grown from slips, or cuttings, it is, in this country,
more generally propagated from seeds. These may be sown on a gentle
hot-bed in March, and the plants set in the open ground in June, in
rows eighteen inches apart, and a foot asunder in the rows; or the seeds
may be sown in April, where the plants are to remain, thinly, in drills
eighteen inches apart, and three-fourths of an inch deep. When the
plants are two inches high, thin them to a foot apart in the rows; and,
if needed, form fresh rows by resetting the plants taken up in thinning.

If grown from cuttings, those from the present year's growth succeed
best. These should be set in June. Cut them four or five inches in
length, remove the lower leaves, and set them two-thirds of their length
in the earth. Water freely, and shade or protect with hand-glasses. By
the last of July, or first of August, they will have taken root, and may
be removed to the place where they are to remain.

It may also be propagated by dividing the roots in spring or autumn, in
the manner of other hardy shrubs.

_Gathering and Use._--Sage should be gathered for drying before the
development of the flowering-shoots; and, when cultivated for its
leaves, these shoots should be cut out as they make their appearance.
When thus treated, the product is largely increased; the leaves being
put forth in much greater numbers, and of larger size.

It is sometimes treated as an annual; the seeds being sown in April, in
drills fourteen inches apart, and the plants cut to the ground when they
have made sufficient growth for use.

The leaves are employed, both in a green and dried state, for seasoning
stuffings, meats, stews, and soups. Sage is also used for flavoring
cheese; and, in the form of a decoction, is sometimes employed for
medical purposes.

_Species and Varieties._--


BROAD-LEAVED GREEN SAGE.

Balsamic Sage. _Mill._

Stems shrubby, less erect and more downy than those of the succeeding
species; the leaves are comparatively large, broad, heart-shaped,
woolly, toothed on the margin, and produced on long footstalks,--those
of the flower-stalks are oblong, sessile, and nearly entire on the
borders; the flowers are small, pale-blue, and much less abundant than
those of the Common Sage.

It is rarely employed in cookery, but for medical purposes is considered
more efficacious than any other species or variety.


COMMON OR RED-LEAVED.

Purple-top. Red-top. Salvia officinalis.

This is the Common Sage of the garden; and with the Green-leaved, which
is but a sub-variety, the most esteemed for culinary purposes. The young
stalks, the leaf-stems, and the ribs and nerves of the leaves, are
purple: the young leaves are also sometimes tinged with the same color,
but generally change by age to clear green.

The Red-leaved is generally regarded as possessing a higher flavor than
the Green-leaved, and is preferred for cultivation; though the
difference, if any really exists, is quite unimportant. The
productiveness of the varieties is nearly the same. The leaves of the
Green Sage are larger than those of the Red; but the latter produces
them in greater numbers.


GREEN-LEAVED.

Green-top.

A variety of the preceding; the young shoots, the leaf-stalks, and the
ribs and nerves of the leaves, being green.

There appears to be little permanency in the characters by which the
varieties are distinguished. Both possess like properties, and are
equally worthy of cultivation. From seeds of either of the sorts, plants
answering to the description of the Red-leaved and Green-leaved would
probably be produced, with almost every intermediate shade of color.


NARROW-LEAVED GREEN SAGE. _Mill._

Sage of Virtue.

Leaves narrow, hoary, toothed towards the base; the spikes of flowers
are long, and nearly leafless; flowers deep-blue; the seeds are similar
to those of the Red-leaved, and produced four together in an open calyx.
Compared with the Common Red-leaved or Green-leaved, the leaves are much
narrower, the spikes longer and less leafy, and the flowers smaller and
of a deeper color.

The variety is mild flavored, and the most esteemed of all the sorts for
use in a crude state; as it is also one of the best for decoctions.

"At one period, the Dutch carried on a profitable trade with the Chinese
by procuring the leaves of this species from the south of France, drying
them in imitation of tea, and shipping the article to China, where, for
each pound of sage, four pounds of tea were received in
exchange."--_M'Int._


VARIEGATED-LEAVED GREEN SAGE.

A sub-variety of the Green-leaved, with variegated foliage. It is not
reproduced from seeds, and must be propagated by slips or by dividing
the roots.


VARIEGATED-LEAVED RED SAGE.

This is but an accidental variety of the Common Red-leaved Sage,
differing only in its variegated foliage. It can be propagated only by
cuttings or by a division of the roots.

       *       *       *       *       *

SAVORY.

Saturjea.


The cultivated species are as follow:--


HEADED SAVORY.

Saturjea capitata.

A perennial plant, with a rigid, angular, branching stem a foot and a
half high. The leaves are firm, pointed, and, when bruised, emit a
strong, pleasant, mint-like odor; the flowers are white, and are
produced in terminal, globular heads; the seeds are quite small, of a
deep-brownish color, and retain their vitality three years.

It may be propagated from seeds or by dividing the roots; the latter
method, however, being generally practised. The young shoots are used in
all the forms of Summer Savory.


SHRUBBY SAVORY.

Saturjea viminea.

A shrub-like, perennial species, cultivated in the same manner as the
Winter Savory. The plant has the pleasant, mint-like odor of the species
first described, but is little used either in cookery or medicine.


SUMMER SAVORY.

Saturjea hortensis.

An annual species, from the south of Europe. Stem twelve or fifteen
inches high, erect, rather slender, and producing its branches in pairs;
the leaves are opposite, narrow, rigid, with a pleasant odor, and warm,
aromatic taste; the flowers are pale-pink, or flesh-colored, and are
produced at the base of the leaves, towards the upper part of the plant,
each stem supporting two flowers; the seeds are quite small,
deep-brown, and retain their vitality two or three years.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--Summer Savory is always raised from
seeds, sown annually in April or May. It thrives best in light, mellow
soil; and the seed should be sown in shallow drills fourteen or fifteen
inches apart. When the plants are two or three inches high, thin them to
five or six inches apart in the rows, and cultivate in the usual manner
during the summer.

When the plants have commenced flowering, they should be cut to the
ground, tied in small bunches, and dried in an airy, shady situation.

For early use, the seeds are sometimes sown in a hot-bed on a gentle
heat, and the seedlings afterwards transplanted to the open ground in
rows, as directed for sowing.

_Use._--The aromatic tops of the plant are used, green or dried, in
stuffing meats and fowl. They are also mixed in salads, and sometimes
boiled with pease and beans. It is sold in considerable quantities at
all seasons of the year, in a dried and pulverized state, packed in
hermetically-sealed bottles or boxes.


WINTER SAVORY. _Thomp._

Saturjea montana.

A hardy, evergreen shrub, with a low, branching stem about a foot in
height. The leaves are opposite, narrow, and rigid, like those of the
preceding species; the flowers resemble those of the Summer Savory, but
are larger and of a paler color; the seeds, which ripen in autumn, are
small, dark-brown, and retain their vitality three years.

_Propagation and Culture._--"It may be raised from seed sown in April or
May; but is generally propagated by dividing the plants in April, or by
cuttings of the young shoots taken off in April or May. The cuttings
should be planted two-thirds of their length deep, on a shady border,
and, if necessary, watered until they take root. When well established,
they may be planted out a foot apart, in rows fifteen inches asunder.
Some may also be planted as an edging.

"The plants should be trimmed every year in autumn, and the ground
between the rows occasionally stirred; but, in doing this, care must be
taken not to injure the roots. Fresh plantations should be made before
the plants grow old and cease to produce a sufficient supply of leaves."

_Use._--It is used for the same purposes as Summer Savory. The leaves
and tender parts of the young branches are mixed in salads: they are
also boiled with pease and beans; and, when dried and powdered, are used
in stuffings for meats and fowl.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPEARMINT.

Green Mint. Mentha viridis.

A hardy, perennial plant, introduced from Europe, and generally
cultivated in gardens, but growing naturally in considerable abundance
about springs of water, and in rich, wet localities. The stem is erect,
four-sided, smooth, and two feet or more in height; the leaves are
opposite, in pairs, stemless, toothed on the margin, and sharply
pointed; the flowers are purple, and are produced in August, in long,
slender, terminal spikes; the seeds are small, oblong, of a brown color,
and retain their vitality five years,--they are generally few in number,
most of the flowers being abortive.

_Soil, Propagation, and Culture._--It may be grown from seed, but is
best propagated by a division of the roots, which are long and creeping,
and readily establish themselves wherever they are planted. Spearmint
thrives best in rich, moist soil; but may be grown in any good garden
loam. The roots may be set either in the autumn or spring.

Where large quantities are required for marketing in the green state, or
when grown for distillation, lay out the land in beds three or four feet
in width, and make the drills two or three inches deep and a foot apart.
Having divided the roots into convenient pieces, spread them thinly
along the drills, and earth them over to a level with the surface of the
bed. Thus treated, the plants will soon make their appearance; and may
be gathered for use in August and September. Just before severe weather,
give the beds a slight dressing of rich soil; and, the ensuing season,
the plants will entirely occupy the surface of the ground.

_Use._--Mint is sometimes mixed in salads, and is used for flavoring
soups of all descriptions. It is often boiled with green pease; and,
with the addition of sugar and vinegar, forms a much-esteemed relish for
roasted lamb. It has also much reputed efficacy as a medicinal plant.


CURLED-LEAVED SPEARMINT.

A variety with curled foliage. It is a good sort for garnishing; but,
for general use, is inferior to the Common or Plain-leaved species
before described. Propagated by dividing the roots.

       *       *       *       *       *

TANSY.

Tanacetum vulgare.

Tansy is a hardy, perennial, herbaceous plant, naturalized from Europe,
and abundant by roadsides and in waste places. Its stem is from two to
three feet high; the leaves are finely cut and divided, twice-toothed on
the margin, and of a rich, deep-green color; flowers in corymbs,
deep-yellow, and produced in great abundance; the seeds are small, of a
brownish color, and retain their vitality three years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Tansy may be grown in almost any soil or
situation, and is propagated from seeds or by dividing the roots; the
latter method being generally practised. In doing this, it is only
necessary to take a few established plants, divide them into small
pieces or collections of roots, and set them six inches apart, in rows a
foot asunder, or in hills two feet apart in each direction. They will
soon become established; and, if not disturbed, will completely occupy
the ground. In most places, when once introduced, it is liable to become
troublesome, as the roots not only spread rapidly, but are very
tenacious of life, and eradicated with difficulty.

When cultivated for its leaves, the flowering-shoots should be cut off
as they make their appearance. It is but little used, and a plant or two
will afford an abundant supply.

_Use._--The leaves have a strong, peculiar, aromatic odor, and a bitter
taste. They were formerly employed to give color and flavor to various
dishes, but are now rarely used in culinary preparations. The plant
possesses the tonic and stomachic properties common to bitter herbs.

There are three cultivated varieties, as follow:--


CURLED-LEAVED TANSY.

Double Tansy. Tanacetum vulgare, var. crispum.

This differs from the Common Tansy in the frilled or curled character of
the leaves, which have some resemblance to the leaves of the finer kinds
of Curled Cress or Parsley. They are of a rich green color, and are
sometimes employed for garnishing. In the habit of the plant, color of
the flowers, odor and flavor of the leaves, the variety differs little,
if at all, from the Common Tansy. It is more beautiful than the
last-named; and, in all respects, much more worthy of cultivation.

Propagated only by dividing the roots.


LARGE-LEAVED TANSY.

Leaves larger than those of any other variety, but much less fragrant.
It is of little value, and rarely cultivated.


VARIEGATED-LEAVED.

A variety with variegated foliage. Aside from the peculiar color of the
leaves, the plant differs in no respect from the Common Tansy: it grows
to the same height, the flowers are of the same color, and the leaves
have the same taste and odor.

It must be propagated by dividing the roots; the variegated character of
the foliage not being reproduced from seeds.

       *       *       *       *       *

THYME.

Thymus.

Two species of Thyme are cultivated for culinary purposes,--the Common
Garden Thyme (_T. vulgaris_) and the Lemon or Evergreen Thyme (_T.
citriodorus_).

They are hardy, perennial plants, of a shrubby character, and
comparatively low growth. They are propagated from seeds and by dividing
the roots; but the finest plants are produced from seeds.

Of the Common Garden Thyme, there are three varieties:--


BROAD-LEAVED.

The Broad-Leaved Thyme is more cultivated in this country than any other
species or variety. The stem is ten or twelve inches high, shrubby, of a
brownish-red color, and much branched; the leaves are small, narrow,
green above, and whitish beneath; flowers purple, in terminal spikes;
the seeds are black, and exceedingly small,--two hundred and thirty
thousand being contained in an ounce; they retain their vitality two
years.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--When propagated by seeds, they are sown
in April or May, thinly, in shallow drills ten or twelve inches apart.
When the plants are up, they should be carefully cleared of weeds, and
thinned to eight or ten inches apart, that they may have space for
development. They may be cut for use as soon as they have made
sufficient growth; but, for drying, the stalks are gathered as they come
into flower.

If propagated by dividing the roots, the old plants should be taken up
in April, and divided into as many parts as the roots and tops will
admit. They are then transplanted about ten inches apart, in beds of
rich, light earth; and, if the weather be dry, watered till they are
well established. They may be cut for use in August and September.

_Use._--The leaves have an agreeable, aromatic odor; and are used for
flavoring soups, stuffings, and sauces.


NARROW-LEAVED. _Mill._

The stalks of this variety are shorter than those of the Broad-leaved;
the leaves also are longer, narrower, and more sharply pointed; and the
flowers are larger.

It is propagated, cultivated, and used as the Broad-leaved.


VARIEGATED-LEAVED.

A sub-variety of the Broad-leaved, with variegated foliage. It is
generally cultivated as an ornamental plant; and is propagated only by
dividing the roots, as directed for the Broad-leaved.


LEMON THYME. _Loud._

Thymus citriodorus.

A low, evergreen shrub, with a somewhat trailing stem, rarely rising
more than six or eight inches high. It is readily distinguished from the
Common or Broad-leaved by the soft, pleasant, lemon-like odor of the
young shoots and leaves.

It is used for flavoring various dishes, and by some is preferred to the
Broad-leaved.

The species is propagated from seeds by dividing the roots, and by
layers and cuttings. Seedling plants, however, are said to vary in
fragrance; and, when a choice stock can be obtained, it is better to
propagate by dividing the plants.




CHAPTER IX.

LEGUMINOUS PLANTS.

American Garden-bean. Asparagus-bean. Lima Bean. Scarlet-runner. Sieva.
Chick-pea. Chickling Vetch. English Bean. Lentil. Lupine. Pea. Pea-nut.
Vetch, or Tare. Winged Pea.

       *       *       *       *       *

AMERICAN GARDEN-BEAN.

French Bean. Kidney-bean. Haricot, of the French. Phaseolus vulgaris.

The Common Garden-bean of the United States is identical with the French
or Kidney Bean of England and France, and is quite distinct from the
English or Garden Bean of French and English catalogues.

The American Garden-bean is a tender, annual plant from the East Indies,
with a dwarfish or climbing stem and trifoliate leaves. The flowers are
variable in color, and produced in loose clusters; the seeds are
produced in long, flattened, or cylindrical, bivalved pods, and vary, in
a remarkable degree, in their size, form, and color,--their germinative
powers are retained three or four years.

As catalogued by seedsmen, the varieties are divided in two
classes,--the Dwarfs, and the Pole or Running Sorts.

_Dwarfs._--The plants of this class vary from a foot to two feet in
height. They require no stakes or poles for their support; and are grown
in hills or drills, as may suit the taste or convenience of the
cultivator.

All of the varieties are comparatively tender, and should not be planted
before settled, mild weather. They succeed best in warm, light soil;
but will flourish in almost any soil or situation, except such as are
shaded or very wet.

When planted in drills, they are made about two inches deep, and from
fourteen to twenty inches apart. The seeds are planted from three to six
inches apart; the distance in the drills, as well as the space between
the drills, being regulated by the habit of the variety cultivated.

If planted in hills, they should be three feet apart in one direction,
and about two feet in the opposite. If the variety under cultivation is
large and vigorous, four or five plants may be allowed to a hill; if of
an opposite character, allow twice this number.

_To raise Seed._--Leave a row or a few hills entirely unplucked. Seed is
of little value when saved at the end of the season from a few scattered
pods accidentally left to ripen on plants that have been plucked from
time to time for the table.


BAGNOLET.

A half-dwarf, French variety. Plant strong and vigorous, with remarkably
large, deep-green foliage; flowers bright lilac; the pods are straight,
seven inches long, half an inch wide, streaked and spotted with purple
when sufficiently grown for shelling in their green state,
nankeen-yellow when fully ripe, and contain six seeds, which are nearly
straight, rounded at the ends, a little flattened on the sides,
three-fourths of an inch long, a fourth of an inch thick, and of a
violet-black color, variegated or marbled with drab.

About sixteen hundred beans are contained in a quart; and, as the plants
are vigorous growers, this amount of seed will be sufficient for three
hundred feet of drill, or for nearly three hundred hills. If planted in
drills, they should be made twenty inches apart, and two plants allowed
to a linear foot.

The variety is not early, and requires the entire season for its full
perfection. When sown as soon as the weather is suitable, the plant will
blossom in about seven weeks. In sixty days, pods may be plucked for
use; and the crop will be ready for harvesting in fifteen weeks from the
time of planting. For its green pods, the seeds may be planted until the
middle of July.

The Bagnolet is of little value as a shelled-bean, either green or ripe.
As a string-bean, it is deservedly considered one of the best. The pods
are produced in great abundance; and are not only tender, succulent, and
well flavored, but remain long on the plants before they become tough,
and unfit for use. If the pods are plucked as they attain a suitable
size, new pods will rapidly succeed, and the plants will afford a
continued supply for several weeks.


BLACK-EYED CHINA.

Plant fifteen inches high, less strong and vigorous than that of the
Common Red-eyed China; the flowers are white; the pods are comparatively
short, usually about five inches long, green and straight while young,
straw-yellow when sufficiently advanced for shelling, yellow, thick,
hard, and parchment-like when ripe, and contain five or six
seeds,--these are white, spotted and marked about the eye with black, of
an oblong form, usually rounded, but sometimes shortened at the ends,
slightly compressed on the sides, and measure half an inch in length,
and three-eighths of an inch in thickness.

A quart contains fifteen hundred beans, and will plant a drill, or row,
of two hundred feet, or a hundred and fifty hills.

The variety is early. When sown at the commencement of the season, the
plants will blossom in six weeks, produce pods for the table in seven
weeks, pods for shelling in ten weeks, and ripen in eighty-seven days.
It yields well, ripens off at once, and, on account of the thick,
parchment-like character of the pods, suffers much less from wet and
unfavorable seasons than many other sorts.

As a string-bean, it is of fair quality, good when shelled in the green
state, and farinaceous and mild flavored when ripe.


BLUE POD.

A half-dwarf variety, growing from two to three feet high, with a
branching stem, deep-green foliage, and white flowers. The pods are five
inches long, pale-green while young, light-yellow as the season of
maturity approaches, cream-white when fully ripe, and contain five or
six seeds.

Its season is intermediate. If sown early, the plants will blossom in
seven weeks, afford pods for stringing in eight weeks, green beans in
ten or eleven weeks, and ripen their seeds in ninety-seven days. It is a
week earlier than the White Marrow, and ten days in advance of the
Pea-bean. Plantings may be made as late as the last week in June, which
will yield pods for the table in seven weeks, and ripen the middle of
September, or in about twelve weeks.

The ripe seed is white, oblong, flattened, rounded on the back, often
squarely or angularly shortened at the ends, half an inch long, and a
fourth of an inch thick: twenty-seven hundred will measure a quart.

It is a field rather than a garden variety; though the green pods are
tender and well flavored. If planted in drills two feet apart, five
pecks of seed will be required for an acre; or four pecks for the same
quantity of ground, if the rows are two feet and a half apart. If
planted in hills, six or eight seeds should be put in each; and, if the
hills are three feet apart, twelve quarts of seed will plant an acre.

The Blue Pod is the earliest of the field varieties; more prolific, more
generally cultivated, and more abundant in the market, than either the
Pea-bean or the White Marrow. It is, however, much less esteemed; and,
even in its greatest perfection, is almost invariably sold at a lower
price.

On account of its precocity, it is well suited for planting in fields of
corn, when the crop may have been partially destroyed by birds or
insects, and the season has too far advanced to admit of a replanting of
corn. In field-culture, Blue-pod beans are planted till the 25th of
June.


CANADA YELLOW.

Round American Kidney. _Law._

The plants of this variety are from fourteen to sixteen inches high, and
of medium strength and vigor; flowers lilac-purple; the pods are five
inches long, nearly straight, green while young, yellow at maturity, and
contain from four to six seeds.

Season intermediate. If sown early, the plants will blossom in six or
seven weeks, supply the table with pods in eight weeks, green
shelled-beans in ten weeks, and ripen off in ninety days. When planted
after settled warm weather, the variety grows rapidly, and ripens
quickly; blossoming in less than six weeks, and ripening in seventy
days, from the time of planting. For green shelled-beans, the seeds may
be planted till the middle of July.

The ripe seeds are of an ovoid or rounded form, and measure half an inch
in length and three-eighths of an inch in thickness. They are of a
yellowish-drab color, with a narrow, reddish-brown line about the eye;
the drab changing, by age, to dull nankeen-yellow. About seventeen
hundred are contained in a quart; and this amount of seeds will plant
two hundred and fifty feet of drill, or a hundred and seventy-five
hills.

The variety is quite productive, and excellent as a shelled bean, green
or dry. The young pods are not so tender as those of many other sorts,
and are but little used.


CHILIAN.

Plant sixteen or eighteen inches high, sturdy and vigorous; foliage
large, deep-green, wrinkled; flowers pale-lilac; the pods are five
inches and a half long, slightly curved, pale-green while young,
yellowish-white when ripe, and contain five seeds.

If planted early in the season, the variety will blossom in seven weeks,
yield pods for the table in about eight weeks, and ripen in a hundred
days, from the time of planting.

The ripe seeds are of a clear, bright pink, or rose color; gradually
becoming duller and darker from the time of harvesting. They are
kidney-shaped, a little flattened, and of large size; generally
measuring three-fourths of an inch long, and three-eighths of an inch
thick. Twelve hundred and fifty are contained in a quart, and will be
sufficient for planting a row or drill of two hundred feet, or for a
hundred and twenty-five hills.

The variety is healthy, and moderatively productive; not much esteemed
for its young pods, but is worthy of cultivation for the large size and
good quality of the beans; which, either in the green or ripe state, are
quite farinaceous and mild flavored.


CRESCENT-EYED.

Height fourteen or fifteen inches; flowers white,--the upper petals
slightly stained with red; the pods are five inches and a half long,
pale-green and somewhat curved when young, yellowish-white when fully
ripe, and contain five seeds.

Season intermediate. If planted early, the variety will blossom in seven
weeks, yield pods for stringing in eight weeks, supply the table with
green beans in eleven weeks, and ripen in about ninety days. When
planted and grown under the influence of summer weather, pods may be
plucked for the table in fifty days, and the crop will ripen in about
twelve weeks.

The beans, when ripe, are white, with a large, rose-red patch about the
eye; the colored portion of the surface being striped and marked with
brownish-red. The fine rose-red changes by age to a brownish-red, and
the red streaks and markings become relatively duller and darker: they
are somewhat kidney-shaped, and measure three-fourths of an inch in
length and three-eighths of an inch in thickness. A quart contains
nearly thirteen hundred seeds, and will plant a hundred and fifty hills,
or a row of two hundred feet.

The variety yields well, and the green pods are tender and well
flavored. It is, however, generally cultivated for its seeds, which are
of large size and excellent quality, whether used in a green or ripe
state.


DUN-COLORED.

Plant of vigorous, branching habit, sixteen inches in height, with
broad, deep-green foliage and purplish-white flowers; the pods are five
inches and a half long, half an inch broad, green and nearly straight
while young, yellow and slender when fully ripe, and contain five or six
beans.

The ripe seeds are dun-colored or dark-drab, usually with a greenish
line encircling the eye, kidney-shaped, five-eighths of an inch long,
and about a fourth of an inch thick. A quart contains about seventeen
hundred beans, and will plant a row of two hundred and twenty-five feet,
or a hundred and seventy-five hills.

It is one of the earliest of the dwarf varieties; blossoming in about
six weeks, producing young pods in seven weeks, and ripening in
eighty-five days, from the time of planting. When sown after settled
warm weather, pods may be gathered for use in six weeks; and, for these,
plantings may be made until the 1st of August.

As a shelled-bean, green or dry, it is of little value, and hardly
worthy of cultivation. As an early string-bean, it is one of the best.
The pods are not only succulent and tender, but suitable for use very
early in the season. It is also quite prolific; and, if planted at
intervals of two weeks till the last of July, will supply the table to
the last of September.

The variety has long been cultivated in England and other parts of
Europe, and is much esteemed for its hardiness and productiveness.


DWARF CRANBERRY.

Plant vigorous; and, if the variety is pure, strictly a Dwarf, growing
about sixteen inches high. As generally found in gardens, the plants
send out slender runners, eighteen inches or two feet in length. The
flowers are pale-purple; the pods are five inches long, sickle-shaped,
pale-green in their young state, nearly white when ripe, and contain
five or six seeds.

The ripe seeds are smaller than those of the running variety, but of the
same form and color: sixteen hundred are contained in a quart, and will
plant nearly two hundred feet of drill, or a hundred and seventy-five
hills.

The genuine Dwarf Cranberry is not one of the earliest varieties, but
rather an intermediate sort. If sown as soon as the weather will admit,
the plants will blossom in seven or eight weeks, and the young pods may
be gathered for use in nine weeks. In favorable seasons, the crop is
perfected in about ninety days. If planted in June, the variety will
ripen in ten weeks.

It is hardy and productive; and the young pods are not only succulent
and tender, but are suitable for use at a more advanced stage of growth
than those of most varieties. The beans, in their green state, are
farinaceous and well flavored, but, after ripening, are little used; the
color being objectionable.

A variety with a brownish-red, oval, flattened seed, half an inch in
length, is extensively known and cultivated as the Dwarf Cranberry. It
is ten or twelve days earlier, the plants are smaller and less
productive, the young pods less tender and succulent, and the seeds
(green or ripe) less farinaceous, than those of the true variety. With
the exception of its earlier maturity, it is comparatively not worthy of
cultivation.


DWARF HORTICULTURAL.

Variegated Dwarf Prague.

Stem about sixteen inches high; plant of vigorous, branching habit;
flowers purple; pods five inches long, green while young, but changing
to yellow, marbled and streaked with brilliant rose-red, when
sufficiently advanced for shelling in their green state. At maturity,
the clear, pale-yellow is changed to brownish-white, and the bright-red
variegations are either entirely obliterated, or changed to dull, dead
purple. If well formed, the pods contain five (rarely six) seeds.

It is a medium or half-early sort; and, if planted as soon as the
weather becomes favorable, will blossom in seven weeks, produce pods for
the table in about eight weeks, and ripen in ninety-five or a hundred
days. Planted and grown in summer weather, the variety will produce
green pods in seven weeks, and ripen in ninety days.

The ripe seeds resemble those of the running variety in form and color;
but they are smaller, a little more slender, and usually flattened
slightly at the sides. When pure, they are egg-shaped; and a much
compressed or a longer and more slender form is indicative of
degeneracy. Fourteen hundred beans are contained in a quart; and this
quantity of seed will be sufficient for planting a row of a hundred and
seventy-five feet, or a hundred and forty hills.

The Dwarf Horticultural Bean is quite productive, and the young pods are
tender and of good quality. It is, however, not so generally cultivated
for its young pods as for its seeds, which are much esteemed for their
mild flavor and farinaceous quality. For shelling in the green state, it
is one of the best of the Dwarfs, and deserves cultivation.


DWARF SABRE.

Dwarf Case-knife. Dwarf Cimeter.

A half-dwarf, French variety, two and a half to three feet high. As the
running shoots are quite slender, and usually decay before the crop
matures, it is always cultivated as other Dwarf sorts. Foliage large,
wrinkled, and blistered; the flowers are white; the pods are very large,
seven to eight inches long, and an inch in width, often irregular and
distorted, green while young, paler as the season of maturity
approaches, brownish-white when ripe, and contain seven or eight seeds.

The ripe bean is white, kidney-shaped, flattened, often twisted or
contorted, three-fourths of an inch in length, and three-eighths of an
inch in width: about twelve hundred are contained in a quart. As the
variety is a vigorous grower, and occupies much space, this quantity of
seed will plant a row of two hundred feet, or two hundred and
twenty-five hills.

Season intermediate. The plants blossom in seven weeks, produce young
pods in about eight weeks, pods for shelling in their green state in
eleven or twelve weeks, and ripen in ninety-seven days, from the time of
sowing. If cultivated for its green pods, the seeds may be planted to
the middle of July.

The Dwarf Sabre is one of the most productive of all varieties; yielding
its long, broad pods in great profusion. From the spreading, recumbent
character of the plants, the pods often rest or lie upon the surface of
the ground; and, being unusually thin and delicate, the crop often
suffers to a considerable extent from the effects of rain and dampness
in unfavorable seasons.

The young pods are remarkable for their tender and succulent character;
and the beans, both in a green and dried state, are mild and well
flavored. It is hardy, productive, of good quality, and recommended for
cultivation.


DWARF SOISSONS.

A half-dwarf, French bean, similar in habit to the Dwarf Sabre. While
young, the plants produce slender runners, two feet or more in length;
but, as they are generally of short duration, the variety is cultivated
as a Common Dwarf. The flowers are white; pods six inches long,
pale-green at first, cream-yellow when sufficiently advanced for
shelling, dull cream-white when fully ripe, and contain five, and
sometimes six, beans.

The variety is comparatively early. Plants, from seeds sown in spring,
will blossom in six weeks, produce pods for use in seven weeks, and
ripen in ninety days. If planted and grown in the summer months, the
crop will be ready for harvesting in eleven weeks; and sowings for the
ripe seeds may be made till the beginning of July.

Seeds white, kidney-shaped, flattened, often bent or distorted,
five-eighths of an inch long, three-eighths of an inch wide, and a
fourth of an inch thick: fifteen hundred are contained in a quart, and
will plant a drill two hundred and twenty-five feet in length, or about
two hundred hills.

The variety is productive, and the young pods are of fair quality; the
seeds are excellent, whether used green or ripe; the skin is thin; and
they are much esteemed for their peculiar whiteness, and delicacy of
flavor.


EARLY CHINA.

China. Red-eyed China.

Plant fifteen inches high, with yellowish-green, wrinkled foliage, and
white flowers; the pods are five inches long, green and straight while
young, yellowish-green as they approach maturity, yellow when fully
ripe, and contain five (rarely six) beans.

The ripe seeds are white, colored and spotted about the eye with
purplish-red, oblong, nearly cylindrical at the centre, rounded at the
ends, six-tenths of an inch long, and three-eighths of an inch thick:
sixteen hundred and fifty measure a quart, and will plant two hundred
feet of drill, or two hundred hills.

If planted early in the season, the variety will blossom in six weeks,
afford young pods for use in seven weeks, green beans in ten weeks, and
ripen in eighty-five days. When planted and grown in summer, the crop
will ripen in eleven weeks; and plants from seeds sown as late as the
first of August will generally afford an abundant supply of tender pods
from the middle to the close of September.

The Early China is very generally disseminated, and is one of the most
popular of the Dwarf varieties. It is hardy and productive; but the
young pods, though succulent and tender, are inferior to those of some
other varieties. The seeds, green or ripe, are thin-skinned, mealy, and
mild flavored.


EARLY RACHEL.

A low-growing, branching variety, twelve to fifteen inches high; flowers
white; the pods are five inches and a half long, green while young,
becoming paler or greenish-yellow as they approach maturity, cream-white
when ripe, and contain five seeds.

Planted early in the season, the variety will blossom in about seven
weeks; and, in eight weeks, the young pods will be fit for use. Pods for
shelling may be plucked in ten weeks, and the crop will ripen in eighty
days. For the green pods, the seeds may be planted till the middle or
twentieth of July.

The ripe seed is yellowish-brown, white at one of the ends,
kidney-shaped, often abruptly shortened, five-eighths of an inch long,
and a fourth of an inch thick: nearly two thousand are contained in a
quart.

The Early Rachel is hardy, and moderately productive, and, as an early
string-bean, may be desirable; but as a shell-bean, green or dry, it is
of little value. In common with many other early sorts cultivated as
string-beans, the pods, though crisp and tender at first, soon become
too tough and parchment-like for use. In general, the pods of the later
sorts remain crisp and tender a much longer period than those of the
earlier descriptions.


EARLY VALENTINE.

Valentine.

Plant about sixteen inches high, with small, yellowish-green leaves and
white flowers; the pods are comparatively short, usually four and a half
or five inches long, sickle-shaped, almost cylindrical, green while
young, yellow when ripe, and contain five seeds.

The variety is productive, and quite early, though not one of the
earliest. When sown at the commencement of the season, the plants will
blossom in six weeks, produce pods for use in about seven weeks, and
ripen in thirteen weeks, or ninety days, from the time of planting. If
planted after the beginning of summer weather, pods may be gathered for
the table in fifty days, and the beans will ripen in eleven weeks.

The beans, when ripe, are of a pale-pink color, marbled or variegated
with rose-red, becoming duller and browner by age, oblong, nearly
straight, sometimes distorted and irregular as if pressed out of their
natural shape, often more or less shortened at the ends, five-eighths of
an inch long, three-eighths of an inch wide, and about the same in
thickness. A quart will contain eighteen or nineteen hundred seeds;
which will be sufficient for a hundred and seventy-five hills, or for a
drill, or row, of two hundred or two hundred and twenty-five feet.

The Early Valentine is generally cultivated for its tender and very
fleshy pods, which remain long on the plants without becoming hard and
tough. They make an excellent, brittle pickle; and, when cooked, are
equal to those of any other Dwarf variety. The shelled-beans, either in
their green or ripe state, are little esteemed.

The variety has long been grown in England and other parts of Europe,
and is common to gardens in almost every section of the United States.


GOLDEN CRANBERRY.

Canadian. Round American Kidney.

Height about sixteen inches; flowers purple; the pods are five inches
and a half long, five-eighths of an inch broad, somewhat irregular in
form, yellow when ripe, and contain five seeds.

Season intermediate. Early plantings will blossom in seven weeks, yield
pods for the table in eight weeks, and ripen in ninety days.

The ripe seeds are pale greenish-yellow, with an olive-green line
encircling the eye; roundish-ovoid, three-eighths of an inch long, and
nearly the same in thickness. A quart contains nearly eighteen hundred
seeds, and will plant a row, or drill, of two hundred feet, or two
hundred and twenty-five hills.

As a string-bean, or for shelling in the green state, it is inferior to
many other varieties, and is little cultivated for use in these forms;
but as a variety for baking, or for cooking in any form when ripe, it is
much esteemed, and recommended for cultivation.

Hardy and productive.


LONG YELLOW SIX-WEEKS.

Six-weeks. Yellow Six-weeks. Yellow Flageolet. _Vil._

The plants of this familiar variety are of vigorous, branching habit,
and from fourteen to sixteen inches high; the flowers are pale-purple;
the pods are five inches long, six-tenths of an inch broad, often curved
or sickle-shaped, green at first, gradually becoming paler, cream-yellow
when ripe, and contain five (rarely six) beans.

It is one of the earliest of the Dwarf varieties. Spring plantings will
blossom in six weeks, produce pods for the table in seven weeks, and
ripen in eighty-seven days. Summer plantings will afford pods for the
table in about six weeks, and ripen in sixty-three days. When planted as
late in the season as the last of July or first of August, the variety
will afford an abundant supply of tender pods from the middle to the
last of September.

The ripe seeds are pale yellowish-drab, with an olive-green line about
the eye; the drab rapidly changing by age to dull yellowish-brown. They
are kidney-shaped, rather straight, three-fourths of an inch long, and
three-tenths of an inch thick. About fourteen hundred beans are
contained in a quart, and will plant a row of two hundred feet, or a
hundred and fifty hills.

It is quite productive, and an excellent early string-bean, but less
valuable as a green shelled-bean, or for cooking when ripe. On account
of the tender and delicate character of the pods, the ripe seeds are
often injured by damp or continued rainy weather. A popular, early
garden-bean, much cultivated both in this country and in Europe.


MOHAWK.

Early Mohawk.

Stem about eighteen inches high, sturdy and branching; foliage large,
deep-green, wrinkled, and blistered; flowers pale-lilac; the pods are
five inches and a half long, five-eighths of an inch wide, and generally
contain five seeds,--while young they are green, and nearly straight; as
they approach maturity they become paler; and, when ripe, are frequently
streaked and spotted with purple.

The ripe seeds are variegated with drab, dull purple, and different
shades of brown; the brown and dull purple prevailing: they are
kidney-shaped, and measure nearly three-fourths of an inch in length,
and three-eighths of an inch in width. A quart contains about fourteen
hundred and fifty seeds, and will plant a hundred and seventy-five feet
of drill, or a hundred and seventy-five hills.

It is about a week later than the earliest varieties. Spring plantings
will blossom in about seven weeks, produce pods for the table in eight
weeks, and ripen in a hundred days, from the time of sowing. In ordinary
seasons, the variety will ripen perfectly if planted the last week in
June; and will yield an abundance of pods for the table, if the planting
be made as late in the season as the last of July.

The Early Mohawk is quite productive, and one of the hardiest of the
Dwarf varieties. It is well adapted for early planting, and is
extensively grown by market-gardeners as an early string-bean. The young
pods are comparatively tender, and of good quality; and, if gathered as
they become of suitable size, the plants will continue to yield them in
great abundance. The shelled-beans, green or dry, are less esteemed, and
considered inferior to many other varieties.


NEWINGTON WONDER.

A healthy, vigorous variety, with deep-green foliage and bright-purple
flowers. The plants often produce slender, barren runners, eighteen
inches or two feet in length; but they are generally of short duration,
and the variety is treated as other Dwarfs.

The pods are small and straight; usually about four inches long, and
nearly half an inch broad. They are pale-green at first; and afterwards
change to yellowish-white, tinted or washed with bright pink. At
maturity they are dusky-drab, sometimes clouded or shaded with purple,
and contain six or seven beans.

The ripe seeds are pale brownish-drab, with a yellowish-brown line about
the eye; oblong, flattened, shortened at the ends, nearly half an inch
long, and a fourth of an inch deep: about thirty-six hundred are
contained in a quart. As the seeds are comparatively small, and the
plants of spreading habit, this amount of seeds will plant a row four
hundred feet in length, or four hundred hills.

The variety is not early, and, when cultivated for its seeds, should
have the benefit of the whole season; though, with favorable autumnal
weather, the crop will ripen if planted the middle of June. Spring
plantings will blossom in eight weeks, produce young pods in nine weeks,
and ripen in a hundred and six days.

The Newington Wonder is remarkably prolific; and, in its manner of
growth and general character, resembles the Tampico or Turtle-soup. As a
string-bean, it is one of the best. The pods, though not large, are
crisp, succulent, and tender, and produced in great abundance throughout
most of the season. The seeds, in their green state, are small, and of
little value for the table: when ripe, they afford an excellent
substitute for the Tampico or Turtle-soup; the difference, aside from
the color, being scarcely perceptible.

The Newington Wonder of English and French authors appears to be, in
some respects, distinct from the American variety. It is described as
very dwarf, about a foot high, early and productive; pods dark-green,
moderately long, not broad, thick and fleshy; seeds quite small, light
chestnut-colored.


PEA-BEAN.

Plant vigorous, much branched, and, like the Blue Pod and White Marrow,
inclined to send up running shoots; foliage comparatively small,
deep-green; flowers white; the pods are about four inches long, half an
inch wide, nearly straight, green when young, paler as they approach the
season of ripening, yellowish when fully ripe, and contain five beans.

It is comparatively a late variety. When planted in spring, it will
blossom in fifty days, afford green pods in fifty-eight days, and ripen
in about fifteen weeks. In favorable autumns, it will ripen if planted
as late as the 20th of June; but it is not so early as the Blue Pod or
White Marrow, and, when practicable, should have the advantage of the
entire season.

The ripe seeds of the pure variety are quite small, roundish-ovoid,
five-sixteenths of an inch long, a fourth of an inch in width and
thickness, and of a pure yet not glossy white color: about forty-four
hundred seeds are contained in a quart.

As a garden variety, it is of little value, though the young pods are
crisp and tender. It is cultivated almost exclusively as a field-bean.
If planted in rows or drills two feet apart, three pecks of seeds will
be required for an acre; or eighteen quarts will seed this quantity of
land, if the rows are two feet and a half apart. When planted in hills,
eight seeds are allowed to a hill; and, if the hills are made three feet
apart, eight quarts will plant an acre. The yield varies from fourteen
to twenty bushels, according to soil, season, and cultivation.

The Pea-bean, the White Marrow, and the Blue Pod are the principal if
not the only kinds of much commercial importance; the names of other
varieties being rarely, if ever, mentioned in the regular reports of the
current prices of the markets. If equally well ripened, and, in their
respective varieties, equally pure, the Pea-bean and the White Marrow
command about the same prices; the former, however, being more abundant
in the market than the latter. By many, and perhaps by a majority, the
Pea-bean is esteemed the best of all baking varieties.


POTTAWOTTOMIE.

The plants of this variety are remarkable for their strong, vigorous
habit, and large, luxuriant foliage. The flowers are flesh-white; the
pods are six inches long, green at first, then mottled and streaked with
lively rose-red on a cream-white ground (the markings changing to purple
at maturity), and contain five (rarely six) seeds.

The variety is comparatively late. If sown early in the season, the
plants will flower in seven weeks, afford pods for shelling in eleven
weeks, and ripen in a hundred days, from the time of planting.

The ripe seeds are of a light creamy-pink color, streaked and spotted
with a red or reddish-brown: the soft, flesh-like color, however, soon
becomes duller and darker, and at last gives place to a dull,
cinnamon-brown. They are kidney-shaped, fully three-fourths of an inch
long, and about three-eighths of an inch broad. About a thousand will
measure a quart, and will plant a row two hundred feet in length, or a
hundred and twenty-five hills. On account of the large size and
spreading habit of the plants, five seeds will be sufficient for a hill;
and, in the rows, they should be dropped five or six inches from each
other.

The young pods are inferior to most varieties in crispness, and
tenderness of texture; and are comparatively but little used. The seeds
are remarkably large, separate easily from the pods, and, green or ripe,
are remarkably farinaceous and well flavored, nearly or quite equalling
the Dwarf and Running Horticultural.


RED FLAGEOLET.

Scarlet Flageolet.

A half-dwarf, French Bean, two to three feet high; flowers pale-purple;
the pods are six inches and a half long, somewhat curved, green while
young, pale-yellow at maturity, and contain five or six seeds.

It is one of the latest of the Dwarf varieties. If sown early, the
plants will blossom in seven weeks, and pods may be gathered for use in
about nine weeks; in thirteen weeks the pods will be sufficiently
advanced for shelling, and the crop will be ready for harvesting in a
hundred and ten days. It requires the whole season for its full
perfection; but, for its young pods or for green beans, plantings may be
made to the last week in June.

The ripe beans are blood-red when first harvested, but gradually change
by age to deep-purple: they are kidney-shaped, nearly straight, slightly
flattened, three-fourths of an inch long, three-eighths of an inch
broad, and nearly the same in thickness. Fifteen hundred seeds are
contained in a quart.

The Red Flageolet yields abundantly; and the young pods are not only of
good size, but remarkably crisp and tender. If plucked as they become
fit for use, the plants continue to produce fresh pods for many weeks.
The green beans are farinaceous, and excellent for table use; but are
seldom cooked in their ripened state.


RED-SPECKLED.

Plant branching, and of strong growth,--nearly a foot and a half high;
foliage remarkably large; flowers pale-purple; pods five inches and a
half long, nearly straight, green while young, paler with occasional
marks and spots of purple when more advanced, yellowish-white when ripe,
and containing five (rarely six) seeds.

Season intermediate. Plants from seeds sown after settled warm weather
will blossom in six weeks, and green pods may be plucked for use in
fifty days. For shelling in their green state, pods may be gathered in
ten weeks, and the crop will ripen off in ninety days. For its young
pods, or for green beans, plantings may be made to the last week in
June; but the crop will not mature, unless the weather continues
favorable till the 1st of October.

The ripe seeds are variegated with deep-red and pale-drab, the red
predominating; kidney-shaped, nearly straight, three-fourths of an inch
long, and three-tenths of an inch deep. A quart contains fourteen
hundred and fifty seeds, and will plant a row of two hundred and
twenty-five feet, or a hundred and fifty hills.

The variety is hardy and productive. It is extensively cultivated as a
garden-bean in England and France, and has been common to the gardens of
this country for nearly two centuries. The young pods are of medium
quality; but the seeds, green or dry, are mealy and well flavored. On
account of the parchment-like character of the pods, the seeds seldom
suffer from the effects of wet weather.


REFUGEE.

Thousand to One.

Plant sixteen to eighteen inches high, and readily distinguished from
most varieties by its small, smooth, deep-green, and elongated leaves;
flowers purple; pods five inches long, nearly cylindrical, pale-green
while young, greenish-white streaked with purple when sufficiently
advanced for shelling, yellow when ripe, and usually yielding five
beans.

The Refugee is not an early sort. The plants blossom in seven weeks,
produce young pods in eight weeks, and ripen in eighty-seven days, from
the time of sowing. Plantings for the ripened product may be made till
the middle of June; and for the green pods, to the middle of July.

The ripe seeds are light-drab, with numerous spots and broad patches of
bright-purple, nearly straight, cylindrical at the middle, tapering to
the ends (which are generally rounded), five-eighths of an inch long,
and three-tenths of an inch thick. Eighteen hundred and fifty are
contained in a quart, and will plant a row two hundred and fifty feet in
length, or two hundred hills.

The variety is hardy, yields abundantly, and the young pods are thick,
fleshy, and tender in texture. As a string-bean, or for pickling, it is
considered one of the best of all varieties, and is recommended for
general cultivation. The seeds are comparatively small, and are rarely
used either in a green or ripened state.


RICE. _Vil._

Half-dwarf, about two feet high; flowers white; pods very small,
scarcely more than three inches in length, and only two-fifths of an
inch in width, usually containing six seeds.

The variety requires a full season for its perfection. Plants from seeds
sown early in spring will blossom in seven weeks, yield young pods in
ten weeks, and ripen in a hundred and twelve days.

The ripe seeds are very small, and of a peculiar yellowish-white,
semi-transparent, rice-like color and appearance. They are quite
irregular in form, usually somewhat oblong or ovoid, often abruptly
shortened at the ends, three-eighths of an inch long, and a fourth of an
inch thick. Nearly five thousand are contained in a quart.

The young pods are tender and excellent; but the green beans are small,
and rarely used. The ripe seeds are peculiar, both in consistency and
flavor: they are quite brittle and rice-like; and, when cooked, much
relished by some, and little esteemed by others.


ROB-ROY.

Plant half-dwarf,--early in the season, producing slender, transient,
barren runners two or three feet in length; flowers purplish-white; the
pods are five inches long, often produced in pairs, yellow as they
approach maturity, yellowish-white when ripe, and contain five or six
seeds.

It is one of the earliest of the Dwarfs. Spring plantings will blossom
in six weeks, produce pods for the table in seven weeks, and ripen in
eighty-two days. If planted in June, pods may be plucked for use in six
weeks, and the crop will be ready for harvesting in sixty-eight days.

The ripe seeds are clear, bright-yellow; the surface being generally
veined, and the eye surrounded with an olive-green line. They are of an
oblong form, nearly straight on the side of the eye, rounded at the
back, five-eighths of an inch long, and three-tenths of an inch deep.
Fifteen hundred seeds are contained in a quart, and will be sufficient
to plant a row of two hundred feet, or a hundred and fifty hills.

The Rob-Roy generally matures in great perfection; being seldom stained
or otherwise injured by rain or the dampness of ordinary seasons. It is
also one of the earliest of the Dwarf varieties, but desirable as a
string-bean rather than for its qualities as a green shelled-bean, or
for cooking when ripe. If cultivated for its pods only, plantings may be
made until the first of August.


ROUND YELLOW SIX-WEEKS.

Round Yellow. Dwarf Yellow.

Fourteen to sixteen inches high; flowers pale-purple; pods about five
inches long, half an inch broad, pale yellowish-green as they approach
maturity, and, when fully ripe, remarkably slender, and more curved than
in their green state,--they contain five or six beans.

The variety is early; blossoming in six weeks, producing young pods in
seven weeks, and ripening in ninety days, from the time of planting.
When planted in June, pods may be plucked for use in seven weeks, and
the crop will be ready for harvesting in eighty days. For its green
pods, plantings may be made to the last of July.

The ripe seeds are orange-yellow, with a narrow, reddish-brown belt, or
line, encircling the eye; oblong or ovoid, half an inch long, and
three-tenths of an inch thick. A quart contains two thousand seeds, and
will plant a row two hundred and twenty-five feet in length, or two
hundred and twenty-five hills.

As an early string-bean, the variety is worthy of cultivation, but is
little used, and is really of little value, as a shelled-bean, green or
ripe. It has been common to the gardens of this country for more than a
century; and, during this period, no apparent change has taken place in
the character of the plant, or in the size, form, or color of the seed.


SOLITAIRE.

A French variety. The ripe seeds are similar to those of the Refugee;
but the plants are quite distinct in foliage and general habit. Its
height is about eighteen inches; the flowers are purple; the pods are
six inches long, slender, nearly cylindrical, green at first, paler and
streaked with purple when more advanced, and contain six seeds.

It is not early. Spring plantings will blossom in sixty days, produce
pods for the table in seventy days, and ripen in about fifteen weeks. It
may be planted for its green pods until the first of July.

The beans, when ripe, are variegated with light-drab and deep-purple,
the purple prevailing. They are often straight, sometimes curved, nearly
cylindrical at the eye, usually rounded, but sometimes shortened, at the
ends, three-fourths of an inch long, and a fourth of an inch thick: two
thousand measure a quart.

On account of the size and branching character of the plants, more space
must be allowed in cultivation than is usually given to Common Dwarf
varieties. If planted in rows, they should be at least eighteen inches
apart, and the plants eight or ten inches from each other in the rows;
and, if planted in hills, they should be thinned to four or five plants,
and the hills should not be less than three feet apart.

It is not much esteemed as a shelled-bean, either green or ripe. As a
string-bean, it is one of the best. Its pods are long, cylindrical,
remarkably slender, succulent, and tender. It is also a very prolific
variety, and the pods remain for an unusual period without becoming
tough or too hard for the table. Recommended for cultivation.


SWISS CRIMSON.

Scarlet Swiss. _Vil._

Plant vigorous, often producing running shoots; flowers pale-purple;
pods nearly straight, six inches long, pale-green while young, yellow
streaked with brilliant rose-red as they approach maturity, and
containing five (rarely six) seeds.

It is comparatively a late variety. If planted as early as the weather
will permit, the plants will blossom in seven weeks, the young pods will
be ready for use in nine weeks, and the crop will be ready for
harvesting in a hundred and five days. Planted and grown in summer
weather, it will produce young pods in sixty days, and ripen in thirteen
weeks. Plantings for the green seeds may be made to the first of July.

The ripe seeds are clear bright-pink, striped and spotted with deep
purplish-red: the pink changes gradually to dull, dark-red, and the
variegations to dark-brown. They are kidney-shaped, comparatively
straight, somewhat flattened, three-fourths of an inch long, and
three-eighths of an inch broad. Thirteen hundred seeds are contained in
a quart, and will plant a row two hundred feet in length, or a hundred
and fifty hills.

It is hardy and productive, and, as a shelled-bean, of excellent
quality, either in its green or ripened state. As a variety for
stringing, it is not above medium quality.


TURTLE-SOUP.

Tampico.

Plant vigorous, producing numerous slender, barren runners two feet or
more in length; flowers rich deep-purple; pods five inches long, green
and sickle-shaped while young, pale greenish-white stained with purple
when more advanced, yellow clouded with purple when ripe, and containing
five or six seeds.

The variety is quite late, and requires most of the season for its full
perfection. Plants from early sowings will blossom in eight weeks, the
young pods will be sufficiently grown for use in ten weeks, and the crop
will ripen in a hundred and eight days. As the young pods are tender and
of excellent quality, and are also produced in great abundance, a
planting for these may be made as late as the last week in June, which
will supply the table from the last of August till the plants are
destroyed by frost.

The ripe seeds are small, glossy-black, somewhat oblong, and much
flattened: thirty-six hundred are contained in a quart, and will plant
four hundred feet of drill, or three hundred and fifty hills.

It is very productive, and deserving of cultivation for its young and
tender pods; but is of little or no value for shelling while green. The
ripened seeds are used, as the name implies, in the preparation of a
soup, which, as respects color and flavor, bears some resemblance to
that made from the green turtle.


VICTORIA.

This is one of the earliest of the Dwarf varieties. Early plantings will
blossom in six weeks, yield pods for the table in seven weeks, produce
pods of suitable size for shelling in about ten weeks, and ripen in
eighty-four days. When planted after the season has somewhat
advanced,--the young plants thus receiving the benefit of summer
temperature,--pods may be gathered for the table in about six weeks, and
the crop will ripen in sixty-three days.

Stalk fourteen to sixteen inches high, with comparatively few branches;
flowers purple; pods four and a half to five inches long, streaked and
spotted with purple, tough and parchment-like when ripe, and containing
five or six seeds.

The ripe seeds are flesh-colored, striped and spotted with purple (the
ground changing by age to dull reddish-brown, and the spots and markings
to chocolate-brown), oblong, somewhat flattened, shortened or rounded at
the ends, five-eighths of an inch long, and three-tenths of an inch
thick: fourteen hundred are contained in a quart.

The variety is remarkably early; and, on this account, is worthy of
cultivation. For table use, the young pods and the seeds, green or dry,
are inferior to many other sorts.


WHITE'S EARLY.

A remarkably hardy and vigorous variety, eighteen to twenty inches high.
Flowers white, tinged with purple; pods five inches and a half long,
curved or sickle-shaped, green at first, yellowish-white striped with
purple when fully ripe, and containing five seeds.

Early plantings will blossom in about six weeks, young pods may be
plucked for use in seven weeks, and the crop will ripen in eighty-two
days. If planted as late in the season as the first week in July, the
variety will generally ripen perfectly; and, when cultivated for its
green pods, plantings may be made at any time during the month.

The ripe seeds are either drab or light-slate,--both colors being
common,--marked and spotted with light-drab. In some specimens, drab is
the prevailing color. They are kidney-shaped, irregularly compressed or
flattened, nearly three-fourths of an inch long, and three-eighths of an
inch deep. A quart contains about sixteen hundred seeds, and is
sufficient for planting a row two hundred and fifty feet in length, or
two hundred hills.

This variety, as an early string-bean, is decidedly one of the best, and
is also one of the hardiest and most prolific. The pods should be
plucked when comparatively young; and, if often gathered, the plants
will continue a long time in bearing. As a shelled-bean, either in its
green or ripened state, it is only of medium quality.

The long peduncles, or stems, that support its spikes of flowers, its
stocky habit, and fine, deep-green, luxurious foliage, distinguish the
variety from all others.


WHITE FLAGEOLET.

From sixteen to eighteen inches high, of strong and branching habit.
Flowers white; pods five inches and a half long, sickle-shaped, green
while young, yellowish-white at maturity, and containing six (rarely
seven) seeds.

It is a half-early variety; blossoming in six weeks, yielding pods for
the table in seven weeks, pods for shelling in eleven weeks, and
ripening in ninety days, from the time of planting. Later plantings will
ripen in a shorter period, or in about eighty days; and, if cultivated
as a string-bean, seed sown as late in the season as the last week of
July will supply the table from the middle of September with an
abundance of well-flavored and tender pods.

The ripe bean is white, kidney-shaped, flattened, three-fourths of an
inch long, and three-tenths of an inch broad: about twenty-two hundred
are contained in a quart, and will plant a drill, or row, of two hundred
and seventy-five feet, or nearly three hundred hills.

The White Flageolet is very productive, and is recommended for
cultivation: the young pods are crisp and tender, and the seeds, green
or ripe, are farinaceous, and remarkable for delicacy of flavor.


WHITE KIDNEY.

Kidney. Large White Kidney. Royal Dwarf.

The plants of this variety are from sixteen to eighteen inches high, and
readily distinguishable, from their large and broad leaves, and strong,
branching habit of growth; the flowers are white; the pods are somewhat
irregular in form, six inches long, green at first, yellow when ripe,
and contain five (rarely six) beans.

The White Kidney-bean is not early: it blossoms in seven weeks, produces
young pods in nine weeks, pods for shelling in eleven weeks, and ripens
in a hundred and ten days, from the time of planting.

The ripe seeds are white, more or less veined, pale-yellow about the
hilum, kidney-shaped, nearly straight, slightly flattened, fully
three-fourths of an inch long, and about three-eighths of an inch thick:
from twelve to thirteen hundred are contained in a quart; and this
quantity of seeds will plant a hundred and seventy-five feet of drill,
or a hundred and forty hills.

As a string-bean, the variety has little merit; but as a shelled-bean,
green or ripe, it is decidedly one of the best of the Dwarfs, and well
deserving of cultivation. The seeds are of large size, pure white,
separate readily from the pods, and are tender and delicate.


WHITE MARROW.

White Marrowfat. Dwarf White Cranberry. White Egg.

Plants vigorous, much branched, and inclined to produce running shoots;
flowers white; pods five inches long, nearly three-fourths of an inch
broad, pale-green at first, then changing to clear yellow, afterwards
becoming pure waxen-white, cream-yellow when ripe, and containing five
seeds.

When planted at the commencement of favorable weather, the variety will
blossom in seven weeks, yield pods for the table in eight weeks, and
ripen in a hundred and five days. When grown for the ripened product,
the planting should not be delayed beyond the 20th of June. Planted at
this season, or the last week in June, the crop will blossom the first
week in August; and, about the middle of the month, pods may be gathered
for the table. By the second week in September, the pods will be of
sufficient size for shelling; and, if the season be ordinarily
favorable, the crop will ripen the last of the month. It must not,
however, be regarded as an early variety; and, when practicable, should
be planted before the 10th of June.

The ripe seeds are clear white, ovoid or egg-shaped, nine-sixteenths of
an inch long, and three-eighths of an inch thick. In size, form, or
color, they are scarcely distinguishable from those of the White Running
Cranberry. If well grown, twelve hundred seeds will measure a quart.

As a string-bean, the White Marrow is of average quality: but, for
shelling in the green state, it is surpassed by few, if any, of the
garden varieties; and deserves more general cultivation. When ripe, it
is remarkably farinaceous, of a delicate fleshy-white when properly
cooked, and by many preferred to the Pea-bean.

In almost every section of the United States, as well as in the Canadas,
it is largely cultivated for market; and is next in importance to the
last named for commercial purposes.

In field-culture, it is planted in drills two feet apart; the seeds
being dropped in groups, three or four together, a foot apart in the
drills. Some plant in hills two and a half or three feet apart by
eighteen inches in the opposite direction, seeding at the rate of
forty-four quarts to the acre; and others plant in drills eighteen
inches apart, dropping the seeds singly, six or eight inches from each
other in the drills.

The yield varies from twenty to thirty bushels to the acre, though crops
are recorded of nearly forty bushels.


YELLOW-EYED CHINA.

Plant sixteen to eighteen inches high, more branched and of stronger
habit than the Black or Red Eyed; flowers white; pods six inches long,
nearly straight, pale-green while young, cream-white at maturity, and
containing five or six seeds.

It is an early variety. When sown in May, or at the beginning of settled
weather, the plants will blossom in six weeks, afford string-beans in
seven weeks, pods for shelling in ten or eleven weeks, and ripen in
ninety days, from the time of planting. From sowings made later in the
season (the plants thereby receiving more directly the influence of
summer weather), pods may be plucked for the table in about six weeks,
and ripened beans in seventy-five days. Plantings for supplying the
table with string-beans may be made until the last week in July.

The ripe beans are white, spotted and marked about the eye with
rusty-yellow, oblong, inclining to kidney-shape, more flattened than
those of the Red or Black Eyed, five-eighths of an inch long, and
three-eighths of an inch in breadth: fifteen hundred and fifty are
contained in a quart, and will plant two hundred feet of drill, or a
hundred and fifty hills. The plants are large and spreading, and most
productive when not grown too closely together.

The Yellow-eyed China is one of the most healthy, vigorous, and
prolific of the Dwarf varieties; of good quality as a string-bean; and,
in its ripened state, excellent for baking, or in whatever manner it may
be cooked. It also ripens its seeds in great perfection; the crop being
rarely affected by wet weather, or injured by blight or mildew.

       *       *       *       *       *

POLE OR RUNNING BEANS.

As a class, these are less hardy than the Dwarfs, and are not usually
planted so early in the season. The common practice is to plant in hills
three feet or three and a half apart; though the lower-growing sorts are
sometimes planted in drills fourteen or fifteen inches apart, and bushed
in the manner of the taller descriptions of pease.

If planted in hills, they should be slightly raised, and the stake, or
pole, set before the planting of the seeds. The maturity of some of the
later sorts will be somewhat facilitated by cutting or nipping off the
leading runners when they have attained a height of four or five feet.


CASE-KNIFE.

This variety, common to almost every garden, is readily distinguished by
its strong and tall habit of growth, and its broad, deep-green,
blistered leaves. The flowers are white. The pods are remarkably large;
often measuring nine or ten inches in length, and nearly an inch in
width. They are of a green color till near maturity, when they change to
yellowish-green, and, when fully ripe, to cream-white. A well-formed pod
contains eight or nine seeds.

Early plantings will blossom in seven or eight weeks, yield pods for
stringing in about ten weeks, green beans in twelve or thirteen weeks,
and ripen in a hundred and five days. Later plantings, with the
exclusive advantage of summer weather, will supply string-beans in
seven weeks, pods for shelling in eight or nine weeks, and ripen in
ninety-six days. Plantings for the green beans may be made till nearly
the middle of July; and, for the young pods, to the 25th of the month.

The ripe seeds are clear white, kidney-shaped, irregularly flattened or
compressed, often diagonally shortened at one or both of the ends,
three-fourths of an inch long, and three-eighths of an inch deep. A
quart contains about fifteen hundred seeds, and will plant a hundred and
seventy-five hills.

It is one of the most prolific of the running varieties. As a
shelled-bean, it is of excellent quality in its green state; and, when
ripe, farinaceous, and well flavored in whatever form prepared. The
large pods, if plucked early, are succulent and tender, but coarser in
texture than those of many other sorts, and not so well flavored.

The Case-knife, in its habit and general appearance, much resembles the
Sabre, or Cimeter, of the French; and perhaps is but a sub-variety.
Plants, however, from imported Sabre-beans, were shorter, not so stocky,
a little earlier, and the pods, generally, less perfectly formed.


CORN-BEAN.

Stem six feet and upwards in height; flowers bright-lilac; the pods are
five inches and a half long, green while young, cream-white at maturity,
and contain six or seven seeds.

The variety is late, but remarkable for hardiness and productiveness.
The shelled-beans, green or ripe, are little used; the young pods are
crisp, succulent, and excellent for the table; and the variety deserves
more general cultivation. If plucked as fast as they become of suitable
size, the plants will continue to produce them in abundance for six or
eight weeks.

The ripe seeds are chocolate-brown, somewhat quadrangular, flattened,
half an inch long, and three-eighths of an inch broad. In size and form,
they somewhat resemble grains of Indian corn: whence the name. Twelve
hundred and fifty seeds are contained in a quart, and will plant a
hundred and twenty-five hills.


HORTICULTURAL.

Marbled Prague. _Vil._ London Horticultural.

Stem six feet or more in height; flowers purple; the pods are from five
to six inches long, nearly three-fourths of an inch broad, pale-green
while young, greenish-white streaked and blotched with brilliant
rose-red when more advanced, much contorted, hard, parchment-like and
very tenacious of their contents when ripe, and enclose five or six
seeds.

When planted at the commencement of the season, the variety will blossom
in about seven weeks, produce pods for stringing in nine weeks, green
beans in twelve weeks, and ripen in a hundred days. Plantings made
during the last week in June will mature their crop, if the season be
favorable. For the green beans, plantings may be made until the last of
June; and, for the young pods, until the first of July.

The ripe beans are flesh-white, streaked and spotted with bright-pink,
or red, with a russet-yellow line encircling the eye. They are
egg-shaped, rather more than half an inch in length, and four-tenths of
an inch in width and depth. From the time of ripening, the soft,
flesh-like tint gradually loses its freshness, and finally becomes
cinnamon-brown; the variegations growing relatively duller and darker. A
quart contains about eleven hundred seeds, and will plant a hundred and
twenty-five hills.

The Horticultural Bean was introduced into this country from England
about the year 1825. It has now become very generally disseminated, and
is one of the most popular of the running sorts. As a string-bean, it is
of good quality; shelled in its green state, remarkably farinaceous and
well flavored; and, when ripe, one of the best for baking or stewing. It
is hardy and productive, but is liable to deteriorate when raised many
years in succession from seed saved in the vegetable garden from the
scattered pods accidentally left to ripen on the poles. To raise good
seed, leave each year a few hills unplucked; allowing the entire product
to ripen.


INDIAN CHIEF.

Wax-bean. Butter-bean. Algerian. D'Alger, of the French.

Stem six or seven feet high, with large, broad foliage and purple
flowers; the pods are five inches long, nearly as thick as broad,
sickle-shaped, green at first, but soon change to a fine, waxen,
semi-transparent cream-white,--the line marking the divisions being
orange-yellow. At this stage of growth, the color indicates approaching
maturity; but the pods will be found crisp and succulent, and are in
their greatest perfection for the table. When ripe, they are nearly
white, much shrivelled, and contain six or seven seeds.

When cultivated for the ripened product, the seed should be planted as
early in the season as the weather will permit. The plants will then
blossom in eight or nine weeks, afford young pods in about eleven weeks,
pods for shelling in thirteen or fourteen weeks, and ripen in a hundred
and twenty-four days. Plantings for green pods may be made until the
first of July.

At the time of harvesting, the seeds are deep indigo-blue, the hilum
being white. They are oblong, often shortened abruptly at the ends, half
an inch long, nearly the same in depth, and three-tenths of an inch
thick. Fourteen hundred seeds measure a quart, and will plant a hundred
and seventy-five hills.

Its fine, tender, succulent, and richly colored pods are its chief
recommendation; and for these it is well worthy of cultivation. They are
produced in profuse abundance, and continue fit for use longer than
those of most varieties. In moist seasons, the pods remain crisp and
tender till the seeds have grown sufficiently to be used in the green
state. The ripe seeds are little used.


MOTTLED CRANBERRY.

A comparatively strong-growing, but not tall variety. The flowers are
white; the pods are short and broad, four inches and a half long,
three-fourths of an inch wide, yellow at maturity, and contain four or
five seeds.

If planted early, the variety will blossom in seven weeks, yield pods
for the table in eight or nine weeks, green beans in eleven weeks, and
ripen in a hundred days. When planted after settled warm weather, it
will ripen in ninety days.

The ripe seeds are white, the eye surrounded with a broad patch of
purple, which is also extended over one of the ends: they are of a
rounded-oval form, half an inch long, and three-eighths of an inch in
width and thickness. A quart contains fourteen hundred and fifty seeds,
and will plant a hundred and fifty hills. As the plants are of dwarfish
character, the seeds are sometimes sown in drills; a quart being
required for two hundred feet.

The Mottled Cranberry is moderately productive, and the young pods are
tender and well flavored: the seeds, while green, are farinaceous, and,
though of good quality when ripe, are but little used.


MOTTLED PROLIFIC.

Plant branching, healthy, and vigorous, six feet or more in height;
flowers purple; the pods are four inches and a half long, usually
produced in pairs, green at first, washed with purple when more
advanced, light-brown at maturity, and contain six seeds.

It is a late variety. Plantings made during the first of the season will
not produce pods for use until the last of July, or beginning of August;
but, if these are plucked as they become of suitable size, the plants
will continue in bearing until destroyed by frost.

The ripe beans are drab, thickly and minutely spotted with black, and
also distinctly marked with regular lines of the same color. They are of
an oblong form, flattened, often squarely or diagonally shortened at the
ends, nearly half an inch in length, and three-tenths of an inch in
width. A quart contains thirty-one hundred seeds, and will plant about
three hundred hills.

As a shelled-bean, in its green or ripened state, the variety has little
merit. Its recommendations are its fine, tender pods, its remarkable
productiveness, and its uniformly healthy habit.


PREDHOMME. _Vil._

Introduced from France. Plant four or five feet high, with broad,
deep-green, blistered foliage and white flowers; the pods are nearly
cylindrical, three inches long, green while young, cream-white when
ripe, and contain from six to eight seeds, set very closely together.

The ripe beans are dull-white, veined, oblong, often shortened at the
ends, a third of an inch long, and nearly a fourth of an inch in width
and thickness. A quart contains about thirty-five hundred seeds, and
will plant three hundred and fifty hills.

Early plantings will blossom in eight weeks, afford pods for the table
in about ten weeks, and ripen in a hundred and eight days. It may be
planted for its green pods to the first of July.

It is of little value as a shelled-bean in its green state. When ripe,
it is of good quality, and, as a string-bean, one of the best; the pods
being very brittle, succulent, and fine flavored. They remain long upon
the plants without becoming tough and hard; and are tender, and good for
use, until almost ripe. On account of their thin and delicate character,
the seeds, in unfavorable seasons, are often stained and otherwise
injured by dampness at the time of ripening.


PRINCESS. _Vil._

A French variety. Plant six feet or more in height, with lively-green
foliage and white flowers; the pods are five inches long, pale-green
while young, yellow at maturity, and contain six or seven, and sometimes
eight, seeds.

The ripe bean is white, egg-shaped, two-fifths of an inch long, and a
fourth of an inch thick: nearly three thousand are contained in a quart,
and will plant three hundred and fifty hills.

The variety somewhat resembles the Predhomme; but the seeds are larger
and brighter, the pods are longer, the seeds are less close in the pods,
and it is some days earlier. It ripens in about three months from the
time of planting. A good sort for stringing, and of excellent quality
when ripe.


RED CRANBERRY.

This is one of the oldest and most familiar of garden-beans, and has
probably been longer and more generally cultivated in this country than
any other variety.

The plants are five or six feet high, of medium strength and vigor;
flowers pale-lilac. The pods are quite irregular in form; often
reversely curved, or sickle-shaped; four inches and a half long;
yellowish-green while young; clear-white when suitable for shelling;
yellowish-white, shrivelled, and contorted, when ripe; and contain five
or six seeds.

Its season is intermediate. If planted early, the variety will blossom
in seven weeks, yield young pods in nine weeks, green beans in eleven
weeks, and ripen in ninety-five days. In favorable seasons, the crop
will ripen if the seeds are planted the last of June; but, for the young
pods or for green beans, plantings may be made to near the middle of
July.

Seeds clear, deep-purple, the hilum white, round-ovoid, slightly
compressed, half an inch long, and about three-eighths of an inch in
depth and thickness. Fourteen hundred and fifty seeds are contained in a
quart, and will plant a hundred and fifty hills.

It is a hardy and productive variety, principally grown as a
string-bean. The pods are succulent and tender; and these qualities are
retained to a very advanced stage of growth, or until quite of suitable
size for shelling. The dark color of the bean, which is to some extent
imparted to the pods in the process of cooking, is by some considered an
objection; and the White Cranberry, though perhaps less prolific, is
preferred. As a shelled-bean, it is of good quality in its green state;
but, in its ripened state, little used, though dry and farinaceous.


RED ORLEANS.

Scarlet Orleans.

Five to six feet high; flowers white; the pods are sickle-shaped, five
inches long, green when young, often tinged with red when more advanced,
yellow at full maturity, and contain five or six seeds, packed closely
together.

It is one of the earliest of the running varieties. Spring plantings
will blossom in about seven weeks, afford pods for the table in eight
weeks, green beans in eleven weeks, and ripen in eighty-five-days.
Planted later in the season, pods sufficiently large for stringing may
be gathered in six weeks, and the crop will begin to ripen in about
seventy days. As a string-bean, the variety may be planted until the
first of August.

At the time of harvesting, the ripe seeds are of a bright blood-red
color, but change rapidly by age to brownish-red. They are of an oblong
form, often squarely or diagonally shortened at the ends by contact with
each other in the pods, half an inch long, and three-tenths of an inch
broad. A quart, which contains nearly twenty-four hundred seeds, will
plant about two hundred and seventy-five hills.

The Red Orleans is quite prolific, and a desirable sort for soups and
stews. The young pods are tender, and well flavored; but its remarkable
precocity must be considered its chief recommendation.

French writers describe the ripe seeds as exceeding the above
dimensions; but specimens received from Paris seedsmen correspond in
size, form, and color with the description before given.


RHODE-ISLAND BUTTER.

Plant seven feet and upwards in height, with large, broad, deep-green,
wrinkled foliage; flowers blush-white; the pods are six inches long,
nearly three-fourths of an inch broad, green while young, paler when
more advanced, cream-white and much shrivelled when ripe, and contain
seven seeds.

If planted early in the season, green pods may be plucked for the table
in nine or ten weeks, pods for shelling in twelve weeks, and the crop
will ripen in a hundred and twenty-three days. Planted early in June,
the pods will generally all ripen; but, if the planting is delayed to
the last of the month, the crop will but partially mature, unless the
season prove more than usually favorable. The vines will, however, yield
a plentiful supply of pods, and also of green beans.

The seeds, at maturity, are cream-yellow, with well-defined spots and
stripes of deep yellowish-buff. They are broad-kidney-shaped, flattened,
five-eighths of an inch long, and nearly half an inch broad. The
cream-yellow gradually changes by age to brown, and the markings become
relatively darker. Fourteen hundred seeds are contained in a quart, and
will plant a hundred and fifty hills.

The variety yields abundantly; and the large pods are tender, succulent,
and excellent for table use. The beans, in their green state, are of
good quality, though little used when ripe.


SABRE, OR CIMETER.

Stem seven or eight feet high; leaves broad, large, deep-green, and much
wrinkled or corrugated; flowers white; pods large, broad, and thin,
curved at the ends in the form of a sabre, or cimeter, green when young,
cream-white when ripe, and contain eight beans.

The variety will blossom in eight weeks, afford young pods for the table
in ten weeks, green beans in eleven weeks, and ripen in a hundred days,
from the time of planting. If sown in June, the crop will mature in
ninety days. Plantings for the green seeds may be made till the last of
June, and for the young pods to the middle of July.

The ripe seeds are clear-white, kidney-form, three-fourths of an inch
long, and three-eighths of an inch broad. Sixteen hundred are contained
in a quart, and will plant a hundred and sixty hills.

The Sabre Bean is remarkably productive; the young pods are crisp and
tender, excellent for table use, and good for pickling; the seeds, green
or dry, are farinaceous, and of delicate flavor and appearance.

In height and foliage, size and form of the pods, color and size of the
ripe seeds, it resembles the Case-knife. The principal difference
between the varieties is in the earlier maturity of the Sabre.


SOISSONS. _Vil._

Introduced from France. Stem six feet or more high; foliage large,
broad, wrinkled; flowers white; the pods are eight inches long,
three-fourths of an inch broad, sword-shaped, yellowish-green when near
maturity, yellowish-white when ripe, and contain six or seven seeds.

The variety requires the whole season for its full perfection. If
planted early, it blossoms in nine weeks, produces young pods in eleven
weeks, and ripens off in gradual succession till the plants are
destroyed by frost. If cultivated for its young pods, plantings may be
made to the last week in June.

The ripe seeds are remarkably large,--often measuring nearly an inch in
length and half an inch in breadth,--pure, glossy-white, kidney-shaped,
and generally irregularly compressed. Seven hundred are contained in a
quart, and will plant about eighty hills.

The young pods, while quite young and small, are crisp and tender, and
the ripe seeds are farinaceous and well flavored. It is also an
excellent sort for shelling in the green state; but the plants are not
hardy, and thrive well only in warm soil and sheltered situations. Under
ordinary culture, many of the pods are imperfect, and frequently contain
but two or three seeds.


WHITE CRANBERRY.

Stem five or six feet high; flowers white; the pods are five inches and
a half long, pale-green while young, striped and marbled with red when
near maturity, yellowish-buff when ripe, and contain five or six beans.

It is not an early variety. From plantings made at the usual season,
young pods may be gathered in about nine weeks, pods for shelling green
in twelve weeks, and ripened beans in a hundred and five days. For
stringing, or for shelling in a green state, the variety may be planted
the first of July; but, in ordinary seasons, few of the pods will reach
maturity.

The ripe seeds are white, egg-shaped, sometimes nearly spherical, half
an inch long, and three-eighths of an inch in breadth and thickness. In
size, form, and color, they strongly resemble the Dwarf White Marrow;
and are not easily distinguished from the seeds of that variety. About
twelve hundred and fifty are contained in a quart, and will plant a
hundred and twenty-five hills.

The White Cranberry is hardy, yields well, and the young pods are tender
and well flavored. For shelling green, it is decidedly one of the best
of all varieties; and for baking, or otherwise cooking, is, when ripe,
fully equal to the Pea-bean or White Marrow.


WILD-GOOSE.

Plant seven or eight feet high, of healthy, vigorous habit; flowers
bright-purple; the pods are sickle-shaped, pale-green at first,
cream-yellow streaked and marbled with purple when ripe, and contain six
seeds, closely set together.

The variety requires the entire season for its full perfection. When
planted early, it will blossom in nine weeks, produce young pods in
eleven weeks, green beans in thirteen weeks, and ripen in a hundred and
twenty days. If planted and grown under the influence of summer weather,
the plants will blossom in seven weeks, yield young pods in nine weeks,
green beans in twelve weeks, and ripen in a hundred days. Plantings for
the green seeds may be made to the middle of June, and for the young
pods to the first of July.

The ripe beans are pale cream-white, spotted with deep purplish-black
(the cream-white gradually changing by age to cinnamon-brown),
round-ovoid, four-tenths of an inch long, and about three-eighths of an
inch in width and thickness. A quart contains nearly seventeen hundred
seeds, and will plant two hundred hills.

The variety has been long cultivated both in Europe and this country. It
is hardy and productive. The young pods are of fair quality; and the
seeds, green or ripe, are excellent for table use, in whatever form
prepared.


YELLOW CRANBERRY.

Five to six feet high, with yellowish-green foliage and pale-purple
flowers: the pods are five inches long, three-fourths of an inch broad,
often sickle-shaped; pale-green at first; cream-yellow, shrivelled, and
irregular in form, like those of the Red variety, at maturity; and
contain five or six seeds.

It is a few days later than the White Cranberry, and nearly two weeks
later than the Red. Planted at the commencement of the season, it will
blossom in eight weeks, yield pods for the table in about ten weeks,
pods for shelling in twelve or thirteen weeks, and ripen in a hundred
and ten days. Early summer-plantings will blossom in seven weeks,
produce pods for the table in less than nine weeks, and ripen in about a
hundred days. When grown for the ripened crop, it should have the
advantage of the entire season; but, when cultivated for its young pods,
plantings may be made till the first of July.

Seeds yellow, with a narrow, dark line encircling the hilum:
round-ovoid, half an inch long, and three-eighths of an inch in breadth
and thickness: thirteen hundred and fifty are contained in a quart, and
will plant a hundred and twenty-five hills.

The variety is hardy and prolific; of good quality as a string-bean, or
for shelling in the green state. When ripe, the seeds are nearly equal
to the White Marrow for baking, though the color is less agreeable.

       *       *       *       *       *

ASPARAGUS-BEAN.

Long-podded Dolichos. Dolichos sesquipedalis.

The Asparagus-bean, in its manner of growth, inflorescence, and in the
size and character of its pods, is quite distinct from the class of
beans before described. It is a native of Tropical America, and requires
a long, warm season for its full perfection.

The stem is from six to seven feet high; the leaves are long, narrow,
smooth, and shining; the flowers are large, greenish-yellow, and
produced two or three together at the extremity of quite a long
peduncle; the pods are nearly cylindrical, pale-green, pendent, and grow
with remarkable rapidity,--when fully developed, they are eighteen or
twenty inches long, and contain eight or nine seeds.

These should be sown as early in spring as the appearance of settled
warm weather; and the plants will then blossom in ten or eleven weeks,
afford pods for use in fourteen weeks, and ripen off their crop in
gradual succession until destroyed by frost.

The ripe seeds are cinnamon-brown, with a narrow, dark line about the
hilum; kidney-shaped, half an inch long, and a fourth of an inch broad:
nearly four thousand are contained in a quart, and will plant four
hundred and fifty hills.

The seeds are quite small, and are rarely eaten, either in a green or
ripe state. The variety is cultivated exclusively for its long, peculiar
pods, which are crisp, tender, of good flavor, and much esteemed for
pickling. It is, however, much less productive than many of the running
kinds of garden-beans, and must be considered more curious than really
useful.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIMA BEAN.

Phaseolus lunatus.

Stem ten feet or more in height; leaves comparatively long and narrow,
smooth and shining; flowers small, greenish-yellow, in spikes; the pods
are four inches and a half long, an inch and a quarter broad, much
flattened, green and wrinkled while young, yellowish when ripe, and
contain three or four beans.

The Lima is one of the latest, as well as one of the most tender, of all
garden-beans; and seldom, if ever, entirely perfects its crop in the
Northern States. Little will be gained by very early planting; as the
seeds are not only liable to decay before vegetating, but the plants
suffer greatly from cold, damp weather. In the Northern and Eastern
States, the seeds should not be planted in the open ground before the
beginning of May; nor should the planting be delayed beyond the tenth or
middle of the month. In ordinary seasons, the Lima Bean will blossom in
eight or nine weeks, and pods may be plucked for use the last of August,
or beginning of September. Only a small proportion of the pods attain a
sufficient size for use; a large part of the crop being prematurely
destroyed by frost.

The ripe seeds are dull-white or greenish-white, with veins radiating
from the eye; broad, kidney-shaped, much flattened, seven-eighths of an
inch long, and two-thirds of an inch broad. A quart contains about seven
hundred seeds, and will plant eighty hills.

The pods are tough and parchment-like in all stages of their growth, and
are never eaten. The seeds, green or ripe, are universally esteemed for
their peculiar flavor and excellence; and, by most persons, are
considered the finest of all the garden varieties. If gathered when
suitable for use in their green state, and dried in the pods in a cool
and shaded situation, they may be preserved during the winter. When
required for use, they are shelled, soaked a short time in clear water,
and cooked as green beans: thus treated, they will be nearly as tender
and well flavored as when freshly plucked from the plants.

The seeds are sometimes started on a hot-bed, in thumb-pots, or on
inverted turf, or sods, cut in convenient pieces; and about the last of
May, if the weather is warm and pleasant, transplanted to hills in the
open ground.

By the following method, an early and abundant crop may be obtained in
comparatively favorable seasons:--

"As soon in spring as the weather is settled, and the soil warm and in
good working condition, set poles about six feet in length, three feet
apart each way, and plant five or six beans in each hill; being careful
to set each bean with its germ downward, and covering an inch deep.
After they have grown a while, and before they begin to run, pull up the
weakest, and leave but three of the most vigorous plants to a hill. As
these increase in height, they should, if necessary, be tied to the
stakes, or poles, using bass-matting, or other soft, fibrous material,
for the purpose. When they have ascended to the tops of the poles, the
ends should be cut or pinched off; as also the ends of all the branches,
whenever they rise above that height. This practice checks their
liability to run to vines, and tends to make them blossom earlier, and
bear sooner and more abundantly, than they otherwise would do."

In tropical climates, the Lima Bean is perennial.


GREEN LIMA.

A sub-variety of the Common Lima, differing principally in the pea-green
color of the seeds.

As generally found in the market, the seeds of the Common and Green Lima
are more or less intermixed. By some, the Green is considered more
tender, and thought to remain longer on the plants without becoming
hard, than the White. The habits of the plants are the same, and there
is no difference in the season of maturity. A careful selection of seeds
for planting, and skilful culture, would undoubtedly give a degree of
permanency to this difference in color; which appears to be the
principal, if not the only, point of variation.


MOTTLED LIMA.

This, like the Green, is a sub-variety of the Common Lima. The ripe
seeds are dull-white or greenish-white, mottled and clouded with purple.

In the habit of the plant, in the foliage, pods, form, or size of the
seeds, or season of maturity, there are no marks of distinction when
compared with the Common Lima.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCARLET-RUNNER.

Phaseolus multiflorus.

From South America. Though nearly allied to the Common Kidney-bean, it
is considered by botanists a distinct species; differing in its
inflorescence, in the form of its pods, and particularly in the fact
that the cotyledons, or lobes of the planted seed, do not rise to the
surface of the ground in the process of germination. It is, besides, a
perennial plant. The roots are tuberous, and, though small, not unlike
those of the Dahlia.

If taken up before frost in the autumn, they may be preserved in a
conservatory, or warm parlor or sitting-room, during winter, and reset
in the open ground on the approach of warm weather; when new shoots will
soon make their appearance, and the plants will blossom a second time
early and abundantly.

The plants are twelve feet or more in height or length, with deep-green
foliage and brilliant scarlet flowers; the latter being produced in
spikes, on long footstalks. The pods are six inches long, nearly an inch
broad, somewhat hairy while young, sickle-shaped and wrinkled when more
advanced, light reddish-brown when ripe, and contain four or five seeds.

It requires the whole season for its perfection, and should be planted
as early as the weather will admit. The plants will then blossom in
seven or eight weeks, produce young pods in nine weeks, green seeds in
twelve weeks, and ripen in a hundred and fifteen days.

The ripe seeds are lilac-purple, variegated with black, or deep
purplish-brown,--the edge, or border, little, if any, marked; hilum long
and white; form broad-kidney-shaped; size large,--if well grown,
measuring seven-eighths of an inch long, six-tenths of an inch broad,
and three-eighths of an inch thick. About five hundred and fifty are
contained in a quart, and will plant eighty hills.

In this country, it is usually cultivated as an ornamental, climbing
annual; the spikes of rich, scarlet flowers, and its deep-green foliage,
rendering the plant one of the most showy and attractive objects of the
garden.

Though inferior to some of the finer sorts of garden-beans, its value as
an esculent has not been generally appreciated. The young pods are
tender and well flavored; and the seeds, green or ripe, are much
esteemed in many localities. "In Britain, the green pods only are used;
on the Continent, the ripened seeds are as much an object of culture; in
Holland, the Runners are grown in every cottage-garden for both
purposes; while, in France and Switzerland, they are grown chiefly for
the ripened seeds. In England, they occupy a place in most
cottage-gardens, and are made both ornamental and useful. They cover
arbors, are trained over pales and up the walls of cottages, which they
enliven by the brightness of their blossoms; while every day produces a
supply of wholesome and nutritious food for the owner. The French, now
enthusiastically fond of this legume, at one time held it in utter
detestation."


PAINTED LADY-RUNNER.

A sub-variety of the Scarlet-runner, with variegated flowers; the upper
petals being scarlet, the lower white. The ripe seeds are paler, and the
spots and markings duller. Cultivation and uses the same.


WHITE-RUNNER.

A variety of the Scarlet-runner. The plants are less vigorous, the pods
are longer and less wrinkled, and the flowers and seeds pure white.

The green pods are used in the same manner as those of the
Scarlet-runner, and are similar in texture and flavor; but the
shelled-beans, either green or ripe, are generally considered superior
to those of the Scarlet variety. They are sometimes seen in vegetable
markets under the name of the "Lima;" and are probably often cultivated,
as well as purchased and consumed, as the Lima. The White-runner beans,
however, are easily distinguished by their greater thickness, more
rounded form, and especially by their uniform whiteness.

       *       *       *       *       *

SIEVA.

Carolina. Saba. West-Indian. Small Lima. Carolina Sewee. Phaseolus
lunatus, var.

The Sieva is a variety of the Lima, attaining a height of ten or twelve
feet. The leaves and flowers resemble those of the Common Lima. The
pods, however, are much smaller, and remarkable for their uniform size;
generally measuring three inches in length, and about seven-eighths of
an inch in width: they are green and wrinkled while young, pale
yellowish-brown when ripe, and contain three, and sometimes four, seeds.

Though several days earlier than the Lima, the Sieva Bean requires the
whole season for its complete maturity; and even when planted early, and
receiving the advantage of a warm summer and a favorable autumn, it is
seldom fully perfected in the Northern States: for, though much of the
crop may ripen, a large portion almost invariably is prematurely
destroyed by frost.

The variety will blossom in eight weeks from the time of planting,
afford pods for shelling in twelve weeks, and ripen from near the middle
of September till destroyed by frost.

The seeds are white or dull yellowish-white, broad-kidney-shaped, much
flattened, five-eighths of an inch long, and nearly half an inch broad.
A quart contains about sixteen hundred, and will plant about a hundred
and fifty hills.

The Sieva is one of the most productive of all varieties. The young
pods, however, are tough and hard, and are never eaten. The beans, in
their green or ripe state, are similar to the Lima, and are nearly as
delicate and richly flavored. It is from two to three weeks earlier than
the last named, and would yield a certain abundance in seasons when the
Lima would uniformly fail. As a shelled-bean, green or dry, it must be
classed as one of the best, and is recommended for cultivation.


MOTTLED SIEVA.

A sub-variety of the Common Sieva; the principal if not the only mark of
distinction being in the variegated character of the seeds, which are
dull-white, spotted and streaked with purple.

It is sometimes described as being earlier than the Common variety; but,
from various experiments in the cultivation of both varieties, there
appears to be little if any difference in their seasons of maturity. The
color and form of the flower are the same as the Sieva; the pods are of
the same size and shape; and the leaves have the same elongated form,
and smooth, glossy appearance.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHICK-PEA.

Egyptian Pea. Cicer arietinum.

The Chick-pea is a hardy, annual plant, originally from the south of
Europe, but also indigenous to the north of Africa and some parts of
Asia. The stem is two or three feet high, erect and branching; the
leaves are pinnate, with from six to nine pairs of oval, grayish,
toothed leaflets; the flowers resemble those of the Common Pea, and are
produced on long peduncles, generally singly, but sometimes in pairs;
the pods are about an inch long, three-fourths of an inch broad,
somewhat rhomboidal, hairy, inflated or bladder-like, and contain two or
three globular, wrinkled, pea-like seeds.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--The seed should be sown in April, in the
manner of the Garden-pea; making the drills about three feet apart, an
inch and a half deep, and dropping the seeds two inches asunder in the
drills. All the culture required is simply to keep the ground between
the rows free from weeds. The crop should be harvested before the
complete maturity of the seeds.

_Use._--"The Pease, though not very digestible, are largely employed in
soups, and form the basis of the _puree aux croutons_, or bread and pea
soup, so highly esteemed in Paris." They are also extensively used,
roasted and ground, as a substitute for coffee.

There are three varieties, as follow:--


RED CHICK-PEA.

A variety with rose-colored flowers, and red or brownish-red seeds.


WHITE CHICK-PEA.

Both the flowers and seeds white; plant similar to those of the other
varieties.


YELLOW CHICK-PEA.

This variety has white blossoms and yellow seeds. The plant, in height,
foliage, or general habit, differs little from the White or the Red
Seeded.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHICKLING VETCH. _Law._

Lentil, of Spain. Cultivated Lathyrus. Lathyrus sativus.

Stem three or four feet high or long, attaching itself to trellises,
branches, or whatever may be provided for its support, in the manner of
pease; the leaves are small and grass-like; flowers solitary, smaller
than those of the Common Pea, and generally bright-blue; the pods are an
inch and a half long, three-fourths of an inch broad, flattened, winged
along the back, and enclose two compressed but irregularly shaped seeds
of a dun or brownish color and pleasant flavor.

_Cultivation and Use._--The seeds are sown at the time and in the manner
of the taller kinds of garden-pease. The plant is principally cultivated
for its seeds, the flour of which is mixed with that of wheat or rye,
and made into bread. It is also fed to stock; and, in some localities,
the plants are given as green food to horses and cattle.

"In 1671, its cultivation and use were prohibited on account of its
supposed pernicious properties; as it was thought to induce rigidity of
the limbs, and to otherwise injuriously affect the system."


WHITE-FLOWERED CHICKLING VETCH.

A variety with white flowers and seeds. The foliage is also much paler
than that of the Common Chickling Vetch.

Other species of the genus also produce farinaceous seeds suitable for
food, but in too small quantities to admit of being profitably
cultivated in this country.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENGLISH BEAN.

Horse-bean. Garden-bean, of the English. Vicia faba.

[Illustration: English Bean.]

The English Bean differs essentially from the Common American Garden or
Kidney Bean usually cultivated in this country; and is classed by
botanists under a different genera, and not as a distinct species, as
intimated in the "American Gardener." Aside from the great difference in
their general appearance and manner of growth, the soil, climate, and
mode of cultivation, required by the two classes, are very dissimilar:
the American Garden-bean thriving best in a light, warm soil, and under
a high temperature; and the English Bean in stiff, moist soil, and in
cool, humid seasons.

The English Bean is a native of Egypt, and is said to be the most
ancient of all the now cultivated esculents. It is an annual plant, with
an upright, smooth, four-sided, hollow stem, dividing into branches near
the ground, and growing from two to four feet and upwards in height. The
leaves are alternate, pinnate, and composed of from two to four pairs of
oval, smooth, entire leaflets; the flowers are large, nearly stemless,
purple or white, veined and spotted with purplish-black; the pods are
large and downy; the seeds are rounded, or reniform, flattened, and vary
to a considerable extent in size and color in the different
varieties,--they will vegetate until more than five years old.

_Soil and Planting._--As before remarked, the English Bean requires a
moist, strong soil, and a cool situation; the principal obstacles in the
way of its successful cultivation in this country being the heat and
drought of the summer. The seeds should be planted early, in drills two
feet asunder for the smaller-growing varieties, and three feet for the
larger sorts; dropping them about six inches from each other, and
covering two inches deep. A quart of seed will plant about a hundred and
fifty feet of row or drill.

_Cultivation._--"When the plants have attained a height of five or six
inches, they are earthed up slightly for support; and, when more
advanced, they are sometimes staked along the rows, and cords extended
from stake to stake to keep the plants erect. When the young pods
appear, the tops of the plants should be pinched off, to throw that
nourishment, which would be expended in uselessly increasing the height
of the plant, into its general system, and consequently increase the
bulk of crop, as well as hasten its maturity. This often-recommended
operation, though disregarded by many, is of very signal
importance."--_M'Int._

_Taking the Crop._--The pods should be gathered for use when the seeds
are comparatively young, or when they are of the size of a
marrowfat-pea. As a general rule, all vegetables are most tender and
delicate when young; and to few esculents does this truth apply with
greater force than to the class of plants to which the English Bean
belongs.

_Use._--The seeds are used in their green state, cooked and served in
the same manner as shelled kidney-beans. The young pods are sometimes,
though rarely, used as string-beans.

_Varieties._--


DUTCH LONG POD.

Plant from four to five feet high, dividing into two or three branches;
flowers white; pods horizontal, or slightly pendulous, six or seven
inches long, about an inch in width, three-fourths of an inch thick, and
containing five or six large white or yellowish-white seeds.

Not early, but prolific, and of good quality.


DWARF FAN, OR CLUSTER.

Early Dwarf. Bog-bean.

A remarkably dwarfish, early variety, much employed in forcing. Stem
about a foot high, separating near the ground into two or three
branches; flowers white; the pods, which are produced in clusters near
the top of the plant, are almost cylindrical, three inches long,
three-fourths of an inch thick, and contain three or four small, oblong,
yellow seeds.

It is one of the smallest and earliest of the English Beans, and yields
abundantly.


EARLY DWARF CRIMSON-SEEDED. _Vil._

Vilmorin's Dwarf Red-seeded.

Plant sixteen inches high, separating into two or three divisions, or
branches; the flowers resemble those of the Common varieties, but are
somewhat smaller; the pods are erect, three inches and a half long,
three-fifths of an inch wide, half an inch thick, and contain three or
four seeds, closely set together, and nearly as large in diameter as the
pod.

The ripe seeds are bright brownish-red or crimson, thick, shortened at
the back, and depressed at the sides: six hundred and fifty will measure
a quart.

The variety is principally esteemed for its dwarfish habit and early
maturity.


EARLY MAZAGAN.

Early Malta.

This variety, though originally from Mazagan, on the coast of Africa, is
one of the hardiest sorts now in cultivation. Stem from two to three
feet high, and rather slender; pods four to five inches long, containing
four or five whitish seeds.

The Early Mazagan is much less productive than many other sorts; but its
hardiness and earliness have secured it a place in the garden, and it
has been cultivated more or less extensively for upwards of a century.


EVERGREEN LONG POD. _M'Int._

Green Genoa. Green Long Pod. Green Nonpareil.

This variety grows from three to four feet high. The pods are long,
somewhat flattened, and generally contain four rather small, oblong,
green seeds. It is an excellent bearer, of good quality, and but a few
days later than the Common Long Pod. The variety is much esteemed on
account of the fine, green color of the beans; which, if gathered at the
proper time, retain their green color when dressed.

In planting, make the drills three feet apart, and two inches and a half
deep; and allow two plants for each linear foot.


GREEN CHINA.

From two to two feet and a half high; pods long, cylindrical, containing
three or four beans, which remain of a green color when dry. It is
recommended for its great productiveness and late maturity.


GREEN JULIENNE. _Vil._

Plant about three feet and a half high, usually divided into four
branches; the pods are erect, four inches long, three-fourths of an inch
thick, and contain two or three small, oblong, green seeds.

Early and of good quality.


GREEN WINDSOR.

Toker.

Stem three feet high, separating into two, and sometimes three,
branches; flowers white; pods erect, often horizontal, four inches and a
half long, an inch and a quarter wide, and containing three large,
green, nearly circular, and rather thick seeds.

The latter retain their fresh, green color till near maturity, and, to a
considerable extent, when fully ripe; and, on this account, are found in
the market, and used at table, after most other varieties have
disappeared.

The variety resembles the Common Broad Windsor; but the seeds are
smaller, and retain their green color after maturity. Eleven or twelve
well-developed seeds will weigh an ounce.


HORSE-BEAN. _Law._

Scotch Bean. Faba vulgaris arvensis.

Stem from three to five feet high; flowers variable in color; the ripe
seeds are from a half to five-eighths of an inch in length by
three-eighths in breadth, generally slightly compressed on the sides,
and frequently a little hollowed or flattened at the end, of a whitish
or light-brownish color, occasionally interspersed with darker blotches,
particularly towards the extremities; eye black; average weight per
bushel sixty-two pounds.

An agricultural sort, generally cultivated in rows, but sometimes sown
broadcast. It is not adapted to the climate of the United States, though
extensively and profitably grown in England and Scotland.


JOHNSON'S WONDERFUL. _Law._

An improved variety of the Broad Windsor, recently introduced, and
apparently of excellent quality. The pods are long, and contain six or
eight beans, which are similar in size and form to the Windsor.


LONG-PODDED. _Law._

Lisbon. Hang-down Long Pod. Early Long Pod. Sandwich. Turkey Long Pod.
Sword Long Pod.

Stems from three to five feet high; pods six to seven inches long, an
inch and a fourth broad, rather pendulous, and containing four or five
whitish, somewhat oblong, flattened seeds, about an inch in length, and
five-eighths of an inch in breadth.

The variety has been long in cultivation, is remarkably productive, and
one of the most esteemed of the English Beans. It is about a week later
than the Early Mazagan.


MARSHALL'S EARLY DWARF PROLIFIC. _M'Int._

Plant from eighteen inches to two feet high, separating into numerous
branches. It resembles the Early Mazagan; but is two weeks earlier, and
much more productive. The pods are produced in clusters near the
ground, and contain four or five seeds, which are larger than those of
the last named.


RED OR SCARLET BLOSSOMED.

Stem three or four feet high, separating near the ground into four
branches; flowers generally bright-red, approaching scarlet, but varying
from pale to purplish-red and blackish-purple, and sometimes to nearly
jet-black; the pods, which differ from all other varieties in their
dark, rusty-brown color, are erect, four inches long, nearly an inch
broad, and contain three and sometimes four seeds.

The variety is remarkably hardy and productive; but less esteemed than
many others, on account of its dark color. It deserves cultivation as an
ornamental plant.


RED WINDSOR. _Law._ _M'Int._

Scarlet Windsor. Dark-red.

This variety resembles the Violet or Purple; growing about four feet
high. The pods are narrower than those of the Broad Windsor, and contain
about the same number of seeds: in the green state, these are darker
than those of the Violet, but change to scarlet when fully grown, and to
deep-red when ripe.

The Red Windsor is late, but prolific, and of good quality. It is,
however, little cultivated, on account of its dark and unattractive
appearance. The seed weighs about thirty-one grains.


ROYAL DWARF CLUSTER. _M'Int._

A very Dwarf, and comparatively new variety; growing only twelve or
fourteen inches high. It produces its pods in clusters, three or four
beans in each pod, which are smaller than Marshall's Early Prolific. On
account of its branching habit, it should not have less than ten or
twelve inches in the line, which is nearly its proper distance between
the rows. Much esteemed for the delicacy and smallness of the beans
while young, and considered one of the best of the early Dwarf sorts.


TOKER. _Law._

Large Toker.

Height about five feet; pods rather long, and very broad, containing
three or four beans of a whitish color,--differing from the Common
Windsor in being of an elongated, oval form.

This is a medium late sort, and an excellent bearer, but considered
somewhat coarse, and therefore not so much esteemed as the Windsor. The
ripe seed weighs thirty-six grains.


VIOLET OR PURPLE.

Violette.

Stem about four feet high, with two or three ramifications; flowers
white; pods generally erect, sometimes at right angles, a little curved,
four inches or upwards in length, an inch and a fourth in width,
four-fifths of an inch thick, containing two and sometimes three seeds.
When ripe, the beans are large, not regular in form, rather thin, of a
violet-red color, changing by age to a mahogany-red; the size and shape
being intermediate between the Long Pod and Broad Windsor.

The variety is of good quality, and productive; but less desirable than
many other sorts, on account of its dark color.


WHITE-BLOSSOMED LONG POD. _Law._

The flowers of this sort differ from all others in being pure white;
having no spots on the large upper petal, or on the wings or smaller
side petals. It is liable to degenerate; but may easily be
distinguished, when in flower, by the above characters. Stem about four
feet high; pods long, nearly cylindrical, and slightly pendulous,
generally containing four and sometimes five seeds, which are black or
blackish-brown, three-fourths of an inch long, and half an inch broad.

It is a moderate bearer, and of excellent quality; but not used in an
advanced state, on account of its color. The variety possesses the
singular anomaly of having the whitest flowers and the darkest seeds of
any of the English Beans. The seed weighs about twelve grains.


WINDSOR.

White Broad Windsor. Taylor's Large Windsor. Kentish Windsor. Mumford.
Wrench's Improved Windsor.

Stem about four feet high; flowers white; pods generally horizontal or
inclined, five inches long, an inch and a fourth wide, seven-eighths of
an inch thick, and containing two or three beans; seeds large,
yellowish, of a flat, circular form, an inch broad, but varying in size
according to soil, culture, and season. A quart contains from two
hundred and fifty to two hundred and seventy-five seeds.

This familiar sort is much esteemed and extensively cultivated. It is
considered the earliest of the late Garden varieties; and excellent as a
summer bean, on account of its remaining longer fit for use than any
other, with the exception of the Green Windsor. It is a sure bearer;
and, as the pods are produced in succession, pluckings may be made from
day to day for many weeks.

The seeds are the heaviest of all the English Beans; nine well-grown
specimens weighing an ounce.


LENTIL. _Law._

Ervum lens.

A hardy, annual plant, with an erect, angular, branching stem a foot and
a half high. The leaves are winged, with about six pairs of narrow
leaflets, and terminate in a divided tendril, or clasper; the flowers
are small, numerous, and generally produced in pairs; the pods are
somewhat quadrangular, flattened, usually in pairs, and enclose one or
two round, lens-like seeds, the size and color varying in the different
varieties,--about four hundred and fifty are contained in an ounce, and
their power of germination is retained three years.

_Cultivation._--"The soil best adapted for the Lentil is that of a dry,
light, calcareous, sandy nature."

When cultivated as green food for stock, it should be sown broadcast;
but, if grown for ripe seeds, it should be sown in drills,--the last of
April or beginning of May being the most suitable season for sowing.

_Use._--"The Lentil is a legume of the greatest antiquity, and was much
esteemed in the days of the patriarchs. In Egypt and Syria, the seeds
are parched, and sold in shops; being considered by the natives as
excellent food for those making long journeys. In France, Germany,
Holland, and other countries of Europe, it is grown to a considerable
extent, both for its seeds and haum. The former are used in various
ways, but principally, when ripe, in soups, as split pease. When given
as green food to stock, it should be cut when the first pods are nearly
full grown."

_Varieties._--


COMMON LENTIL. _Law._

Yellow Lentil.

This variety is considered superior to the Large Lentil, though the
seeds are much smaller. In the markets of Paris, it is the most
esteemed of all the cultivated sorts. Its season is the same with that
of the last named.


GREEN LENTIL.

Lentille verte Du Puy. _Vil._

The Green Lentil somewhat resembles the Small Lentil, particularly in
its habit of growth; though its stem is taller and more slender, and its
foliage deeper colored. The principal distinction is in the color of the
seeds, which are green, spotted and marbled with black.


LARGE LENTIL. _Law._

Flowers small, white, generally two, but sometimes three, on each
peduncle; the pods are three-fourths of an inch long, half an inch
broad, flattened, and generally contain a single seed, which is white or
cream-colored, lens-shaped, three-eighths of an inch in diameter, and an
eighth of an inch in thickness. The plant is about fifteen inches high.

It is one of the most productive of all the varieties, though inferior
in quality to the Common Lentil.


ONE-FLOWERED LENTIL.

Ervum monanthos.

The stem of this quite distinct species is from twelve to fifteen inches
high; the flowers are yellow, stained or spotted with black, and
produced one on a foot-stalk; the pods are oval, smooth, and contain
three or four globular, wrinkled, grayish-brown seeds, nearly a fourth
of an inch in diameter.

About five hundred and fifty seeds are contained in an ounce.

The One-flowered Lentil is inferior to most of the other sorts; but is
cultivated to some extent, in France and elsewhere, both for its seeds
and herbage.


RED LENTIL. _Law._

Seeds of the size and form of those of the Common Lentil, but of a
reddish-brown color; flowers light-red. Its season of maturity is the
same with that of the last named.


SMALL LENTIL. _Law._

Lentille petite. _Vil._

Seeds about an eighth of an inch in diameter; flowers reddish; and pods
often containing two seeds.

This is the "Lentille petite" of the French; and is the variety mostly
sown for green food in France, although its ripe seeds are also used. It
is rather late, and grows taller than any of the other sorts, except the
Green Lentil. When sown in drills, they should be from ten to fifteen
inches apart, and the plants about four or five inches distant in the
rows.

The Lentils are of a close, branching habit of growth; and a single
plant will produce a hundred and fifty and often a much greater number
of pods.

       *       *       *       *       *

LUPINE.

Lupinus.

The Lupines are distinguished among leguminous plants by their strong,
erect, branching habit of growth. Of the numerous species and varieties,
some are cultivated for ornament, others for forage, and some for
ploughing under for the purpose of enriching the soil. The only species
grown for their farinaceous seeds, or which are considered of much value
to the gardener, are the two following:--


WHITE LUPINE. _Law._

Lupinus albus.

An annual species, with a sturdy, erect stem two feet high; leaves
oblong, covered with a silvery down, and produced seven or eight
together at the end of a common stem; the flowers are white, in loose,
terminal spikes; the pods are straight, hairy, about three inches long,
and contain five or six large, white, flattened seeds,--these are
slightly bitter when eaten, and are reputed to possess important medical
properties.

"The White Lupine was extensively cultivated by the Romans for its
ripened seeds, which were used for food; and also for its green herbage,
which was employed for the support of their domestic animals."

It is of little value as an esculent; and, compared with many other
leguminous plants, not worthy of cultivation.

The seeds should be sown where the plants are to remain, as they do not
succeed well when transplanted. Sow early in May, in drills sixteen to
eighteen inches apart; cover an inch and a half deep, and thin to five
or six inches in the rows.


YELLOW LUPINE. _Law._

Lupinus luteus.

The Yellow Lupine is a native of Sicily. It is a hardy annual, and
resembles the foregoing species in its general character. The flowers
are yellow; the pods are about two inches long, hairy, flattened, and
enclose four or five large, roundish, speckled seeds. It blossoms and
ripens at the same time with the White, and is planted and cultivated in
the same manner.

This species is grown in Italy for the same purposes as the White, but
more extensively. It is also grown in some parts of the south of France,
on poor, dry grounds, for cutting in a green state, and ploughing under
as a fertilizer.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PEA.

Pisum sativum.

The native country of the Pea, like that of many of our garden
vegetables, is unknown. It is a hardy, annual plant; and its cultivation
and use as an esculent are almost universal.

To give in detail the various methods of preparing the soil, sowing,
culture, gathering, and use, would occupy a volume.

The following directions are condensed from an elaborate treatise on the
culture of this vegetable, by Charles M'Intosh, in his excellent work
entitled "The Book of the Garden:"--

_Soil and its Preparation._--The Pea comes earliest to maturity in
light, rich soil, abounding in humus: hence the practice of adding
decomposed leaves or vegetable mould has a very beneficial effect. For
general crops, a rich, hazel loam, or deep, rich, alluvial soil, is next
best; but, for the most abundant of all, a strong loam, inclining to
clay. For early crops, mild manure, such as leaf-mould, should be used.
If the soil is very poor, stronger manure should be employed. For
general crops, a good dressing may be applied; and for the dwarf kinds,
such as Tom Thumb, Bishop's New Long Pod, and the like, the soil can
hardly be too rich.

_Seed and Sowing._--A quart of ripe pease is equal to about two pounds'
weight; and contains, of the largest-sized varieties, about thirteen
hundred, and of the smaller descriptions about two thousand, seeds. A
pint of the small-seeded sorts, such as the Daniel O'Rourke, Early
Frame, and Early Charlton, will sow a row about sixty feet in length;
and the same quantity of larger-growing sorts will sow a row of nearly a
hundred feet, on account of being sown so much thinner. A fair average
depth for covering the seed is two and a half or three inches; though
some practise planting four or five inches deep, which is said to be a
preventive against the premature decay of the vines near the roots.

As to distance between the rows, when pease are sown in the usual manner
(that is, row after row throughout the whole field), they should be as
far asunder as the length of the stem of the variety cultivated: thus a
pea, that attains a height or length of two feet, should have two feet
from row to row, and so on to those taller or lower growing.

They are sometimes sown two rows together, about a foot apart, and ten,
twenty, or even fifty feet between the double rows; by which every
portion of the crop is well exposed to the sun and air, and the produce
gathered with great facility. There is no loss of ground by this method;
for other crops can be planted within a foot or two of the rows, and
this amount of space is necessary for the purpose of gathering.

A common practice in ordinary garden culture is to sow in double rows
twelve or fourteen inches apart, slightly raising the soil for the
purpose. When so planted, all of the sorts not over two feet in height
may be successfully grown without sticking. When varieties of much
taller growth are sown, a greater yield will be secured by bushing the
plants; which is more economically as well as more strongly done if the
planting is made in double rows. The staking, or bushing, should be
furnished when the plants are three or four inches high, or immediately
after the second hoeing: they should be of equal height, and all
straggling side-twigs should be removed for appearance' sake.

_Early Crops._--The earliest crops produced in the open garden without
artificial aid are obtained by judicious selection of the most approved
early varieties, choosing a warm, favorable soil and situation, and
sowing the seed either in November, just as the ground is closing, or in
February or March, at the first opening of the soil; the latter season,
however, being preferable, as the seed then vegetates with much greater
certainty, and the crop is nearly or quite as early. Great benefit will
be derived from reflected heat, when planted at the foot of a wall,
building, or tight fence, running east and west. It is necessary,
however, when warm sunshine follows cold, frosty nights, to shade the
pease from its influence an hour or two in the morning, or to sprinkle
them with cold water if they have been at all frozen.

They are sometimes covered with a narrow glass frame of a triangular
form, and glazed on both sides, or on one only, according as they may be
used on rows running from north to south, or from east to west. In the
latter case, such frames may have glass in the south side only.

_Subsequent Cultivation._--"When the crop has attained the height of
about five inches, a little earth should be drawn around the stems, but
not so closely as to press upon them: it should form a sort of ridge,
with a slight channel in the middle. The intention here is not, as in
many other cases, to encourage the roots to diverge in a horizontal
direction (for they have no disposition to do so), but rather to give a
slight support to the plants until they take hold of the stakes that are
to support them. Those crops which are not to be staked require this
support the most: and they should have the earth drawn up upon one side
only, that the vines may be thrown to one side; which will both
facilitate the operation of gathering, and keep the ground between them
clear at the same time, while it supports the necks of the plants better
than if the earth was drawn up on both sides."

_Mildew._--One of the most successful cultivators (T. A. Knight) says,
"that the secondary and immediate cause of this disease is a want of a
sufficient supply of moisture from the soil, with excess of humidity in
the air; particularly if the plants be exposed to a temperature below
that to which they have been accustomed. If damp and cloudy weather
succeed that which has been warm and bright, without the intervention
of sufficient rain to moisten the ground to some depth, the crop is
generally much injured by mildew."

"While engaged in the production of those excellent pease which bear his
name, he proved this theory by warding off mildew by copious waterings
of the roots. The fashionable remedy, at present, is the application of
sulphur. This, no doubt, subdues the disease, but does not remove the
cause."--_M'Int._

_Gathering._--The crop should be gathered as it becomes fit for use. If
even a few of the pods begin to ripen, young pods will not only cease to
form, but those partly advanced will cease to enlarge.

_Use._--"In a sanitary point of view, pease cannot be eaten too young,
nor too soon after they are gathered; and hence people who depend on the
public markets for their supply seldom have this very popular vegetable
in perfection, and too often only when it is almost unfit for use. This
is a formidable objection to the use of pease brought from long
distances. It is, of course, for the interest of the producer to keep
back his pease till they are fully grown, because they measure better,
and, we believe, by many are purchased quicker, as they get greater bulk
for their money. This may be so far excusable on the part of such: but
it is inexcusable that a gentleman, having a garden of his own, should
be served with pease otherwise than in the very highest state of
perfection; which they are not, if allowed to become too old, or even
too large."--_M'Int._

"Pease, in a green state, are with difficulty sent to a distance, as,
when packed closely together, heat and fermentation speedily take place.
This is one of the causes why pease from the South, or those brought by
long distances to market, are discolored, devoid of flavor, and, worst
of all, very unwholesome to eat. Pease intended for long transportation
should be packed in open baskets (not in boxes or tight barrels), and
laid in layers not more than two inches thick; and, between such
layers, a thick stratum of clean straw or other dry material should be
placed."

_Varieties._--These are very numerous, and, like those of the Broccoli
Lettuce, not only greatly confused, but often based on trifling and
unimportant distinctions.

From experiments made a few years since in the gardens of the London
Horticultural Society, under the direction of Mr. Thompson, who planted
no less than two hundred and thirty-five reputed sorts (all of which
were then enumerated in seedsmen's catalogues), only twenty-seven of the
number were selected as being really useful. About the same time,
upwards of a hundred sorts were grown by Mr. M'Intosh, from which twelve
were selected as being truly distinct and valuable.

"New sorts are yearly introduced: and it would be injudicious not to
give them a fair trial; for as we progress in pea-culture, as in every
other branch of horticulture, we may reasonably expect that really
improved and meritorious sorts will arise, and be substituted for others
that may be inferior."


AUVERGNE. _Cot. Gard._

White Sabre. White Cimeter.

The plant is of moderately strong habit of growth, producing a single
stem from four to five feet high, according to the soil in which it is
grown; and bears from twelve to fifteen pods. These are generally
single, but sometimes in pairs; when fully grown, four inches and a half
long, and over half an inch broad; tapering to the point, and very much
curved. They contain from eight to ten peas, which are closely
compressed, and of the size of the Early Frames. Even the small pods
contain as many as six or seven peas in each. The ripe seed is white.

Plants from seed sown May 1 were in blossom June 26; and the pods were
sufficiently grown for plucking, July 12.

The Auvergne Pea was introduced from France into England some years ago
by the London Horticultural Society. Although it very far surpasses most
of the varieties of the White Pea, it has never become much
disseminated, and is very little known or cultivated. It is, however, a
most characteristic variety, and always easily distinguishable by its
long, curved pods. It is one of the most productive of all the garden
pease.


BATT'S WONDER. _Trans._

Plant three feet in height, of robust growth; foliage dark-green; pods
narrow, nearly straight, but exceedingly well filled, containing seven
or eight peas of medium size, which, when ripe, are small, smooth, and
of a bluish-green color.

Planted May 1, the variety will flower about July 1, and the pods will
be fit for use the middle of the month.

The variety withstands drought well, and the pods hang long before the
peas become too hard for use. It is an excellent pea for a second crop.


BECK'S PRIZE-TAKER. _Trans._

Prize-taker. Rising Sun.

Plant four and a half to five feet in height; pods roundish, curved or
hooked near the end, well filled, containing seven to eight middle-sized
peas of a fine green color when young, and mixed olive and white when
ripe.

Sown May 1, the variety will blossom June 25, and the pods will be
suitable for plucking about the 12th of July.

It is one of the best varieties for the main crop. Similar to, if not
identical with, Bellamy's Early Green Marrow.


BEDMAN'S IMPERIAL. _Cot. Gard._

The plant generally produces a single stem, which is from three to four
feet high; the pods are usually in pairs, but sometimes single, three
inches and a quarter long, five-eighths of an inch broad, somewhat
curved, and terminate abruptly at the points. Each pod contains six to
seven peas, which are of an ovate form, and about a third of an inch in
their greatest diameter. The ripe seed is pale-blue.

Planted May 1, the variety blossomed the last of June, and furnished
pease for use about the 18th of July. For many years, this variety stood
foremost among the Imperials; but is now giving place to other and
greatly superior sorts.


BELLAMY'S EARLY GREEN MARROW. _Cot. Gard._

Plant of strong and robust habit of growth, sometimes with a single and
often with a branching stem, four and a half or five feet high, and
producing from twelve to eighteen pods: these are in pairs, rarely
single, three inches and a half long, seven-tenths of an inch broad,
slightly curved, thick-backed, and terminate abruptly at the point. The
surface is smooth, and of a very dark-green color. They contain, on an
average, from six to seven large bluish-green peas. The ripe seed has a
mixed appearance; some being dull yellowish-white, and others light
olive-green, in about equal proportions.

Plants from seed sown the first week in May were in blossom the last
week in June, and pods were plucked for use about the middle of July.

The variety is highly recommended, both as a good bearer and a pea of
excellent quality, whether for private use or for marketing: for the
latter purpose it is peculiarly adapted, as the pod is of a fine
deep-color, handsomely and regularly shaped, and always plumply filled.


BISHOP'S EARLY DWARF. _Law._

Pods single or in pairs, about two inches long, bent back at both ends,
and increasing in size towards the middle; pea about a fourth of an
inch in diameter, and irregularly shaped, cream-colored, with blotches
of white, particularly about the eye. The plant grows little more than a
foot high, and is fairly productive. Early sowings will give a supply
for the table in about ten weeks.

This once-popular, Early Dwarf sort is now rapidly giving place to
Bishop's New Long-podded,--a more prolific and much superior variety.


BISHOP'S NEW LONG-PODDED.

Stem about two feet high; pods nearly straight, almost cylindrical,
containing six or seven white peas. It is an early variety, an abundant
bearer, of excellent quality, and in all respects much superior to the
Common Bishop's Early Dwarf. Planted the 1st of May, it will blossom
June 14, and yield pease for the table the 10th of July.

M'Intosh describes it as "a most abundant bearer, producing a succession
of pods during most of the pea-season. Like all pease of its class, it
requires a rich soil, and from four to six inches between the seed in
the line. It is one of the most valuable sorts for small gardens and for
domestic use. It originated in England with Mr. David Bishop; and is a
hybrid between Bishop's Early Dwarf and one of the Marrowfats, carrying
with it the characters of both its parents."


BLACK-EYED MARROW.

Plant about five feet high, strong and vigorous; pods generally single,
sometimes in pairs, three inches and a quarter in length, three-fourths
of an inch in breadth, becoming rough or wrinkled on the surface as they
approach maturity, and containing about six large, round, cream-white or
brownish-white black-eyed seeds, about three-eighths of an inch in
diameter.

Its season is nearly the same with the Dwarf and Missouri Marrow. If
sown the 1st of May, the plants will blossom the 28th or 30th of June,
and yield pease for the table about July 15: the crop will ripen the
last of the same month.

This is a very prolific as well as excellent variety. It is little
cultivated in gardens at the North, though sometimes grown as a
field-pea in the Canadas. In the Middle States, and at the South, it is
a popular market-sort, and its cultivation is much more extensive.

The dark color of the eye of the ripened seed distinguishes the variety
from all others.


BLUE CIMETER. _Thomp._

Sabre. Dwarf Sabre. Blue Sabre. New Sabre. Beck's Eclipse.

Plant about three feet high; pods generally in pairs, well filled, long,
roundish, gradually curved from the stem to the point, or
cimeter-shaped; seeds of good quality, larger than those of the Prussian
Blue, from which the variety doubtless originated, and to which, when
grown in poor soil, it has a tendency to return.

If planted the 1st of May, it will blossom about the 28th of June, and
the pods will be suitable for plucking about the middle of July.

It bears abundantly, but not in succession; and, for this reason, is
much prized by market-gardeners. The most of the pods being fit to pluck
at the same time, the crop is harvested at once, and the land
immediately occupied with other vegetables.


BLUE IMPERIAL.

Dwarf Blue Imperial.

Plant strong and vigorous, four feet in height, with large, healthy
foliage; pods single and in pairs, three inches and a quarter in
length, three-fourths of an inch in breadth, containing six or seven
large peas.

The ripe seed is somewhat indented and irregularly compressed,
three-eighths of an inch in diameter, and of a greenish-blue color.

With respect to season, the variety is intermediate. If planted the 1st
of May, it will blossom the 26th of June, and the pods will attain a
size fit for plucking about the 12th of July. It is very hardy; yields
abundantly; thrives well in almost any description of soil or situation;
and, though not so sweet and tender as some of the more recent sorts, is
of good quality. It vegetates with much greater certainty, and its crops
are more reliable, than the higher-flavored varieties; and these
qualities will still secure its cultivation by those who prefer a
certain and plentiful supply of fair quality, to a precarious and
limited yield of extraordinary sweetness and excellence. It has long
been grown in this country, and is considered a standard variety.


BLUE PRUSSIAN. _Cot. Gard._

Dwarf Blue Prussian. Prussian Blue. Green Prussian.

Plant of a vigorous but not robust habit of growth, with a single stem
about three feet high, which is sometimes branching. The pods are
generally produced in pairs, but are also sometimes single, and vary
from twelve to sixteen on each plant. They are from two and
three-fourths of an inch to three inches long, three-fourths of an inch
wide, somewhat curved, and rather broader towards the point, where they
terminate abruptly. They contain about seven peas, which are four-tenths
of an inch long, seven-twentieths of an inch wide, about the same in
thickness, and compressed on the sides, from being so close together.
The ripe seed is blue.

Sown the 1st of May, the plants blossomed June 28, and yielded pease for
use the middle of July.

It produces abundantly, and is a valuable sort for late summer use. "It
is unquestionably the parent of the Blue Imperial and all like
varieties."


BLUE SPANISH DWARF. _Cot. Gard._

Groom's Superb. Blue Fan.

Plant from a foot and a half to three feet high. The pods are single and
in pairs, in about equal proportion, two inches and a half long,
containing from six to seven peas each. The ripe seed is pale-blue.

Plants from sowings made the first of May will blossom the last of June,
and yield pease for use the middle of July.

It is a useful variety for small gardens, as it is a low grower and a
fair bearer; but it is now much surpassed by Bishop's Long-podded and
Burbridge's Eclipse, both of which are considered more prolific and
better flavored.


BRITISH QUEEN. _Cot. Gard._

Hair's Defiance. Tall White Mammoth. Erin's Queen.

The plant is of a showy and robust habit of growth, from six to seven
feet high, sometimes with a single stem, but generally branching within
nine inches or a foot of the ground, and frequently furnished with two
and even three laterals, which are of the same height as the whole
plant. The pods begin to be produced at the first joint above the first
lateral shoot, and are in number from thirteen to eighteen on each
plant. They are generally single, but frequently in pairs, from three
inches and a quarter to three inches and three-quarters long, rather
flattened and broad when first fit to gather, but becoming round and
plump when more advanced. They are quite smooth, of a bright-green
color, slightly curved, wavy on the upper edge, and contain from five
to seven exceedingly large peas, which are not so close together as to
compress each other. The ripe seed is white, large, and wrinkled.

Sown the 1st of May, the plants will blossom about the 30th of June, and
pods may be plucked for use about the 15th of July. They will ripen off
about the 1st of August.

This is one of the best late peas in cultivation. It belongs to the
class known as Wrinkled, or Knight's Marrow; but is much superior in
every respect to all the old varieties usually called Knight's Marrows,
being much more prolific and richly flavored. As an intermediate
variety, it deserves a place in every garden.


BURBRIDGE'S ECLIPSE. _Cot. Gard._

Stubbs's Dwarf.

Plant a robust grower, always with a simple stem, attaining the height
of a foot and a half to about two feet; pods in pairs, rarely single,
and from three inches to three inches and a quarter long, seven-tenths
of an inch broad, perfectly straight, and of equal width throughout,
with a slight waving on the upper edge,--they contain from five to seven
peas, which are ovate, nearly half an inch long, a third of an inch
broad, and the same in thickness.

Seed was planted May 1, the plants blossomed June 26, and pods were
plucked for use July 14.

This may be classed among the valuable contributions which have been
made to the list of peas during the last few years. Unlike most of the
dwarf varieties, it is a most productive sort; and thus its dwarf
character is not its chief recommendation. For private gardens, or for
cultivation for market, few peas surpass this and Bishop's Long-podded.


CARTER'S VICTORIA. _Trans._

Carter's Eclipse.

Plant six to seven feet high; pods large, slightly curved, containing
seven or eight large peas, which are sweet and of excellent quality. The
ripe seeds are white, and much shrivelled or wrinkled.

Plants from seeds sown May 1 blossomed July 1, and the pods were fit for
plucking the 18th of the month.

The variety continues long in bearing, and the peas exceed in size those
of Knight's Tall White Marrow. It is one of the best late tall peas.


CHARLTON. _Cot. Gard. Law. Thomp._

Early Charlton.

The original character of this variety may be described as follows:--

Plant about five feet high, and of vigorous growth; leaves large, with
short petioles; tendrils small; pods broad, containing six or seven peas
of excellent quality. They are rather larger than those of the Early
Frame, with which this is often confounded. The Early Charlton may,
however, be distinguished by its stronger habit of growth, flat pods,
larger seeds, and by being fit for use about a fortnight later than the
Early Frame; so that, when sown at the same time, it forms a succession.

According to the Messrs. Lawson, this is the oldest, and for a long
period was the best known and most extensively cultivated, of all the
varieties of white garden-pease. Its history can be traced as far back
as 1670; and from that time till about 1770, or nearly a century, it
continued to stand first in catalogues as the earliest pea, until it was
supplanted by the Early Frame about 1770. It is further said by some to
be the source from which the most esteemed early garden varieties have
arisen; and that they are nothing else than the Early Charlton Pea,
considerably modified in character from the effects of cultivation and
selection. Although this idea may seem far-fetched, it is not
improbable, especially when we take into consideration the
susceptibility of change, from cultivation and other causes, which the
Pea is ascertained to possess. Thus if the Early Charlton, or any other
variety, be sown for several years, and only the very earliest and very
latest flowering-plants selected for seed each season, the difference in
the time of ripening between the two will ultimately become so great as
to give them the appearance of two distinct varieties; and by sowing the
earlier portion on light, early soils, and the later on strong, black,
coarse, or low soils, the difference will become materially increased.
It is therefore probable, that the Early Frame, with its numerous
sub-varieties (including the Dan O'Rourke, Prince Albert, Early Kent,
and a multitude of others), may have originated in the Charlton, though
some of them differ essentially in their habit of growth.

The various names by which it has been known are Reading Hotspur,
Master's or Flander's Hotspur, Golden Hotspur, Brompton Hotspur, Essex
Hotspur, Early Nicol's Hotspur, Charlton Hotspur, and finally Early
Charlton; the last name becoming general about 1750.

An English writer remarks, "that the variety now exists only in name.
That which is sold for the Early Charlton is often a degenerated stock
of Early Frames, or any stock of Frames which cannot be warranted or
depended upon, but which are, nevertheless, of such a character as to
admit of their being grown as garden varieties. The Early Charlton, if
grown at all by seed-growers as a distinct variety, is certainly
cultivated to a very limited extent."

Of the popular American improved early sorts, the Hill's Early, Hovey's
Extra Early, Landreth's Extra Early, are hardy, as well as very
prolific; and are not only well adapted for private gardens, but may be
recommended as the most profitable kinds for cultivating for early
marketing. In an experimental trial of these kinds with the Early Daniel
O'Rourke, and some of the most approved of the earliest foreign
varieties, they proved to be nearly or quite as early, fully as
prolific, continued longer in bearing, and were much more stocky and
vigorous in habit.


CHAMPION OF PARIS. _Cot. Gard._

Excelsior. Paradise Marrow. Stuart's Paradise.

Plant of vigorous growth, with a simple stem five to six feet high,
rarely branched, producing from eight to ten pods. These last are
generally single, but sometimes in pairs, from three inches and a
quarter to three inches and three-quarters long, and five-eighths of an
inch wide. They are curved almost as much as those of the Cimeter; and,
when near maturity, become quite fleshy, wrinkled, and thick-backed.
They contain from six to seven large peas, which are close together
without being compressed. The ripe seed is white, medium-sized, somewhat
flattened and pitted. If sown May 1, the plants will blossom June 28,
and the pods will be ready for plucking July 16.

This is a very excellent pea, an abundant cropper, and considerably
earlier than the Auvergne and Shillings Grotto; to both of which it is
also greatly superior.


CLIMAX. _Trans._

Napoleon.

Plant three feet and a half high, of robust habit; pods single or in
pairs, three inches long, containing five or six peas; when ripe, these
are of medium size, pale-blue or olive, sometimes yellowish, shaded with
blue, and, like the Eugenie, much wrinkled and indented.

If sown the beginning of May, the variety will blossom about the 15th
of June, pods may be plucked for use the 10th of July, and the crop will
ripen the 25th of the same month.

English catalogues represent the Napoleon as being "the earliest blue
pea in cultivation, podding from the bottom of the haum to the top, with
fine large pods." In a trial growth, it proved early and productive; not
only forming a great number of pods, but well filling the pods after
being formed. In quality it is tender, very sweet and well flavored,
resembling the Champion of England. Its season is nearly the same with
that of the Eugenie, and the variety is well deserving of cultivation.

Mr. Harrison, the originator of the Eugenie and Napoleon, states that
both of the peas were originally taken from one pod.


DANTZIC. _Law._

Plant six to seven feet high, branching; pods in pairs, two and a half
inches long, half an inch broad, compact, and slightly bent. When ripe,
the seed is the smallest of all the light peas, quite round or
spherical, of a bright-yellow color, beautifully transparent, with
whitish eyes.

If sown the 1st of May, the plants will blossom the 8th of July, afford
pease for the table about the 25th of the same month, and ripen from the
10th to the middle of August.

It is not a productive variety, and is seldom cultivated in England or
in this country; but is grown extensively on the shores of the Baltic,
and exported for splitting, or boiling whole.


DICKSON'S FAVORITE. _Trans._

Dickson's Early Favorite.

Plant five feet high, stocky, vigorous, and very prolific; pods ten to
twelve on a stalk, long, round when fully grown, curved, hooked at the
extremity, but not so much so as in the Auvergne,--to which, in many
respects, it bears a strong resemblance. The pods are remarkably well
filled, containing from eight to ten peas of medium size, round, and
very white.

Planted the 1st of May, the variety blossomed June 25, and pods were
gathered for use the 12th of July.

This pea is highly deserving of cultivation as a second early variety.


DILLISTONE'S EARLY. _Cot. Gard._

The plant is of slender habit of growth, produces a single stem two feet
high, and bears, on an average, from seven to nine pods: these are
smaller than those of the Dan O'Rourke, generally single, but
occasionally in pairs, almost straight, and contain seven peas each. The
seed, when ripe, is white.

Sown at the time of the Dan O'Rourke, the plants were a mass of bloom
three days before the last named had commenced blossoming, and the crop
was ready for gathering seven days before the Dan O'Rourke.

This is undoubtedly the earliest pea known, and is quite seven or eight
days earlier than the Dan O'Rourke, which has hitherto been regarded as
the earliest variety. A striking feature of Dillistone's Early is, that
its changes take place at once. It blooms in a mass, its pods all appear
together, and the whole crop is ready to be gathered at the same time.

In the Chiswick Garden, England, where a hundred and sixteen varieties
were experimentally cultivated, during the season of 1860, under the
supervision of Robert Hogg, LL.D., this variety was beginning to die
off, when the Dan O'Rourke was yet green and growing.


DWARF MARROW.

Dwarf White Marrow. Dwarf Marrowfat. Early Dwarf Marrowfat.

Plant from three to four feet in height, generally with a single stem,
but sometimes branching; pods somewhat flattened, generally single, but
sometimes produced in pairs, three inches to three inches and a half
long, three-fourths of an inch broad at the middle, tapering with a
slight but regular curve to both ends, and containing about six
closely-set peas: these are cream-colored and white; the white
prevailing about the eye, and at the union of the two sections of the
pea; not perfectly round, but more or less compressed, slightly
wrinkled, and measuring nearly three-eighths of an inch in diameter.

Planted the 1st of May, the variety blossomed the last of June, and
afforded pease for the table the 15th of July.

The Dwarf Marrow is hardy and productive. Though not so sweet or well
flavored as some of the more recent sorts, its yield is abundant and
long continued; and, for these qualities, it is extensively cultivated.
The variety, however, is rarely found in an unmixed state; much of the
seed sown under this name producing plants of stronger habit of growth
than those of the true Dwarf Marrow, and more resembling the Tall White
variety.


EARLY DAN O'ROURKE.

Dunnett's First Early. Waite's Dan O'Rourke. Carter's Earliest.
Sangster's Number One. _Cot. Gard._

Plant from three and a half to four feet high,--in general habit not
unlike the Early Frame, of which it is probably an improved variety;
pods usually single, two inches and three-fourths long, containing five
or six peas.

When fully ripe, the pea is round, cream-colored, white at the eye and
at the junction of the cotyledons, and nearly a fourth of an inch in
diameter.

Plants from seeds sown May 1 were in bloom June 7, and pods were
gathered for use from the 25th of the month.

The Dan O'Rourke is remarkable for its precocity; and, with the
exception of Dillistone's Early and one or two American varieties, is
the earliest of all the sorts now in cultivation. It is hardy, prolific,
seldom fails to produce a good crop, appears to be well adapted to our
soil and climate, is excellent for small private gardens, and one of the
best for extensive culture for market.

Its character as an early pea can be sustained only by careful culture,
and judicious selection of seeds for propagation. If grown in cold soil,
from late-ripened seeds, the variety will rapidly degenerate; and, if
from the past any thing can be judged of the future, the Dan O'Rourke,
under the ordinary forms of propagation and culture, will shortly follow
its numerous and once equally popular predecessors to quiet retirement
as a synonyme of the Early Frame or Charlton.


EARLY FRAME. _Thomp._

Early Dwarf Frame. Early Double-blossomed Frame. _Law._ Essex Champion.
Single-blossomed Frame.

Plant three to four feet in height; pods in pairs, slightly bent
backwards, well filled, terminating rather abruptly at both ends, and
about two and a half inches long by from three-eighths to half an inch
in breadth. The pease, when fully ripe, are round and plump,
cream-colored, white towards the eye and at the union of the cotyledons,
and measure nearly a fourth of an inch in diameter.

Sown the 1st of May, the variety blossomed June 20, and the pods were
ready for plucking the 6th of July.

This well-known pea, for a long period, was the most popular of all the
early varieties. At present, it is less extensively cultivated; having
been superseded by much earlier and equally hardy and prolific sorts.
"The flowers sometimes come single, and sometimes double; the stalk
from the same axil dividing into two branches, each terminating in a
flower: hence the names of 'Single-blossomed' and 'Double-blossomed'
have both been occasionally applied to this variety."


EARLY HOTSPUR.

Early Golden Hotspur. Golden Hotspur. Superfine Early. Reading Hotspur.

Similar to the Early Frame. Mr. Thompson represents it as identical. The
Messrs. Lawson describe it as follows: "Pods generally in pairs, three
inches long, half an inch broad, nearly straight, and well filled; pea
similar to the Double-blossomed Early Frame, but rather larger."


EARLY WARWICK.

Race-horse.

Once at the head of early pease: now considered by the most experienced
cultivators to be identical with the Early Frame.


EARLY WASHINGTON.

Cedo nulli.

A sub-variety of the Early Frame; differing slightly, if at all, either
in the size or form of the pod, color and size of the seed, or in
productiveness.

Once popular, and almost universally cultivated: now rarely found on
seedsmen's catalogues.


EUGENIE.

Plant about three feet in height, with pale-green foliage; pods single
or in pairs, three inches long, containing five or six peas. When ripe,
the peas are of medium size, cream-colored, and much shrivelled and
indented.

Plants from sowings made May 1 were in blossom June 14, green pease were
plucked July 10, and the pods ripened from the 18th to the 25th of the
same month. English catalogues describe the variety as being "the
earliest white, wrinkled marrow-pea in cultivation; podding from the
bottom of the stalk to the top, with fine large pods." In a
trial-growth, it proved hardy and very prolific; and the pease, while
young, were nearly as sweet as those of the Champion of England. The
pods were not remarkable for diameter; but, on the contrary, were
apparently slender. The peas, however, were large; and, the pods being
thin in texture, the pease, when shelled, seemed to be equal in diameter
to the pods themselves. As a new variety, it certainly promises well,
and appears to be worthy of general cultivation. It will come to the
table immediately after the earliest sorts, and yield a supply till the
Marrows are ready for plucking.


FAIRBEARD'S CHAMPION OF ENGLAND. _Cot. Gard._

Champion of England.

Plant of strong and luxuriant habit of growth, with a stem from five to
six feet in height, which is often undivided, but also frequently
branching. The laterals are produced within about eighteen inches of the
ground, and sometimes assume a vigorous growth, and attain as great a
height as the main stem. They produce pods at the first joint above the
lateral, and are continued at every succeeding joint to the greatest
extremity of the plant. The pods are generally single, but frequently in
pairs, about three inches and a half long, slightly curved, and
terminate abruptly at the point; the surface is quite smooth, and the
color light-green till maturity, when they become paler and shrivelled.
They contain six or seven quite large peas, which are closely packed
together and compressed. The ripe seed is wrinkled, and of a pale
olive-green.

Sown the 1st of May, the plants were in flower June 25, and pods were
gathered for use the 12th of July.

This variety was originated in England, by Mr. William Fairbeard, in
1843; and, with the Early Surprise, came out of the same pod,--the
produce of a plant found in a crop of the Dwarf White Knight's Marrows,
to which class it properly belongs. It is, without doubt, one of the
most valuable acquisitions which have been obtained for many years;
being remarkably tender and sugary, and, in all respects, of first-rate
excellence. The rapid progress of its popularity, and its universal
cultivation, are, however, the best indications of its superiority.

The variety was introduced into this country soon after it was
originated, and was first sold at five dollars per quart.


FAIRBEARD'S NONPAREIL. _Cot. Gard._

Stem branching, three and a half to four feet high, with a habit of
growth and vigor similar to the Early Frames. The pods are full and
plump, but do not become thick-backed and fleshy as they ripen, like
those of the Frames. They contain from six to eight peas, which are
close together, much compressed, and of that sweet flavor which is
peculiar to the Knight's Marrows. The ripe seed is small and wrinkled,
and of the same color as the other white, wrinkled pease.

The variety was originated by Mr. William Fairbeard, who also raised the
Champion of England. It is earlier than the last-named sort, nearly as
early as the Frames, and a most valuable acquisition.


FAIRBEARD'S SURPRISE. _Cot. Gard._

Early Surprise. Surprise.

The plant of this variety is of a free but not robust habit of growth,
and always with a simple stem, which is about four feet high. The pods
are produced at every joint, beginning at about two feet and a half from
the ground. They are generally single, but sometimes in pairs, three
inches long, slightly curved, but not quite so much as those of the
Champion of England. They contain from six to seven peas, which are of
good size, but not so sweet as those of the last-named sort. The ripe
seed is somewhat oval, and of a pale, olive-green color.

The variety is a day or two earlier than the Champion of England. It
originated from the Dwarf White Knight's Marrow, and was taken from the
pod in which was found the Champion of England.


FLACK'S IMPERIAL. _Cot. Gard._

Flack's Victory. Flack's Victoria. Flack's New Large Victoria.

The plant is of a robust habit of growth, with a stem which is always
branching, and generally about three feet in height; the pods are
numerous, varying from twelve to eighteen on a plant, generally produced
in pairs, but often singly, three inches and a half long, three-fourths
of an inch broad, and considerably curved,--terminating abruptly at the
point, where they are somewhat broader than at any other part. Each pod
contains from six to eight very large peas, which are of an ovate shape,
half an inch long, seven-twentieths of an inch broad, and the same in
thickness. The ripe seed is blue.

Plants from seed sown May 1 will blossom June 28, and supply the table
July 15.

It is one of the most prolific peas in cultivation; grows to a
convenient height; and, whether considered for private gardens or for
market supplies, is one of the most valuable varieties which has been
introduced for years.


GENERAL WYNDHAM. _Cot. Gard._

The plant is of a robust habit, six to seven feet high, and frequently
branched; the foliage is dark-green and blotched; the pods are either
single or in pairs, and number from ten to fourteen on each plant,--they
contain eight very large peas, which are of the deep, dull-green color
of the Early Green Marrow. The ripe seed is white and olive mixed.

This is a valuable acquisition, and was evidently procured from the Ne
Plus Ultra; but it is a more robust grower, and produces much larger
pods.

The plant continues growing, blooming, and podding till very late in the
season; and, when this is in the full vigor of growth, the Ne Plus Ultra
is ripening off. The pease, when cooked, are of a fine, bright-green
color, and unlike those of any other variety.


HAIR'S DWARF MAMMOTH.

Plant strong and vigorous, from three to three feet and a half high,
branching, with short joints; pods single or in pairs, broad,
comparatively flat, containing about six very large peas, which are
sugary, tender, and excellent. The ripe seeds are shrivelled, and vary
in color; some being cream-white, and others bluish-green.

Sown May 1, the plants will blossom July 1, and the pods will be ready
for use the 15th of the same month.

Very prolific, and deserving of cultivation.


HARRISON'S GLORY. _Trans._

Plant three feet high, of a bushy, robust habit of growth; pods rather
short, nearly straight, and flattish, containing five or six
medium-sized peas, of good quality: when ripe, the seeds are
light-olive, mixed with white, and also slightly indented.

If planted May 1, the variety will flower June 23, and the pods will be
fit for gathering about the 10th of July.

A good variety; but, like Harrison's Glory, the pods are frequently not
well filled.


HARRISON'S PERFECTION. _Trans._

Plant three feet in height, of vigorous habit; pods small, straight,
containing five peas of good size and quality.

Sown the 1st of May, the variety will flower June 23, and the pods will
be fit for plucking about the 12th of July.

The only defect in this variety is, that the pods are often not well
filled. When growing, it is scarcely distinguishable from Harrison's
Glory; but, in the mature state, the seeds of the former are smooth and
white, while those of the latter are indented, and of an olive-color.


KING OF THE MARROWS.

Plant six feet in height, stocky, and of remarkably vigorous habit; pods
single or in pairs, containing five or six large seeds, which, when
ripe, are yellowish-green, and much shrivelled and indented, like those
of the Champion of England.

If planted May 1, the variety will blossom the last of June, and pods
for the table may be plucked about the 15th of July.

Though comparatively late, it is one of the best of the more recently
introduced sorts, and well deserving of general cultivation. When the
pods are gathered as fast as they become fit for use, the plants will
continue to put forth new blossoms, and form new pods for an
extraordinary length of time; in favorable seasons, often supplying the
table for five or six weeks.

It is very tender and sugary, and little, if at all, inferior to the
Champion of England.

In common with most of the colored pease, the ripe seeds, when grown in
this country, are much paler than those of foreign production; and, when
long cultivated in the climate of the United States, the blue or green
is frequently changed to pale-blue or yellowish-green, and often
ultimately becomes nearly cream-white.


KNIGHT'S DWARF BLUE MARROW.

A dwarfish sub-variety of Knight's Marrows, with wrinkled, blue seeds.


KNIGHT'S DWARF GREEN MARROW.

Knight's Dwarf Green Wrinkled.

Plant about three feet high; pods in pairs, three inches long,
three-fourths of an inch wide, flattish, and slightly bent. The ripe
pease are of a light bluish-green color. It differs from the foregoing
principally in the height of the plant, but also to some extent in the
form of the pods.


KNIGHT'S DWARF WHITE MARROW. _Law._

Knight's Dwarf White Wrinkled Marrow.

Plant three feet high; pods in pairs, three inches long, three-fourths
of an inch wide, straight, or nearly so, well filled, and terminating
abruptly at both ends; pea, on an average, about three-eighths of an
inch in diameter, flattened, and very much wrinkled; color white, and
sometimes of a greenish tinge. It is a few days earlier than the Dwarf
Green.


KNIGHT'S TALL BLUE MARROW.

A sub-variety of Knight's Tall Marrows, with blue, wrinkled, and
indented seeds. It resembles the Tall White and Tall Green Marrows.


KNIGHT'S TALL GREEN MARROW. _Law._ _Thomp._

Plant from six to seven feet in height, of strong growth; pods large,
broad, and well filled; the seed, when ripe, is green, and much wrinkled
or indented.

If planted the first of May, the variety will blossom towards the last
of June, and supply the table the middle of July.

The peas are exceedingly tender and sugary; the skin also is very thin.
"From their remarkably wrinkled appearance, together with the peculiar
sweetness which they all possess, Knight's Marrows may be said to form a
distinct class of garden-pease; possessing qualities which, together
with their general productiveness, render them a valuable acquisition,
both to cultivators and consumers."

If planted not less than six feet apart, these pease will bear most
abundantly from the ground to the top: they also yield their pods in
succession, and are the best for late crops.


KNIGHT'S TALL WHITE MARROW.

Knight's Tall White Wrinkled Marrow.

Height and general character of the plant similar to Knight's Tall Green
Marrow. Pods in pairs. The ripe seed is white. Very productive and
excellent.


MATCHLESS MARROW. _Cot. Gard._

This is a good marrow-pea, but now surpassed by the improved varieties
of the Early Green Marrow. It possesses no qualities superior to that
variety, and is not so early. The plant grows from five to six feet in
height; and the pods contain about seven large peas, which are closely
compressed together.


MILFORD MARROW. _Cot. Gard._

The plant is of a strong and robust habit of growth, always with a
single stem, attaining the height of four and a half or five feet, and
producing from twelve to sixteen pods, which are almost always in pairs,
three inches and three-quarters long, and three-quarters of an inch
wide. They do not become broad-backed, thick, or fleshy, but rather
shrivelled, and contain from six to seven very large peas, which are
roundish and somewhat compressed, half an inch long, nearly the same
broad, and nine-twentieths thick.

Its season is near that of Bellamy's Early Green Marrow; if planted May
1, blossoming June 28, and being fit for plucking about the middle of
July.


MISSOURI MARROW.

Missouri Marrowfat.

Plant three feet and a half or four feet high, strong and vigorous,
generally simple, but sometimes divided into branches; pods single and
in pairs, three inches long, wrinkled on the surface as they ripen,
nearly straight, and containing about six peas, rather closely set
together. When ripe, the pea is similar to the Dwarf Marrow in form, but
is larger, paler, more wrinkled, and much more regular in size.

Plants from seed sown May 1 were in blossom the 30th of June, and pods
were gathered for use the 14th of July. It is a few days later than
Fairbeard's Champion of England, and nearly of the season of the Dwarf
Marrowfat, of which it is probably but an improved or sub-variety.

It is of American origin, very productive, of good quality, and well
deserving of cultivation.


NE PLUS ULTRA. _Cot. Gard._

Jay's Conqueror.

This is comparatively a recent variety. It belongs to the wrinkled class
of pease; is as early as Bellamy's Green Marrow; and possesses, both in
pod and pea, the same fine, deep, olive-green color.

The plant is of strong and robust habit of growth, six to seven feet
high, with a branching stem. It begins to produce pods at two or two and
a half feet from the ground; and the number, in all, is from twelve to
eighteen. The pods are generally in pairs, three inches and a half long,
three-fourths of an inch wide, very plump and full, almost round,
slightly curved, and terminate abruptly at the end. Their color is deep,
bright-green, and the surface smooth. They contain seven very large
peas, each of which is half an inch long, nearly the same broad; and,
although they are not so closely packed as to compress each other, they
fill the pods well.

When sown the first of May, the variety will blossom the last of June,
and afford peas for use the 15th of July.

It is one of the best tall Marrows in cultivation. The ripe seed is
mixed white and olive.


NOBLE'S EARLY GREEN MARROW. _Cot. Gard._

A sub-variety of Bellamy's Early Green Marrow. It is a much more
abundant bearer; producing from eighteen to twenty pods on a plant,
which are singularly regular in their size and form.


PRINCE ALBERT.

Early Prince Albert. Early May. Early Kent.

Plant from two and a half to three feet in height, usually without
branches; pods generally in pairs, two inches and a half in length, half
an inch broad, tapering abruptly at both ends, slightly bent backwards,
and well filled; pea, when fully ripe, round, cream-colored, approaching
to white about the eye and at the line of the division of the lobes, and
measuring about a fourth of an inch in diameter.

Sown May 1, the plants blossomed June 15, and pods were plucked for use
July 6.

The Prince Albert was, at one period, the most popular of all the early
varieties, and was cultivated in almost every part of the United States.
As now found in the garden, the variety is not distinguishable from some
forms of the Early Frame; and it is everywhere giving place to the Early
Dan O'Rourke, Dillistone's Early, and other more recent and superior
sorts.


QUEEN OF THE DWARFS. _Cot. Gard._

A very dwarfish variety, from six to nine inches high. Stem thick and
succulent; foliage dark bluish-green. Each plant produces from four to
six pods, which are of a curious, elliptic form, and contain three or
four large peas. Ripe seed white, of medium size, egg-shaped, unevenly
compressed.

The plants are tender; the pods do not fill freely; and the variety
cannot be recommended for cultivation.


RINGWOOD MARROW.

Flanagan's Early. Early Ringwood. _Cot. Gard._ Beck's Gem.

Plant three and a half to four feet high, usually simple, but sometimes
sending out shoots near the ground. The pods are single and in pairs;
and, as they ripen, become thick and fleshy, with a rough, pitted, and
shrivelled surface: they contain from six to seven large peas, which are
nearly round, and about seven-tenths of an inch in diameter in the green
state. The ripe seed is white.

The variety is comparatively early. If planted May 1, it will blossom
about the 25th of June, and the pods will be ready to pluck about the
10th of July.

A very valuable sort, producing a large, well-filled pod, and is a most
abundant bearer. It has, however, a peculiarity, which by many is
considered an objection,--the pod is white, instead of green, and
presents, when only full grown, the appearance of over-maturity. This
objection is chiefly made by those who grow it for markets, and who find
it difficult to convince their customers, that, notwithstanding the pod
is white, it is still in its highest perfection. So far from being soon
out of season, it retains its tender and marrowy character longer than
many other varieties.

A new sort, called the "Lincoln Green," is said to possess all the
excellences of the Ringwood Marrow, without the objectionable white pod.


ROYAL DWARF OR WHITE PRUSSIAN. _Cot. Gard._

Dwarf Prolific. Poor Man's Profit.

Plant of medium growth, with an erect stem, which is three feet high,
generally simple, but occasionally branching. The pods are usually
single, but sometimes in pairs, nearly three inches long, half an inch
broad, almost straight, and somewhat tapering towards the point. The
surface is quite smooth, and the color bright-green. They are generally
well filled, and contain from five to six peas, which are ovate, not
compressed, four-tenths of an inch long, a third of an inch broad, and
the same in thickness. The ripe seed is white.

Plants from seed sown the 1st of May will blossom June 25, and supply
the table about the middle of July. The crop will ripen the 25th of the
same month.

This is an old and prolific variety, well adapted for field culture, and
long a favorite in gardens, but now, to a great extent, superseded.


SEBASTOPOL.

Plant of rather slender habit, three feet and a half in height; pods
usually single, two inches and three quarters in length, containing from
five to seven peas, which, when ripe, are nearly round and smooth,
cream-colored, and scarcely distinguishable, in their size, form, or
color, from the Early Frame and kindred kinds.

If planted May 1, the variety will blossom June 16, afford pods of
sufficient size for shelling about July 7, and ripen the 20th of the
same month.

It is early, very productive, of superior quality, and an excellent sort
for growing for market, or in small gardens for family use. In an
experimental cultivation of the variety, it proved one of the most
prolific of all the early sorts.


SHILLINGS GROTTO. _Cot. Gard._

Plant with a simple stem, four feet and a half to five feet high; the
pods are generally single, but frequently in pairs, three inches and a
half long, about half an inch wide, slightly curved, and, when fully
matured, assuming a thick-backed and somewhat quadrangular form. Each
pod contains, on an average, seven large peas. The ripe seed is white.

A great objection to this variety is the tardiness with which it fills;
the pods being fully grown, and apparently filled, when the peas are
quite small and only half grown. Though considered a standard sort, it
is not superior to the Champion of England; and will probably soon give
place to it, or some other of the more recent varieties.


SPANISH DWARF. _Cot. Gard._

Early Spanish Dwarf. Dwarf Fan. Strawberry.

Plant about a foot high, branching on each side in the manner of a fan;
and hence often called the "Dwarf Fan." The pods are sometimes single,
but generally in pairs, two inches and a half long, half an inch broad,
terminate rather abruptly at the point, and contain from five to six
rather large peas. The ripe seed is cream-white.

Sown May 1, the plants were in blossom June 26, and pods were plucked
for use July 14.

The Spanish Dwarf is an old variety, and still maintains its position as
an Early Dwarf for small gardens, though it can hardly be considered
equal to Burbridge's Eclipse or Bishop's Long-podded.

There is a variety of this which is called the Improved Spanish Dwarf,
and grows fully nine inches taller than the old variety; but it
possesses no particular merit to recommend it.


TALL WHITE MARROW.

Large Carolina. Tall Marrowfat.

Plant six to seven feet in height, seldom branched; pods three to three
inches and a half long, three-fourths of an inch broad, more bluntly
pointed than those of the Dwarf variety, and containing six or seven
peas. When ripe, the pea is nearly of the color of the Dwarf Marrow, but
is more perfectly spherical, less wrinkled, and, when compared in bulk,
has a smoother, harder, and more glossy appearance.

Planted May 1, the variety will blossom near the 1st of July, and will
come to the table from the 15th to the 20th of the same month. It is a
few days later than the Dwarf.

In this country, it has been longer cultivated than any other sort; and,
in some of the forms of its very numerous sub-varieties, is now to be
found in almost every garden. It is hardy, abundant, long-continued in
its yield, and of excellent quality. In England, the variety is
cultivated in single rows three feet apart. In this country, where the
growth of the pea is much less luxuriant, it may be grown in double rows
three feet and a half apart, and twelve inches between the single rows.


TAYLOR'S EARLY.

Similar in habit, production, and early maturity, to the Early Dan
O'Rourke.


THURSTON'S RELIANCE. _Cot. Gard._

Plant strong and robust, six to seven feet high; pods generally single,
but occasionally in pairs, and from three inches and a half to four
inches and a quarter long. They are broad and flat, shaped like the pods
of the Blue Cimeter, and contain seven or eight very large peas. Ripe
seed white, large, and unevenly compressed.

This is a quite distinct and useful pea; an abundant bearer; and the
pods are of a fine deep-green color, which is a recommendation for it
when grown for market. It comes in at the same time as the Auvergne and
Shillings Grotto, but is of a more tender constitution.


TOM THUMB.

Beck's Gem. Bush Pea. Pois nain hatif extra, of the French.

Plant of remarkably low growth, seldom much exceeding nine inches in
height, stout and branching; pods single, rarely in pairs, two inches
and a half in length, half an inch broad, containing five or six peas,
which are cream-yellow, and measure about a fourth of an inch in
diameter.

Planted the 1st of May, the variety blossomed the 12th of June, and the
pods were of suitable size for plucking July 4.

In the color of its foliage, its height and general habit, the variety
is very distinct, and readily distinguishable from all other kinds. It
is early, of good quality, and, the height of the plant considered,
yields abundantly. It may be cultivated in rows ten inches apart.

Mr. Landreth, of Philadelphia, remarks as follows: "For sowing at this
season (November, in the Middle States), we recommend trial of a new
variety, which we have designated 'Tom Thumb,' in allusion to its
extreme dwarfness. It seldom rises over twelve inches, is an abundant
bearer, and is, withal, quite early. It seems to be admirably adapted to
autumn sowings in the South, where, on apprehended frost, protection may
be given: it is also equally well suited to early spring planting for
the same reason. It is curious, as well as useful; and, if planted on
ground well enriched, will yield as much to a given quantity of land as
any pea known to us."

It is a desirable variety in the kitchen garden; as, from its exceeding
dwarfish habit, it may be so sown as to form a neat edging for the walk
or border.


VEITCH'S PERFECTION. _Trans._

Plant three feet and a half to four feet high, of strong, robust growth,
somewhat branched; pods ten or twelve on a stalk or branch, large, flat,
straight, containing six or eight large peas, which are very sugary and
excellent. The ripe seeds are large, of a light olive-green color; some
being nearly white.

Planted the 1st of May, the variety will be in flower June 28, and the
pods will be fit for use about the middle or 20th of July. It is one of
the best pease for main or late crops.


VICTORIA MARROW. _Thomp._

Plant from six to seven feet high; pods remarkably large, nearly four
inches in length, generally in pairs, straight, roundish, well filled,
containing from six to eight peas of extraordinary size and of good
quality. The ripe pease are olive-green.

The Victoria Marrow is not early. Planted May 1, it will blossom the
last of June, and be fit for the table from the middle of July.

This variety bears some resemblance to Knight's Tall Marrow; but, like
nearly all others, it is less sugary. Those who have a fancy for large
pease will find this perhaps the largest.


WARNER'S EARLY EMPEROR. _Thomp._

Warner's Early Conqueror. Early Railway. Early Wonder. Beck's
Morning-star. Early Emperor.

This variety grows somewhat taller, and is a few days earlier, than the
Prince Albert: the pods and pease are also somewhat larger. It is an
abundant bearer; and, on the whole, must be considered a good
sub-variety of the Early Frame.


WOODFORD'S MARROW. _Cot. Gard._

Nonpareil.

Plant of strong and robust habit of growth, like a vigorous-growing
Marrow; rising with a stem three feet and a half high, which is
sometimes simple, but generally branching at about half its height from
the ground. The pods begin to be produced at little more than half the
height of the plant; and, from that point to the top, every joint
produces single or double pods, amounting, in all, to ten or twelve on
each. They are single or in pairs, in nearly equal proportions, about
three inches and a half long, seven-tenths of an inch broad, quite
smooth, and of a dark-green color. When ready to gather, they are rather
flattened, but become round as they ripen. They contain, on an average,
seven peas, which are of a dark olive-green color, rather thick in the
skin, and closely packed; so much so as to be quite flattened on the
sides adjoining.

Sown May 1, the variety blossomed June 28, and pease were gathered for
the table July 17.

This is a very characteristic pea, and may at once be detected from all
others, either by the ripe seed or growing plants, from the peculiar
dark-green color, which, when true, it always exhibits. It is well
adapted for a market-pea; its dark-green color favoring the popular
prejudices.

       *       *       *       *       *

EATABLE-PODDED OR SUGAR PEASE.

String-pease. Skinless Pease. Pisum macrocarpum. _Dec._

In this class are included such of the varieties as want the tough,
inner film, or parchment lining, common to the other sorts. The pods are
generally of large size, tender and succulent, and are used in the green
state like string-beans; though the seeds may be used as other pease,
either in the green state or when ripe. "When not ripe, the pods of some
of the sorts have the appearance of being swollen or distended with air;
but, on ripening, they become much shrivelled, and collapse closely on
the seeds." The varieties are not numerous, when compared with the
extensive catalogue of the kinds of the Common Pea offered for sale by
seedsmen, and described by horticultural writers. The principal are the
following:--


COMMON DWARF SUGAR. _Law. Vil._

Dwarf Crooked-podded Sugar.

Stalk about two feet high, dividing into branches when cultivated in
good soil; flower white; pods single or in pairs, six-seeded, three
inches long by five-eighths of an inch broad, crooked or jointed-like
with the seeds, as in all of the Sugar Pease, very prominent, especially
on becoming ripe and dry; pea fully a fourth of an inch in diameter,
white, and slightly wrinkled.

The variety is quite late. Sown the beginning of May, the plants
blossomed the last week in June, and pods were gathered for use July 17.

It is prolific, of good quality as a shelled-pea, and the young pods are
tender and well flavored.


EARLY DWARF DUTCH SUGAR. _Vil._

Early Dwarf de Grace.

Plant about twenty inches high, branching; leaves of medium size,
yellowish-green; flowers white; pods two inches and three-quarters in
length, half an inch wide, somewhat sickle-shaped, swollen on the sides,
flattened at the lower end, and containing five or six peas, which, when
ripe, are roundish, often irregularly flattened or indented, wrinkled,
and of a yellowish-white color.

The variety is the lowest-growing and earliest of all the Eatable-podded
kinds. If sown at the time of the Common Dwarf Sugar, it will be fit for
use twelve or fourteen days in advance of that variety. It requires a
good soil; and the pods are succulent and tender, but are not considered
superior to those of the Common Dwarf Sugar.


GIANT EATABLE-PODDED. _Vil._

Giant Sugar.

Stalk four to five feet high; leaves large, yellowish-green, stained
with red at their union with the stalk of the plant; flower reddish;
pods transparent yellowish-green, very thick and fleshy, distended on
the surface by the seeds, which are widely distributed, curved, and much
contorted, six inches long, and sometimes nearly an inch and a half in
diameter,--exceeding in size that of any other variety. They contain but
five or six seeds, which, when ripe, are irregular in form, and of a
greenish-yellow color, spotted or speckled with brown.

It is about a week later than the Large Crooked Sugar.


LARGE CROOKED SUGAR. _Thomp._

Broadsword. Six-inch-pod Sugar.

Plant nearly six feet in height, and branching when grown in good soil;
the leaves are large, yellowish-green; flowers white; pods very
large,--measuring from four to five inches in length and an inch in
width,--broad, flat, and crooked. When young, they are tender, and
easily snap or break in pieces, like the young pods of kidney-beans; and
are then fit for use. The sides of the pods exhibit prominent marks
where pushed out by the seeds, even at an early stage of growth. The
ripe pease are somewhat indented or irregularly compressed, and of a
yellowish-white color.

It is one of the best of the Eatable-podded sorts, and is hardy and
productive. It is, however, quite late; blossoming, if sown May 1, about
the last of June, and producing pods for use in the green state about
the 20th of July.


PURPLE-PODDED OR AUSTRALIAN. _Law._

Blue-podded. Botany-bay Pea.

Plant five feet high, generally without branches; pods usually in pairs,
flattened, with thick, fleshy skins, and commonly of a dark-purple
color; but this characteristic is not permanent, as they are sometimes
found with green pods; in which case, they are, however, easily
distinguished from those of other pease by their thick and fleshy
nature. When ripe, the pease are of medium size, often much indented and
irregularly compressed, and of a light, dunnish, or brown color. Season
intermediate.

It is very productive, and seems possessed of properties which entitle
it to cultivation.


RED-FLOWERED SUGAR. _Vil._

Chocolate.

Stem four or five feet in height, generally simple, but branching when
grown in rich soil; leaves long, yellowish-green, tinged with red where
they connect with the stalk of the plant; flowers pale-red; pods three
inches long, seven-tenths of an inch broad, more or less contorted,
containing six to eight peas; seed comparatively large, pale-brown,
marbled with reddish-brown.

Season nearly the same as that of the Common Dwarf Sugar. It is
productive, remarkably hardy, and may be sown very early in spring, as
it is little affected by cool and wet weather; but the green pease are
not much esteemed, as they possess a strong and rather unpleasant
flavor. The green pods are tender and good; and, for these, the variety
may be worthy of cultivation.


TAMARIND SUGAR.

Late Dwarf Sugar. Tamarind Pea.

Plant similar to the Common Dwarf Sugar, but of more luxuriant habit,
and with larger foliage; flowers white; pods single or in pairs, six to
eight seeded, very long and broad,--often measuring four inches in
length and an inch in breadth,--succulent, and generally contorted and
irregular in form. A few days later than the Common Dwarf Sugar.

Hardy, prolific, and deserves more general cultivation.


WHITE-PODDED SUGAR. _Vil._

Stem four to five feet high; leaves yellowish-green, and, like those of
the Giant Eatable-podded, stained with red at their insertion with the
stalk; flowers purple; pods nearly three inches long, five-eighths of an
inch wide, sickle-shaped and contorted, of a yellowish-white color,
containing five or six peas. The ripe seeds are irregularly flattened
and indented, of a greenish-yellow color, marbled or spotted with brown
or black.

The variety is quite late. Sown May 1, the pods were not fit for use
till July 24.

The pods are crisp and succulent, though inferior in flavor to most of
the Eatable-podded varieties.


YELLOW-PODDED SUGAR. _Vil._

Stem three to four feet high; leaves large, yellowish-green; flowers
white, tinted with yellow; pods four inches long, tapering slightly at
the ends, greenish-yellow, thick and fleshy, containing six or seven
peas, widely separated. The ripe seeds are oblong, rather regular in
form, and of a creamy-white color.

It is one of the earliest of the Eatable-podded sorts; coming to the
table, if planted May 1, about the middle of July. It is of good
quality, but not hardy or productive; and seems to have little to
recommend it, aside from the singular color of its pods.

       *       *       *       *       *

PEA-NUT.

Ground Bean. Earth Nut. _Vil._ Pindar Nut. Ground Nut. Arachys hypogea.

A native of Africa, and also of Central and Tropical America. It is an
annual plant; and the stem, when full grown, is about fifteen inches in
height. The leaves are pinnate, with four leaflets, and a leafy,
emarginate appendage at the base of the petioles; the flowers are
yellow, and are produced singly, in the axils of the leaves; the fruit,
or pod, is of an oblong form, from an inch to an inch and a half in
length, rather more than three-eighths of an inch in diameter, often
contracted at the middle, but sometimes bottle-formed, reticulated, and
of a yellowish color; the kernels, of which the pods contain from one to
three, are oblong, quite white, and enclosed in a thin, brown skin, or
pellicle.

A remarkable peculiarity of this plant is, that the lower blossoms
(which alone produce fruit), after the decay of the petals, insinuate
their ovaries into the earth; beneath which, at the depth of several
inches, the fruit is afterwards perfected.

The seed, or kernel, retains its germinative property but a single
season; and, when designed for planting, should be preserved unbroken in
the pod, or shell.

_Soil and Cultivation._--The Pea-nut succeeds best in a warm, light,
loamy soil. This should be deeply ploughed and well pulverized, and
afterwards laid out in slightly raised ridges two feet apart. As the
plants require the whole season for their perfection, the seed should be
planted as early in spring as the weather becomes suitable. Drop nine
inches apart in the drills, and cover an inch and a half or two inches
deep. Weeding must be performed early in the season; as, after the
blossoming of the plants, they are greatly injured if disturbed by the
hoe, or if weeds are removed about the roots.

It is rather tropical in its character, and cannot be cultivated with
success either in the Northern or Middle States.

"The seeds are sometimes dibbled in rows, so as to leave the plants a
foot apart each way. As soon as the flowers appear, the vines are
earthed up from time to time, so as to keep them chiefly within the
ground. When cultivated alone, and there is sufficient moisture, the
yield of nuts is from sixty to seventy-five bushels to the acre. If
allowed to grow without earthing up, the vines will yield half a ton of
hay to the acre. They are killed by the first frost; when the nuts will
be mature, and ready for use."

_Varieties._--


AFRICAN PEA-NUT.

A comparatively small, smooth, and regularly formed sort. Shell thin,
usually enclosing two kernels.


WILMINGTON PEA-NUT.

Carolina.

Similar to the African. The pods, however, are longer, and the shell is
thicker and paler. They rarely contain less than two, and often enclose
three, kernels. Extensively cultivated in the Carolinas and Gulf States.


TENNESSEE PEA-NUT.

Pods large, thick, and irregular in form; the reticulations very coarse
and deep. The pods usually contain two kernels. Less esteemed than
either of the preceding varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

VETCH, OR TARE.

Vicia sativa.

The Vetch, or Tare, in its properties and habits, somewhat resembles the
Common Pea. There are numerous species as well as varieties, and the
seeds of all may be used for food; but they are generally too small, or
produced too sparingly, to repay the cost of cultivation.

The only variety of much importance to the garden is the following:--


WHITE TARE, OR VETCH. _Law._

Lentil, of Canada. Napoleon Pea.

Annual; stem slender and climbing, about three feet high, the leaves
terminating in a branching tendril, or clasper; flowers purplish; pods
brown, slender, containing from eight to twelve seeds, or grains, which
are globular, sometimes slightly flattened, smooth, and of a
yellowish-white color; they retain their germinative quality three
years; an ounce contains about six hundred seeds.

In France and Canada, the seeds are used as a substitute for pease, both
green and ripe, in soups and other dishes. They are also ground, and
made into bread; but in this case their flour is generally mixed with
that of wheat, or other of the edible grains.

The seeds may be sown in drills, in April or May, in the manner of
garden-pease, or broadcast with oats for agricultural purposes.

_Varieties._--


SUMMER TARE, OR VETCH.

An agricultural variety, grown at the north of England and in Scotland.
It is sown broadcast, and cultivated as wheat or barley. Both the haum
and seed are used.


WINTER TARE, OR VETCH.

Extensively grown in England and Scotland; usually sown in autumn, mixed
with rye, for early spring food for stock. The seeds are smaller than
those of the summer variety.

Not sufficiently hardy to survive the winters of the Northern States.

       *       *       *       *       *

WINGED PEA.

Red Birdsfoot Trefoil. _Mill._ Lotus tetragonolobus.

A hardy, creeping, or climbing, annual plant, fifteen or eighteen inches
in height, or length; leaves trifoliate; flowers large, solitary,
bright-scarlet; pods three inches and a half long, with four
longitudinal, leafy membranes, or wings; seeds globular, slightly
compressed, yellowish-white.

_Use._--The ripened seeds are sometimes used as a substitute for coffee;
and the pods, while young and tender, form an agreeable dish, not unlike
string-beans. It is often cultivated as an ornamental plant; and, for
this purpose, is generally sown in patches, four or five seeds together
on the border, where the plants are intended to remain.

When grown as an esculent, sow in double drills an inch and a half deep,
and two feet apart; the single rows being made twelve inches from each
other.




CHAPTER X.

MEDICINAL PLANTS.


Bene-plant. Camomile. Coltsfoot. Elecampane. Hoarhound. Hyssop.
Licorice. Pennyroyal. Poppy. Palmate-leaved or Turkey Rhubarb. Rue.
Saffron. Southernwood. Wormwood.

       *       *       *       *       *

BENE-PLANT.

Oily Grain. Sesamum, sp.

This plant is said to have been introduced into this country from Africa
by the negroes. It is cultivated in the south of Europe, and in Egypt is
grown to a considerable extent for forage and culinary purposes.

It is a hardy annual, with an erect, four-sided stem from two to four
feet high, and opposite, lobed, or entire leaves; the flowers terminate
the stalk in loose spikes, and are of a dingy-white color; the seeds are
oval, flattened, and produced in an oblong, pointed capsule.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--It is propagated from seeds, which
should be sown in spring, as soon as the ground has become well settled.
They may be sown where the plants are to remain; or in a nursery-bed, to
be afterwards transplanted. The plants should be grown in rows eighteen
inches or two feet apart, and about a foot apart in the rows. The
after-culture consists simply in keeping the ground loose, and free from
weeds. The plant is said to yield a much greater amount of herbage if
the top is broken or cut off when it is about half grown.

_Use._--"The seeds were at one time used for food; being first parched,
then mixed with water, and afterwards stewed with other ingredients. A
sort of pudding is made of the seeds, in the same manner as rice; and is
by some persons much esteemed. From the seeds of the first-named sort an
oil is extracted, which will keep many years without having any rancid
smell or taste. In two years, the warm taste which the new oil possesses
wears off, and it becomes quite mild and pleasant, and may be used as a
salad-oil, or for all the purposes of olive-oil. Two quarts of oil have
been extracted from nine pounds of the seeds."

The properties of the plant are cooling and healing, with some degree of
astringency. A few of the leaves, immersed a short time in a tumbler of
water, give it a jelly-like consistence, without imparting color or
flavor; and in this form it is generally used.

There are three varieties:--


BIFORMED-LEAVED. _Mill._

Plant larger than that of the Oval-leaved; the lower leaves are
three-parted, while those of the upper part of the stalk are oval or
entire.


OVAL-LEAVED.

Stem about two feet high, with a few short branches; the leaves are
oblong, and entire on the borders.


TRIFID-LEAVED. _Mill._

Taller and more vigorous than either of the preceding. The upper as well
as the lower leaves are trifid, or three-parted.

       *       *       *       *       *

CAMOMILE.

Anthemis nobilis.

This is a half-hardy, herbaceous, perennial plant, growing wild in
various parts of England, by roadsides and in gravelly pastures. Its
stems rest upon the surface of the ground, and send out roots, by which
the plants spread and are rapidly increased.

_Soil and Culture._--Camomile flourishes best in light, poor soil; and
is generally propagated by dividing the roots, and setting them in rows
a foot apart, and eight or ten inches from each other in the rows. They
will soon entirely occupy the ground.

_Gathering._--The flowers should be gathered in a dry day, and when they
are fully expanded. They are generally spread in an airy, shady
situation for a few days, and afterwards removed to a heated apartment
to perfect the drying.


COMMON CAMOMILE.

The flowers of this variety are single. Though considered more
efficacious for medicinal purposes, it is not so generally cultivated as
the Double-flowering. Its leaves are finely cut, or divided; and, when
bruised, emit a peculiar, pungent odor. It may be grown from seeds, or
slips, and from divisions of the plants, or roots.


DOUBLE-FLOWERING CAMOMILE.

A variety of the foregoing, with large, white, double flowers. The
leaves are of the same form, but milder in their odor and taste. It is
equally hardy with the Single-flowering, and much more ornamental.
Though generally considered less efficacious than the last named, it is
generally cultivated for use and the market on account of the greater
bulk and weight of its flowers.

It is propagated by slips, with a few of the small roots attached. Both
of the sorts are classed as hardy perennials; but, in the Northern and
Eastern States, the plants are frequently destroyed in severe winters.

_Use._--"The flowers, which are the parts principally used, have long
been in high repute, both in the popular and scientific Materia Medica,
and give out their properties by infusion in either water or alcohol.
The flowers are also sometimes used in the manufacture of bitter beer,
and, along with Wormwood, made, to a certain extent, a substitute for
hops. In many parts of England, the peasants have what they call a
'Camomile seat' at the end of their gardens, which is constructed by
cutting out a bench in a bank of earth, and planting it thickly with the
Double-flowering variety; on which they delight to sit, and fancy it
conducive to health."--_M'Int._

It is considered a safe bitter, and tonic; though strong infusions, when
taken warm, sometimes act as an emetic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMON COLTSFOOT.

Tussilago farfara.

A hardy, herbaceous, perennial plant. The leaves are all radical,
roundish-heart-shaped, and from five to seven inches in diameter; the
flower-stem (scape) is six or seven inches high, imbricated, and
produces a solitary yellow flower, which is about an inch in diameter.
The plants blossom in February and March, before the appearance of the
leaves, and often while the ground is still frozen and even covered with
snow.

_Propagation and Culture._--Coltsfoot thrives best in rich, moist soil.
It may be propagated from seeds, but is generally increased by dividing
its long, creeping roots. The plants require little attention, and will
soon occupy all the space allotted.

_Gathering and Use._--The leaves are the parts of the plant used, and
are generally cut in July and September. They should not be exposed to
the sun for drying, but spread singly in an airy, shaded situation. They
are esteemed beneficial in colds and pulmonary disorders.

       *       *       *       *       *

ELECAMPANE.

Inula helenium.

A hardy, herbaceous, perennial plant, introduced from Europe, but
growing spontaneously in moist places, by roadsides, and in the vicinity
of gardens where it has been cultivated. Stem from three to five feet
high, thick and strong, branching towards the top; the leaves are from
nine inches to a foot in length, ovate, toothed on the margin, downy
beneath; the flowers are yellow, spreading, and resemble a small
sunflower; the seeds are narrow, four-sided, and crowned with down.

The plants blossom in July and August, and there is but one variety
cultivated.

_Propagation and Culture._--It is generally propagated by dividing the
roots; but may be grown from seeds, which are sown just after ripening.
The plants should be set in rows two feet asunder, and a foot from each
other in the rows.

_Use._--Elecampane is cultivated for its roots, which are carminative,
sudorific, tonic, and alleviating in pulmonary diseases. They are in
their greatest perfection when of two years' growth.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOARHOUND.

Marrubium vulgare.

Hoarhound is a hardy, herbaceous, perennial plant, introduced from
Europe, and naturalized to a considerable extent in localities where it
has been once cultivated. Stem hoary, about two feet high; leaves
round-ovate; flowers white; seeds small, of an angular-ovoid form and
grayish-brown color.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--The plant prefers a rich, warm soil; and
is generally propagated by dividing its long, creeping roots, but may
also be raised from seeds. When once established, it will grow almost
spontaneously, and yield abundantly.

_Gathering and Use._--The plants are cut for use as they come into
flower; and, if required, the foliage may be cut twice in the season.

The leaves possess a strong and somewhat unpleasant odor, and their
taste is "bitter, penetrating, and durable." The plant has long been
esteemed for its efficacy in colds and pulmonary consumption.

       *       *       *       *       *

HYSSOP.

Hyssopus officinalis.

Hyssop is a hardy, evergreen, dwarfish, aromatic shrub, from the south
of Europe.

Three kinds are cultivated, as follow:--


COMMON OR BLUE-FLOWERING.

More generally found in gardens than either of the following varieties.
The stems are square and tender at first, but afterwards become round
and woody; the leaves are opposite, small, narrow, with six or eight
bract-like leaves at the same joint; the flowers are blue, in terminal
spikes; seeds small, black, oblong.


RED-FLOWERING HYSSOP.

Quite distinct from the Common or Blue-flowering. The stem is shorter,
the plants are more branching in their habit, and the spikes more dense
or compact; flowers fine red. It is not so hardy as the White or the
Blue Flowering, and is often injured by severe winters.


WHITE-FLOWERING HYSSOP.

This is a sub-variety of the Common Blue-flowering; the principal if not
the only mark of distinction being its white flowers. Its properties,
and modes of culture, are the same.

_Soil and Cultivation._--The plants require a light, warm, mellow soil;
and are propagated from seeds, cuttings, or by dividing the roots. The
seeds are sown in April; and, when the seedlings are two or three inches
high, they are transplanted to rows eighteen inches apart, and a foot
from each other in the rows. The roots may be divided or the slips set
in spring or autumn.

_Use._--The plant is highly aromatic. The leaves and young shoots are
the parts used, and are cut, dried, and preserved as other pot-herbs.

"Hyssop has the general virtues ascribed to aromatic plants; and is
recommended in asthmas, coughs, and other pulmonary disorders."--_Rog._

       *       *       *       *       *

LICORICE.

Glycyrrhiza glabra.

Licorice is a hardy, perennial plant. The roots are fleshy, creeping,
and, when undisturbed, attain a great length, and penetrate far into
the earth; the stem is herbaceous, dull-green, and about four feet high;
leaves pinnate, composed of four or five pairs of oval leaflets; flowers
pale-blue, in terminal spikes. The fruit consists of short, flattened
pods, each containing two or three kidney-shaped seeds.

_Soil, Propagation, and Culture._--"Licorice succeeds best in deep,
rich, rather sandy, or in alluvial soil. The ground should be well
enriched the year previous to planting: and it should either be trenched
three feet deep in autumn, laid in ridges, and allowed to remain in that
state till spring; or it may be trenched immediately before planting.
The former method is the preferable one.

"Licorice is propagated by portions of the creeping stem (commonly
termed 'the creeping root'), from four to six inches in length, each
having two or three buds. These are planted in March or April, or as
soon as the ground can be well worked, in rows three feet apart, and
eighteen inches from each other in the rows; covering with earth to the
depth of two or three inches. Every year, late in autumn, when the sap
has gone down and the leaves have turned yellow, the old stems should be
cut down with a pruning-knife to a level with the ground. At this time,
also, the creeping stems are forked up, cut off close to the main stems,
and preserved in sand, or in heaps covered with straw and earth, for
future plantations. The roots will be ready for taking up three years
after planting. This should be done towards winter, after the descent of
the sap. A trench three feet must then be thrown out, and the roots
extracted; after which, they may be stored in sand for use."--_Thomp._

_Use._--The roots are the parts of the plant used, and these are
extensively employed by porter-brewers. "The sweet, mucilaginous juice
extracted from the roots by boiling is much esteemed as an emollient in
colds."

       *       *       *       *       *

PENNYROYAL.

Hedeoma pulegioides.

The American Pennyroyal is a small, branching, annual plant, common to
gravelly localities, and abounding towards autumn among stubble in dry
fields from whence crops of wheat or rye have been recently harvested.
The stem is erect, branching, and from six to twelve inches high; the
leaves are opposite, oval, slightly toothed; flowers bluish, in axillary
clusters; seeds very small, deep blackish-brown.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--In its natural state, the seeds ripen towards
autumn, lie dormant in the earth during winter, and vegetate the
following spring or summer. When cultivated, the seeds should be sown
soon after ripening, as they vegetate best when exposed to the action of
frost during winter. They are sown broadcast, or in drills ten or twelve
inches asunder. When the plants are in full flower, they are cut off, or
taken up by the roots, and dried in an airy, shaded situation.

_Use._--Pennyroyal possesses a warm, pungent, somewhat aromatic taste,
and is employed exclusively for medical purposes. An infusion of the
leaves is stimulating, sudorific, tonic, and beneficial in colds and
chills.

This plant must not be confounded with the Pennyroyal (_Mentha
pulegium_) of English writers, which is a species of Mint, and quite
distinct from the plant generally known as Pennyroyal in this country.

       *       *       *       *       *

POPPY, OR MAW.

Papaver somniferum, var. nigrum.

A hardy annual, growing naturally in different parts of Europe, and
cultivated to a considerable extent in Germany for its seeds, which,
under the name of "Maw-seed," are an article of some commercial
importance. Stem five or six feet high, branching; leaves smooth,
glaucous, clasping, and much cut or gashed on the borders; flowers
large, terminal, purple and white; the bud pendent, or drooping, until
the time of flowering, when it becomes erect. The petals soon fall to
the ground, remaining on the plant but a few hours after their
expansion; and are succeeded by large, roundish heads, or capsules, two
inches and upwards in diameter, filled with the small, darkish-blue
seeds for which the plant is principally cultivated.

_Soil, Sowing, and Culture._--"The soils best suited to the growth of
the Poppy are such as are of medium texture and in the highest state of
fertilization. As the seeds are small, and consequently easily buried,
the land should be well pulverized by harrowing and rolling. The seeds
are sown in April, in drills about half an inch in depth, and twenty
inches or two feet distant from each other. The young plants are
afterwards thinned out to from six to ten inches' distance in the rows,
and the whole crop kept free from weeds by frequent hoeing.

"The period of reaping is about the month of August, when the earliest
and generally the largest capsules begin to open. The plants are then
cut or pulled, and tied in small bundles, taking care not to allow the
heads to recline until they are carried to the place allotted for the
reception of the seed; which is then shaken out, and the sheaves again
set upon their ends for the ripening of the remaining capsules.

"In Germany and Flanders, a mode of obtaining the first crop is to
spread sheets by the side of the row, into which the seeds are shaken by
bending over the tops of the plants: these are then pulled, tied in
bundles, and removed; when the sheets are drawn forward to the next row,
and so on, until the harvesting is completed."--_Law._

_Use._--Maw-seed is imported to some extent from different parts of
Europe, and is principally used in this country for feeding birds.


OIL-POPPY. _Law._

Gray Poppy. Papaver somniferum olifer.

Stem three feet high, smooth and branching; flowers dull-red, or
grayish; capsules very large, oblong; seeds of a brownish color, and
produced in great abundance.

It is chiefly cultivated in Italy, the south of France, Germany, and
Flanders.

_Use._--"The oil of the seeds of the Poppy is of an agreeable flavor;
and, in Europe, is chiefly applied to domestic purposes, for which it is
esteemed nearly equal to that of the Olive. Its consumption in this
country is comparatively trifling; being principally used for the finer
kinds of oil-painting and by druggists."


OPIUM, OR WHITE POPPY. _Law._

P. somniferum, album vel candidum.

Plant strong and vigorous,--the stem, in favorable situations, reaching
a height of five or six feet; flowers large, white, and of short
duration; seed-pods globular, of large size, often measuring upwards of
two inches in diameter; seeds small, white, ripening in August and
September.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--"Being an annual plant, the Poppy, when sown
in spring, matures its seed the last of summer or early in autumn. It is
of easy culture, and can be successfully grown in any section of the
Northern or Middle States. It may be sown at any time during the month
of April, or the first week in May. The best method of cultivating the
plant is in rows two feet and a half apart; and, on the poppies
attaining a few inches in height, they are hoed out to a distance from
one another of six or eight inches.

"Opium is obtained from the capsules or heads of seed, and is extracted
after they are fully formed, but while yet green. The process is simple,
and may be taught to children in an hour.

"Two or more vertical incisions are made in the capsule with a sharp
knife or other instrument, about an inch in length, and not so deep as
to penetrate through the capsule. As soon as the incisions are made, a
milky juice will flow out, which, being glutinous, will adhere to the
capsule. This may be collected by a small hair-brush such as is used by
painters, and squeezed into a small vessel carried by the person who
collects the juice. The incisions are repeated at intervals of a few
days all round the capsule, and the same process of collecting the
exuded juice is also repeated.

"The juice thus collected is Opium. In a day or two, it is of the
consistence to be worked up into a mass. The narcotic matter of the
plant may also be collected by boiling; but it is only the exuded juice
that forms pure Opium.

"In the opium countries of the East, the incisions are made at sunset by
several-pointed knives or lancets. On the following day the juice is
collected, scraped off with a small iron scoop, and deposited in earthen
pots; when it is worked by the hand until it becomes consistent. It is
then formed in globular cakes, and laid in small earthen basins to be
further dried. After the opium is extracted from the capsule, the plant
is allowed to stand, and ripen its seeds.

"The seeds of the Poppy have nothing of the narcotic principle, and are
eaten by the people of the East as a nourishing and grateful food; and
they yield, by expression, an oil which is regarded as inferior only to
that of the olive."--_Law._

The expense of labor forms the principal objection to the cultivation of
the Poppy in the United States for its opium. As, however, the plants
succeed well, and can be easily and extensively grown in any section of
the country; and as the process of extraction, though minute, is yet
simple,--the employment of females or children might render its
production remunerative.

       *       *       *       *       *

PALMATE-LEAVED RHUBARB. _Law._

Turkey Rhubarb. Rheum palmatum.

This species is readily distinguished by its deeply divided or palmate
leaves, and is generally considered as that from which the dried roots
chiefly used in medicine are obtained. Like the Pie Rhubarb, it requires
a deep, rich soil, which should be thoroughly stirred, and put in as
fine a state of cultivation as possible, before setting the plants.
These should be placed about three feet apart in each direction, and
kept free from weeds during the summer. They will not be ready for
taking up until five or six years old.

The roots are thick and succulent, with a brownish skin and
bright-yellow flesh, streaked or variegated with red. After being dug,
they are washed clean, cut in rather large pieces, and dried either by
the sun, or in kilns formed for the purpose; when they are ready for
use.

Rhubarb from Turkey and the neighboring countries is generally
preferred; but it is said its superiority, to a great degree, is
attributable to the manner in which it is dried and prepared for market.
It is propagated by seed, or by a division of the roots.

       *       *       *       *       *

RUE.

Ruta graveolens.

Rue is a hardy, shrubby, nearly evergreen plant, and thrives best in
poor but dry and warm soil. It is propagated by seeds, or slips, and by
dividing the roots. The seeds are sown in April, and the roots may be
separated in spring or autumn. The plants should be set about eighteen
inches apart in each direction. When extensively cultivated, they are
set in rows eighteen inches apart, and a foot asunder in the rows.

_Use._--"Rue has a strong, unpleasant odor, and a bitter, pungent,
penetrating taste. The leaves are so acrid as to irritate and inflame
the skin, if much handled. Its efficacy as a vermifuge is unquestioned;
but it should be used with caution. It was formerly employed in soups;
and the leaves, after being boiled, were eaten pickled in vinegar." The
plant is rarely used in this country, either as an esculent or for
medical purposes.

The kinds cultivated are the following:--


BROAD-LEAVED RUE.

Stem shrubby, four or five feet high; leaves compound, of a
grayish-green color and strong odor; flowers yellow, in terminal,
spreading clusters; the fruit is a roundish capsule, and contains four
rough, black seeds.

At one period, this was the sort principally cultivated, and is that
referred to in most treatises on medicine. More recently, however, it
has given place to the Narrow-leaved, which is much hardier, and equally
efficacious.


NARROW-LEAVED RUE.

Stem three or four feet high; foliage narrower than that of the
preceding, but of the same grayish color, and strong, peculiar odor; the
flowers are produced in longer and looser clusters than those of the
Broad-leaved, and the seed-vessels are smaller. Now generally cultivated
because of its greater hardiness.

       *       *       *       *       *

SAFFRON. _Law._

Safflower. Carthamus tinctorius.

A hardy, annual plant, with a smooth, woody stem, two and a half or
three feet high; leaves ovate, spiny; flowers large, compound,
bright-orange, or vermilion; seeds ovate, whitish, or very light-brown,
a fifth of an inch long, and a tenth of an inch thick.

_Soil and Cultivation._--It grows best on soils rather light, and not
wet; and the seed should be sown the last of April, or early in May, in
drills about two feet apart and an inch deep. When the plants are two
inches high, they should be thinned to six inches apart in the rows, and
afterwards occasionally hoed during the summer, to keep the earth loose,
and free the plants of weeds.

_Use._--"It is cultivated exclusively for its flowers, from which the
coloring-matter of Saffron, or Safflower, is obtained. These are
collected when fully expanded, and dried on a kiln, under pressure, to
form them into cakes; in which state they are sold in the market. It is
extensively cultivated in the Levant and several countries of Europe,
particularly France, Spain, and Germany; in the latter of which, the
first gathering of flowers is obtained in the beginning of September;
and others, for six or eight weeks following, as the flowers expand. It
flowers somewhat earlier in this country, and seems well adapted to our
climate.

"Though the color of the petals is of a deep-orange, they are used for
dying various shades of red; the yellow matter being easily separated
from the other. The flowers of Saffron are employed in Spain and other
countries for coloring dishes and confectioneries; and from the seed a
fixed oil is obtained, somewhat similar to that of the Sunflower: for
which purpose alone, it does not, however, seem deserving of
cultivation."

It was formerly much used in medicine in cases of humors and diseased
blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUTHERNWOOD.

Artemesia abrotanum.

A hardy, shrubby plant, about three feet high. The leaves are
pale-green, and cut, or divided, into narrow, thread-like segments; the
flowers are numerous, small, yellow, drooping; the seeds resemble those
of the Common Wormwood, and retain their germinative properties two
years.

The plant is generally propagated by dividing the roots in the manner of
other hardy shrubs.

_Use._--The leaves have a strong, resinous, somewhat aromatic and rather
pleasant odor, and are quite bitter to the taste. The root is seldom
used; but the leaves and young branches are employed in the same manner
and for the same purposes as those of the Common Wormwood.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORMWOOD.

Artemesia.

The cultivated species are as follow:--


COMMON WORMWOOD.

Artemesia absynthium.

This species, everywhere common to gardens in this country, is a native
of Great Britain. It is a hardy, perennial, shrubby plant, two or three
feet in height. The leaves are deeply cut, or divided, pale-green above,
and hoary beneath; the flowers are small, numerous, pale-yellow; the
seeds are quite small, and retain their powers of germination two
years.

The leaves, when bruised, have a strong, somewhat pungent, yet aromatic
odor, and are proverbial for their intense bitterness.


ROMAN WORMWOOD.

Artemesia pontica.

This species somewhat resembles the foregoing: but the roots are
smaller, less woody, and more fibrous, and the stalks are shorter, and
more slender; the leaves are smaller, more finely cut, or divided,
pale-green above, and hoary on the under surface, like those of the
Common Wormwood; the flowers, which are produced on the upper branches,
are small, and of a pale-yellow color; seeds similar to those of the
above species, retaining their vitality two years.

It is generally preferred to the Common Wormwood for medicinal purposes,
as the taste is more agreeable, and its odor less pungent.


SEA WORMWOOD.

Artemesia maritima.

Indigenous to Great Britain, and common to the seacoast of Holland and
the low countries of Europe. Roots creeping, tough, and fibrous; stalks
two or three feet high, and, like the roots, tough and woody; leaves
numerous, long, narrow, and hoary; flowers yellow, produced on the small
branches towards the top of the plant; seeds similar to those of the
Common Wormwood.

The leaves are somewhat bitter to the taste, and, when bruised, emit a
strong, pleasant, aromatic odor.

_Soil and Cultivation._--All the species are hardy, aromatic perennials;
and, though they will thrive in almost any soil, their properties are
best developed in that which is warm, dry, and light. They are generally
propagated, as other hardy shrubs, by dividing the plants; but may be
raised from seeds, or slips. The seeds are sown in April, in shallow
drills; and the seedlings afterwards transplanted to rows two feet
apart, and a foot from each other in the rows.

_Use._--"An infusion of the leaves and tops of the Common Wormwood is
used as a vermifuge, tonic, and stomachic; and the leaves are found to
be beneficial to poultry."--- _Thomp._

Most of the other species possess the same properties in a greater or
less degree, and are used for the same purposes.




CHAPTER XI.

MUSHROOMS, OR ESCULENT FUNGI.

Agaricus. Boletus. Clavaria. Morchella, or Morel. Tuber, or Truffle.


Although many experiments have been made in the culture of different
species of edible Fungi, "only one has yet been generally introduced
into the garden, though there can be no doubt the whole would finally
submit to and probably be improved by cultivation. Many of them are
natives of this country, abounding in our woods and pastures; and may be
gathered wild, and freely enjoyed by those who have not the means of
raising them artificially. In Poland and Russia, there are about thirty
sorts of edible Fungi in common use among the peasantry. They are
gathered in all the different stages of their growth, and used in
various ways,--raw, boiled, stewed, roasted; and being hung up, and
dried in stoves or chimneys, form a part of their winter's stock of
provisions.

"Mushrooms are not, however, everywhere equally abundant, owing as well
to climate as to the more general cultivation of the soil: the character
of many of the sorts is, therefore, not perfectly known, and most of
them are passed over as deleterious. Indeed, the greatest caution is
requisite in selecting any species of this tribe for food; and we can
advise none but an experienced botanist to search after any but the
common and familiar sort (_Agaricus campestris_) for food."--_Loud._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMON MUSHROOM. _M'Int._ _Rog._

Champignon. Agaricus campestris.

[Illustration: Common Mushroom.]

This Mushroom, when it first appears, is of a rounded or button-like
form, of a white color, and apparently rests on the surface of the
ground. When fully developed, "the stem is solid, two or three inches
high, and about half an inch in diameter; its cap measures from an inch
to three and sometimes even upwards of four inches in diameter, is of a
white color, changing to brown when old, and becoming scurfy, fleshy,
and regularly convex, but, with age, flat, and liquefying in decay; the
gills are loose, of a pinkish-red, changing to liver-color, in contact
with but not united to the stem, very thick-set, some forked next the
stem, some next the edge of the cap, some at both ends, and generally,
in that case, excluding the intermediate smaller gills."

Loudon says that it is most readily distinguished, when of middle size,
by its fine pink or flesh-colored gills and pleasant smell. In a more
advanced stage, the gills become of a chocolate color; and it is then
more liable to be confounded with other kinds of dubious quality: but
the species which most nearly resembles it is slimy to the touch, and
destitute of the fine odor, having rather a disagreeable smell. Further,
the noxious kind grows in woods, or on the margin of woods; while the
true Mushroom springs up chiefly in open pastures, and should be
gathered only in such places.

_Cultivation._--"This is the only species that has as yet been subjected
to successful cultivation; though there can be little doubt that all or
most of the terrestrial-growing sorts would submit to the same process,
if their natural habitats were sufficiently studied, and their spawn
collected and propagated. In this way, the Common Mushroom was first
brought under the control of man.

"The seeds of the Common Mushroom, in falling from the gills when ripe,
are no doubt wafted by the wind, and become attached to the stems and
leaves of grasses and other herbage; and notwithstanding they are eaten
by such animals as the horse, deer, and sheep, pass through their
intestines without undergoing any material change in their vegetative
existence: and hence, in the dung of these animals, when placed
together, and kept moderately dry, and brought to a slight state of
fermentation, we discover the first stage of the existence of the future
brood of mushrooms. This is practically called 'spawn,' and consists of
a white, fibrous substance, running like broken threads through the mass
of dung, which appears to be its only and proper _nidus_."--_M'Int._ It
is prepared for use as follows:--

"In June and July, take any quantity of fresh horse-droppings,--the more
dry and high-fed the better,--mixed with short litter, one-third of
cow's dung, and a good portion of mould of a loamy nature; cement them
well together, and mash the whole into a thin compost, and spread it on
the floor of an open shed, to remain until it becomes firm enough to be
formed into flat, square bricks; which done, set them on an edge, and
frequently turn them till half dry; then, with a dibble, make two or
three holes in each brick, and insert in each hole a piece of good old
spawn about the size of a common walnut. The bricks should then be left
till they are dry. This being completed, level the surface of a piece of
ground, under cover, three feet wide, and of sufficient length to
receive the bricks; on which lay a bottom of dry horse-dung six inches
thick; then form a pile by placing the bricks in rows one upon another,
with the spawn-side uppermost, till the pile is three feet high; next
cover it with a small portion of warm horse-dung, sufficient in
quantity to diffuse a gentle glow of heat through the whole. When the
spawn has spread itself through every part of the bricks, the process is
ended, and the bricks may then be laid up in a dry place for use.
Mushroom-spawn thus made will preserve its vegetative power many years,
if well dried before it is laid up; but, if moist, it will grow, and
exhaust itself."--_Trans._

The next step to be taken is the formation of the bed; in the
preparation of which, no dung answers so well as that of the horse, when
taken fresh from the stable: the more droppings in it, the better. The
process recommended by Rogers is as follows:--

"About July or August is the general season for making mushroom-beds,
though this may be done all the year round. A quantity of the dung
mentioned should be collected and thrown together in a heap, to ferment
and acquire heat; and, as this heat generally proves too violent at
first, it should, previously to making the bed, be reduced to a proper
temperature by frequently turning it in the course of the fortnight or
three weeks; which time it will most likely require for all the parts to
get into an even state of fermentation. During the above time, should it
be showery weather, the bed will require some sort of temporary
protection, by covering it with litter or such like, as too much wet
would soon deaden its fermenting quality. The like caution should be
attended to in making the bed, and after finishing it. As soon as it is
observed that the fiery heat and rank steam of the dung have passed off,
a dry and sheltered spot of ground should be chosen on which to make the
bed. This should be marked out five feet broad; and the length, running
north and south, should be according to the quantity of mushrooms likely
to be required. If for a moderate family, a bed twelve or fourteen feet
long will be found, if it takes well, to produce a good supply of
mushrooms for some months, provided proper attention be paid to the
covering.

"On the space marked for making the bed, a trench should be thrown out
about six inches deep. The mould may be laid regularly at the side; and,
if good, it will do for earthing the bed hereafter: otherwise, if
brought from a distance, that of a more loamy than a sandy nature will
be best.

"Whether in the trench, or upon the surface, there should be laid about
four inches of good litter, not too short, for forming the bottom of the
bed; then lay on the prepared dung a few inches thick, regularly over
the surface, beating it as regularly down with the fork; continue thus,
gradually drawing in the sides to the height of five feet, until it is
narrow at the top like the ridge of a house. In that state it may remain
for ten days or a fortnight, during which time the heat should be
examined towards the middle of the bed by thrusting some small sharp
sticks down in three or four places; and, when found of a gentle heat
(not hot), the bed may be spawned: for which purpose, the spawn-bricks
should be broken regularly into pieces about an inch and a half or two
inches square, beginning within six inches of the bottom of the bed, and
in lines about eight inches apart. The same distance will also do for
the pieces of spawn, which are best put in by one hand, raising the
manure up a few inches, whilst with the other the spawn can be laid in
and covered at the same time.

"After spawning the bed, if it is found to be in that regular state of
heat before mentioned, it may be earthed. After the surface is levelled
with the back of the spade, there should be laid on two inches of
mould,--that out of the trench, if dry and good, will do; otherwise make
choice of a rich loam, as before directed. After having been laid on, it
is to be beaten closely together; and, when the whole is finished, the
bed must be covered about a foot thick with good oat or wheat straw;
over which should be laid mats, for the double purpose of keeping the
bed dry, and of securing the covering from being blown off. In the
course of two or three days, the bed should be examined; and, if it is
considered that the heat is likely to increase, the covering must be
diminished for a few days, which is better than taking it entirely off.

"In about a month or five weeks,--but frequently within the former time,
if the bed is in a high state of cultivation,--mushrooms will most
likely make their appearance; and, in the course of eight and forty
hours afterwards, they will have grown to a sufficient size for use. In
gathering, instead of cutting them off close to the ground, they should
be drawn out with a gentle twist, filling up the cavity with a little
fine mould, gently pressed in level with the bed. This method of
gathering is much better than cutting, as the part left generally rots,
and breeds insects, which are very destructive, both in frames and on
mushroom-beds.

"Where a mushroom-bed is to remain permanently, a covered shed will be
found convenient.

"Sometimes it happens that a bed suddenly ceases to produce any
mushrooms. This arises from various causes, but principally from the
cold state of the bed in winter, or from a too dry state in summer. In
the former case, a slight covering of mulchy hay laid over the bed, and
on that six or eight inches of well-worked, hot dung, and the whole
covered lightly with the straw that was taken off, will most likely
bring it about again. In the latter instance, moisture, if required,
should be given moderately, two or three mornings; when, after lying
about an hour, the whole may be covered up, and be found of much
service. In summer, most mushroom-beds in a bearing state require more
or less slight waterings. Soft water should be used for the purpose:
spring water is of too hard and too cold a nature; and, when at any time
applied, checks vegetation. In summer time, a gentle shower of rain, on
open beds that are in bearing and seem dry, will add considerably to
their productiveness.

"A mushroom-bed seldom furnishes any abundance after two or three
months: it has often done its best in six or seven weeks. Heavy rains
are most destructive to mushrooms: therefore care should be taken to
remove the wet straw, or litter, and directly replace it with dry. Hence
the utility of a covered shed, or mushroom-house."

In addition to the foregoing, the following native species may be eaten
with perfect safety, if gathered young and used while fresh:--


AGARICUS COMATUS.

"An excellent species, much employed for making catchup; but should be
used in a young state. It is found growing abundantly on stumps of
trees, appearing both in spring and autumn."


AGARICUS DELICIOSUS. _M'Int._

Sweet Mushroom.

Found in September and October, growing under fir and pine trees. It is
of medium size, yellowish, zoned, with deep orange on the top, somewhat
resembling _A. torminosus_ (a deleterious species), but readily
distinguished from it, as its juice is, when fresh cut, quite red,
afterwards turning green, while that of the latter is white and
unchangeable.

Sir James Edward Smith says it well deserves its name, and is really the
most delicious mushroom known; and Mr. Sowerby is equally high in its
praise, pronouncing it very luscious eating, full of rich gravy, with a
little of the flavor of mussels.


AGARICUS EXQUISITUS. _Badham._

St. George's Mushroom. _M'Int._ Agaricus Georgii.

This species often attains a weight of five or six pounds. It is
generally considered less delicate than the common cultivated mushroom
(_A. campestris_); but in Hungary it is regarded as a special gift from
the saint whose name it bears. Persoon describes it as superior to _A.
campestris_ in smell, taste, and digestibility; on which account, he
says, it is generally preferred in France.

It is found abundantly in many places, generally growing in rings, and
re-appearing for many successive years on the same spot; and, though
sometimes met with in old pastures, is generally found in thickets,
under trees.


AGARICUS PERSONATUS.

Blewits. Blue Hats. _Cooke._

This is one of the species occasionally sold in Covent-Garden Market,
London. When mature, it has a soft, convex, moist, smooth pileus, with a
solid, somewhat bulbous stem, tinted with lilac. The gills are
dirty-white, and rounded towards the stem.

The _Agaricus personatus_ constitutes one of the very few mushrooms
which have a market value in England. It is quite essential that it
should be collected in dry weather, as it absorbs moisture readily, and
is thereby injured in flavor, and rendered more liable to decay.


AGARICUS PRUNULUS. _Vitt._ _M'Int._

This is found only in spring, growing in rings on the borders of
wood-lands; at which time abundance of its spawn may be procured, and
may be continued in the same way that the spawn of the common cultivated
Mushroom is; namely, by transplanting it into bricks of loam and
horse-dung, in which it will keep for months.

This mushroom is used both in its green and dried state. In the latter
it constitutes what is called "Funghi di Genoa," and is preserved by
being simply cut into four pieces, and dried in the air for a few days;
when it is strung up, and kept for use.


AGARICUS OREADES.

Fairy-ring Agaricus.

There is little difficulty in distinguishing this mushroom, which is
found growing in rings. The pileus is of a brownish-ochre color at
first; becomes paler as it grows older, until it fades into a rich
cream-yellow.

Dr. Badham says, "Independent of the excellent flavor of this little
mushroom, two circumstances make it valuable in a domestic point of
view,--the facility with which it is dried, and its extensive
dissemination." It may be kept for years without losing any of its aroma
or goodness.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOLETUS. _Fries._

Of this, two species are considered eatable,--the _B. edulis_ and the
_B. scaber_; the former resembling the Common Mushroom in taste, and the
latter of good quality while in a young, fresh state, but of little
value when dried, as it loses much of its odor, and becomes insipid, and
unfit for use.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLAVARIA.

All the species are edible, and many of them indigenous to our woods;
being usually found in damp, shady places.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MOREL. _M'Int._

Morchella esculenta.

[Illustration: The Morel.]

In its natural state, the Morel is found growing in orchards, damp
woods, and in moist pastures. Its height is about four inches. It is
distinguished by its white, cylindrical, hollow, or solid, smooth stem;
its cap is of a pale-brown or gray color, nearly spherical, hollow,
adheres to the stem by its base, and is deeply pitted over its entire
surface. It is in perfection early in the season; but should not be
gathered soon after rain, or while wet with dew. If gathered when dry,
it may be preserved for several months.

_Use._--The Morels are used, like the Truffle, as an ingredient to
heighten the flavor of ragouts, gravies, and other rich dishes. They are
used either fresh or in a dried state.

_Cultivation._--Its cultivation, if ever attempted, has been carried on
to a very limited extent. Of its capability of submitting to culture,
there can be little doubt. If the spawn were collected from its natural
habitats in June, and planted in beds differently formed, but
approximating as nearly as possible to its natural conditions, a proper
mode of cultivation would assuredly be in time arrived at. Persoon
remarks that "it prefers a chalky or argillaceous soil to one of a sandy
nature; and that it not unfrequently springs up where charcoal has been
burned, or where cinders have been thrown."

"The great value of the Morel--which is one of the most expensive
luxuries furnished by the Italian warehouses, and which is by no means
met with in the same abundance as some others of the Fungi--deserves to
be better known than it is at present." The genus comprises a very few
species, and they are all edible.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMON TRUFFLE.

Tuber cibarium.

[Illustration: The Truffle.]

On the authority of our most distinguished mycologists, the Common
Truffle has not yet been discovered within the limits of the United
States. It is said to be found abundantly in some parts of Great
Britain, particularly in Wiltshire, Kent, and Hampshire. It is collected
in large quantities in some portions of France, and is indigenous to
other countries of Europe.

The following description by Mascall, in connection with the engraving,
will give an accurate idea of its size, form, color, and general
character: "The size rarely much exceeds that of a large walnut. Its
form is rounded, sometimes kidney-shaped, and rough with protuberances.
The surface, when the truffle is young, is whitish; but, in those that
are full grown, it is either blackish or a deep-black. The color of the
inside is whitish, with dark-blue and white, gray, reddish, light-brown
or dark-brown veins, of the thickness of a horse-hair, which are usually
variously entangled, and which form a kind of network, or mat. Between
the veins are numerous cavities, filled with mucilage, and small, solid
grains. These scarcely visible glands were formerly said to be the
seeds, or germs, of the young truffles. The less the inside of the
Truffle is colored with dark veins, the more tender and delicious is its
flesh.

"The blackish, external rind is hard, and very rough, by means of fine
fissures, grains, and protuberances; and forms, with its small facets
(which are almost hexagonal), an appearance by which it somewhat
resembles the fir-apples of the larch. Whilst the truffle is young, its
smell resembles that of putrid plants, or of moist, vegetable earth.
When it has nearly attained its full growth, it diffuses an agreeable
smell, which is peculiar to it, resembling that of musk, which lasts
only a few days: it then becomes stronger; and the nearer the fungus is
to its dissolution, which speedily ensues, so much the more unpleasant
is its odor, till at last it is quite disagreeable and putrid. Whilst
young, the flesh is watery, and the taste insipid: when fully formed,
its firm flesh, which is like the kernel of the almond, has an extremely
aromatic and delicious taste; but as soon as the fungus begins to decay,
and worms and putrescence to attack it, its taste is bitter and
disagreeable."

Many attempts have been made in Great Britain, as well as in other parts
of Europe, to propagate the Truffle by artificial means; but all
experiments thus far, if they have not totally failed, have been
attended by very unsatisfactory results.

_Use._--Like the Common Mushroom, it is used principally in stuffings,
gravies, and sauces, and in other very highly seasoned culinary
preparations. It has long been held in high esteem by epicures and the
opulent; but, from its extreme rarity, has always commanded a price
which has effectually prohibited its general use. It has been truthfully
remarked, "that few know how to raise it, and fewer still possess the
proper knowledge to prepare it for the table."


PIEDMONTESE TRUFFLE. _Thomp._

Tuber magnatum.

This species is the most celebrated of all the truffles, and always
commands an enormous price. It occurs abundantly in the mountains of
Piedmont, and probably nowhere else.


TUBER MELANOSPORUM. _Thomp._

This is the Truffle of the Paris markets. It is richly scented, and also
greatly superior in flavor to the common sorts.

Other genera and species of Fungi are considered harmless, and are
occasionally used for food. Some of the edible kinds, however, in size,
form, color, and organization, so closely approach certain poisonous or
deleterious species, as to confuse even the most experienced student.
None of the family (not excepting even the common cultivated Mushroom)
should therefore be gathered for use, except by those who may possess a
thorough knowledge of the various species and their properties.




CHAPTER XII.

MISCELLANEOUS VEGETABLES.

Alkekengi, or Ground Cherry. Corn. Egg-plant. Martynia. Oil Radish.
Okra, or Gumbo. Pepper. Rhubarb, or Pie-plant. Sunflower. Tobacco.
Tomato.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALKEKENGI.

Strawberry Tomato. Winter Cherry. Ground Cherry. Barbadoes Gooseberry.
Physalis edulis.

A hardy annual plant from Central or Tropical America. Stem angular,
very much branched, but not erect,--in good soils, attaining a length or
height of more than three feet; leaves large, triangular; flowers
solitary, yellow, spotted or marked with purple, and about half an inch
in diameter; fruit rounded or obtuse-heart-shaped, half an inch in
diameter, yellow, and semi-transparent at maturity, enclosed in a
peculiar thin, membranous, inflated, angular calyx, or covering, which
is of a pale-green color while the fruit is forming, but at maturity
changes to a dusky-white or reddish-drab. The pedicel, or fruit-stem, is
weak and slender; and most of the berries fall spontaneously to the
ground at the time of ripening.

The seeds are small, yellow, lens-shaped, and retain their germinative
properties three years.

The plants are exceedingly prolific, and will thrive in almost any
description of soil. Sow at the same time, and thin or transplant to the
same distance, as practised in the cultivation of the Tomato. On land
where it has been grown, it springs up spontaneously in great abundance,
and often becomes troublesome in the garden.

_Use._--The fruit has a juicy pulp, and, when first tasted, a pleasant,
strawberry-like flavor, with a certain degree of sweetness and acidity
intermixed. The after-taste is, however, much less agreeable, and is
similar to that of the Common Tomato.

By many the fruit is much esteemed, and is served in its natural state
at the table as a dessert. With the addition of lemon-juice, it is
sometimes preserved in the manner of the plum, as well as stewed and
served like cranberries.

If kept from the action of frost, the fruit retains its natural
freshness till March or April.


PURPLE ALKEKENGI.

Purple Ground Cherry. Purple Strawberry Tomato. Purple Winter Cherry.
Physalis sp.

This species grows naturally and abundantly in some of the Western
States. The fruit is roundish, somewhat depressed, about an inch in
diameter, of a deep purple color, and enclosed in the membranous
covering peculiar to the genus.

Compared with the preceding species, the fruit is more acid, less
perfumed, and not so palatable in its crude state, but by many
considered superior for preserving. The plant is less pubescent, but has
much the same habit, and is cultivated in the same manner.


TALL ALKEKENGI.

Tall Ground Cherry. Tall Strawberry Tomato. Physalis pubescens.

Stem about four feet high, erect and branching; leaves oval, somewhat
triangular, soft and velvety; flowers yellow, spotted with deep purple;
fruit yellow, of the size of the Common Yellow Alkekengi, enclosed in an
angular, inflated calyx, and scarcely distinguishable from the last
named.

It is grown from seeds, which are sown like those of the Tomato. It is
later, and much less prolific, than the species first described.

       *       *       *       *       *

CORN.

Zea mays.

_Garden and Table Varieties._--


ADAMS'S EARLY WHITE.

A distinct and well-marked table variety. Ears seven to eight inches in
length, two inches in diameter, twelve or fourteen rowed, and rather
abruptly contracted at the tips; kernel white, rounded, somewhat deeper
than broad, and indented at the exterior end, which is whiter and less
transparent than the interior or opposite extremity. The depth and
solidity of the kernel give great comparative weight to the ear; and, as
the cob is of small size, the proportion of product is unusually large.

In its general appearance, the ear is not unlike some descriptions of
Southern or Western field-corn; from which, aside from its smaller
dimensions, it would hardly be distinguishable. In quality, it cannot be
considered equal to some of the shrivelled-kernelled, sweet
descriptions, but will prove acceptable to those to whom the peculiar,
sugary character of these may be objectionable. Though later than the
Jefferson or Darlings, it is comparatively early, and may be classed as
a good garden variety.

Much grown for early use and the market in the Middle States, but less
generally known or cultivated in New England.


BLACK SWEET.

Slate Sweet.

Plant, in height and general habit, similar to Darling's Early; ears six
to eight inches in length, uniformly eight-rowed; kernels roundish,
flattened, deep slate-color, much shrivelled at maturity. Early.

The variety is sweet, tender, and well flavored; remains a long period
in condition for use; and, aside from its peculiar color (which by some
is considered objectionable), is well worthy of cultivation.


BURR'S IMPROVED.

Burr's Sweet.

An improved variety of the Twelve-rowed Sweet. The ears are from twelve
to sixteen rowed, rarely eighteen, and, in good soils and seasons, often
measure eight or ten inches in length, nearly three inches in diameter,
and weigh, when in condition for the table, from eighteen to twenty-two
ounces; cob white; kernel rounded, flattened, pure white at first, or
while suitable for use,--becoming wrinkled, and changing to dull,
yellowish, semi-transparent white, when ripe.

The variety is hardy and productive; and, though not early, usually
perfects its crop. For use in its green state, plantings may be made to
the 20th of June.

The kernel is tender, remarkably sugary, hardens slowly, is
thin-skinned, and generally considered much superior to the Common
Twelve-rowed.

It is always dried or ripened for seed with much difficulty; often
moulding or decaying before the glazing or hardening of the kernel takes
place. If the crop is sufficiently advanced as not to be injured by
freezing, it will ripen and dry off best upon the stalks in the open
ground; but if in the milk, or still soft and tender at the approach of
freezing weather, it should be gathered and suspended, after being
husked, in a dry and airy room or building, taking care to keep the ears
entirely separate from each other.


DARLING'S EARLY.

Darling's Early Sweet.

Stalk about five feet in height, and comparatively slender; the ears are
from six to eight inches in length, an inch and a half in diameter, and,
when the variety is unmixed, uniformly eight-rowed; the kernels are
roundish, flattened, pure white when suitable for boiling,--much
shrivelled or wrinkled, and of a dull, semi-transparent yellow, when
ripe; the cob is white.

The variety is early, very tender and sugary, yields well, produces
little fodder, ears near the ground, and is one of the best sorts for
planting for early use, as it seldom, if ever, fails to perfect its
crop. In the Middle States, and in the milder sections of New England,
it may be planted for boiling until near the beginning of July.

The hills are made three feet apart in one direction by two feet and a
half in the opposite; or the seeds may be planted in drills three feet
apart, dropping them in groups of three together every eighteen inches.


EARLY JEFFERSON.

Stalk five to six feet high, producing one or two ears, which are of
small size, eight-rowed, and measure six or eight inches in length, and
about an inch and a half in diameter at the largest part; cob white;
kernel white, roundish, flattened,--the surface of a portion of the ear,
especially near its tip, often tinged with a delicate shade of rose-red.
The kernel retains its color, and never shrivels or wrinkles, in
ripening.

The variety is hardy and productive, but is principally cultivated on
account of its early maturity; though, in this respect, it is little, if
at all, in advance of Darling's. The quality is tender and good, but
much less sugary than the common shrivelled varieties; on which
account, however, it is preferred by some palates. It remains but a
short time tender and in good condition for boiling; soon becoming hard,
glazed, and unfit for use.


GOLDEN SWEET.

Golden Sugar.

Stalk and general habit similar to Darling's Early; ears six to eight
inches long, an inch and a half or an inch and three-fourths in
diameter, regularly eight-rowed; the kernel, when ripe, is
semi-transparent yellow.

The variety is apparently a hybrid between the Common Yellow or Canada
Corn and Darling's Early. In flavor, as well as appearance, both of
these varieties are recognized. It does not run excessively to stalk and
foliage, yields well, is hardy, and seldom fails to ripen perfectly in
all sections of New England. For boiling in its green state, plantings
may be made until the last week of June or first of July.

In respect to quality, it is quite tender, sweet, and well flavored, but
less sugary than most of the other sugar or sweet varieties.


OLD COLONY. _Hov. Mag._

This variety was originated by the late Rev. A. R. Pope, of Somerville,
Mass. At the time of its production, he was a resident of Kingston,
Plymouth County, Mass.; and, in consequence of the locality of its
origin, it received the name above given. In a communication at the
close of the sixteenth volume of the "Magazine of Horticulture," Mr.
Pope describes it as follows:--

"It is a hybrid, as any one can readily perceive by inspection, between
the Southern White and the Common Sweet Corn of New England; and
exhibits certain characteristics of the two varieties, combining the
size of the ear and kernel and productiveness of the Southern with the
sweetness and tenderness of the Northern parent.

"The stalks are from ten to twelve feet in height, and of corresponding
circumference. They are also furnished with brace-roots (seldom found
upon the common varieties of Sweet Corn); and the pistils are invariably
green, and not pink, as in the Southern White." The ears are from five
to seven inches in length, and the number of rows varies from twelve to
twenty; the kernels are very long or deep; and the cob, which is always
white, is quite small compared with the size of the ear. When ripe, the
kernels are of a dull, semi-transparent, yellowish white, and much
shrivelled. The ears are produced on the stalk, four or five feet from
the ground. It is very productive, but late; and though it will rarely
fail in the coldest seasons to yield abundant supplies in the green
state for the table, yet it requires a long and warm season for its
complete maturity.

For cultivation in the Southern States and tropical climates, it has
been found to be peculiarly adapted; as it not only possesses there the
sweetness and excellence that distinguish the Sweet Corn of the
temperate and cooler sections, but does not deteriorate by long
cultivation, as other sweet varieties almost invariably are found to do.


PARCHING CORN (WHITE KERNEL).

Pop-corn.

Stalk six feet high, usually producing two ears, which are from six to
eight inches long, quite slender, and uniformly eight-rowed; cob white;
kernel roundish, flattened, glossy, flinty, or rice-like, and of a dull,
semi-transparent, white color. When parched, it is of pure snowy
whiteness, very brittle, tender, and well flavored, and generally
considered the best of all the sorts used for this purpose.

In some parts of Massachusetts, as also in New Hampshire, the variety is
somewhat extensively cultivated for commercial purposes. Its peculiar
properties seem to be most perfectly developed in dry, gravelly, or
silicious soils, and under the influence of short and warm seasons. In
field culture, it is either planted in hills three feet apart, or in
drills three feet apart, and eighteen inches apart in the drills. The
product per acre is usually about the same number of bushels of ears
that the same land would yield of shelled-corn of the ordinary field
varieties.

Increase of size is a sure indication of deterioration. The cultivator
should aim to keep the variety as pure as possible by selecting slender
and small-sized but well-filled ears for seed, and in no case to plant
such as may have yellow or any foreign sort intermixed. The value of a
crop will be diminished nearly in a relative proportion to the increase
of the size of the ears.


PARCHING CORN (YELLOW).

A yellow variety of the preceding. It retains its color to some extent
after being parched; and this is considered an objection. It is tender,
but not so mild flavored as the white, and is little cultivated. The
size and form of the ears are the same, and it is equally productive.


RED-COB SWEET.

Ears about eight inches in length by a diameter of two inches,--usually
twelve but sometimes fourteen rowed; kernels roundish, flattened, white
when suitable for boiling, shrivelled, and of a dull, semi-transparent
white when ripe; the cob is red, which may be called its distinguishing
characteristic. Quality good; the kernel being tender and sweet. It
remains long in good condition for the table, and is recommended for
general cultivation. Season intermediate.

A sub-variety occurs with eight rows; the form and size of the ear and
kernel resembling Darling's Early.


RICE (RED KERNEL).

This is a variety of the White Rice, with deep purplish-red or blood-red
kernels. The ears are of the same size and form. Its quality, though
inferior to the white, is much superior to the yellow. Productiveness,
and season of maturity, the same.


RICE (WHITE KERNEL).

Stalk six feet or more in height; ears five or six inches long, an inch
and a half in diameter, somewhat conical, broadest at the base, and
tapering to the top, which is often more or less sharply pointed; the
cob is white; the kernels are long and slender, angular, sharply pointed
at the outward extremity, as well as to some extent at the opposite, and
extremely hard and flinty. They are not formed at right angles on the
cob, as in most varieties of corn, but point upward, and rest in an
imbricated manner, one over the other.

The variety is hardy and prolific; and, though not late, should have the
benefit of the whole season. For parching, it is inferior to the Common
Parching Corn before described, though it yields as much bulk in
proportion to the size of the kernel, and is equally as white: but the
sharp points often remain sound; and it is, consequently, less crisp and
tender.


RICE (YELLOW KERNEL).

Another sub-variety of the White Rice; the ear and kernel being of the
same form and size. It is equally productive, and matures as early; but,
when parched, is inferior to the White both in crispness and flavor.


STOWELL'S EVERGREEN.

Stowell's Evergreen Sweet.

Stalk from six to seven feet in height, and of average diameter; ears of
a conical form, six or seven inches long, and two inches and a quarter
in diameter at the base; kernels long or deep, pure white when suitable
for boiling, of a dull, yellowish-white, and much shrivelled when ripe;
cob white, and, in consequence of the depth of the kernels, small in
comparison to the diameter of the ear.

The variety is intermediate in its season; and, if planted at the same
time with Darling's or equally early kinds, will keep the table supplied
till October. It is hardy and productive, very tender and sugary, and,
as implied by the name, remains a long period in a fresh condition, and
suitable for boiling.


TUSCARORA.

Turkey Wheat.

Plant five to six feet in height, moderately strong and vigorous; ears
eight-rowed, and of remarkable size,--exceeding, in this respect, almost
every sort used for the table in the green state. In good soil, they are
often a foot and upwards in length, and from two inches and
three-fourths to three inches in diameter at the base. The kernel, which
is much larger than that of any other table variety, is pure white,
rounded, flattened, and, when divided in the direction of its width,
apparently filled with fine flour of snowy whiteness; the cob is red,
and of medium size.

In point of maturity, the Tuscarora is an intermediate variety. In its
green state, it is of fair quality, and considered a valuable sort by
those to whom the sweetness of the sugar varieties is objectionable. In
their ripened state, the kernels, to a great extent, retain their fresh
and full appearance, not shrivelling in the manner of the sugar sort,
though almost invariably indented at the ends like some of the Southern
Horse-toothed field varieties.

When ground in the ripe state, it is much less farinaceous and valuable
for cooking or feeding stock than the fine, white, floury appearance of
the kernel, when cut or broken, would seem to indicate.


TWELVE-ROWED SWEET.

A large, comparatively late variety. Stalk seven feet high; the ears are
from ten to fourteen rowed, seven to nine inches long, often two inches
and a half in diameter in the green state, and taper slightly towards
the top, which is bluntly rounded; cob white; the kernels are large,
round or circular, sometimes tooth-shaped, pure white when suitable for
the table, dull white and shrivelled when ripe.

The variety is hardy, yields a certain crop, and is sweet, tender, and
of good quality. It is the parent of one or two varieties of superior
size and excellence, to which it is now gradually giving place.

_Field Varieties._--


CANADA YELLOW.

Early Canada.

Ear small, about seven inches in length, symmetrical, broadest at the
base, and tapering to the tip, uniformly eight-rowed, in four double
rows; kernel roundish, smooth, and of a rich, glossy, orange-yellow
color; cob small, white; stalk four to five feet high, slender; the
leaves are not abundant, and the ears, of which the plant very rarely
produces more than two, near the ground.

On account of the small size of the ear, the yield per acre is much less
than that of almost any other field variety; twenty-five or thirty
bushels being an average crop. The dwarfish character of the plants,
however, admits of close culture,--three feet in one direction by two or
two and a half in the opposite,--affording ample space for their full
development; four plants being allowed to a hill.

Its chief merit is its early maturity. In ordinary seasons, the crop
will be fully ripened in August. If cultivated for a series of years in
the Eastern or Middle States, or in a latitude much warmer than that of
the Canadas, the plant increases in size, the ears and kernels grow
larger, and it is slower in coming to maturity.


DUTTON.

Early Dutton.

Ears nine or ten inches long, broadest at the base, tapering slightly
towards the tip, ten or twelve rowed, and rarely found with the broad
clefts or longitudinal spaces which often mark the divisions into double
rows in the eight-rowed varieties,--the outline being almost invariably
smooth and regular; kernel as broad as deep, smooth, and of a rich,
clear, glossy, yellow color; cob comparatively large, white; stalk of
medium height and strength, producing one or two ears.

One of the handsomest of the field varieties, nearly as early as the
King Philip, and remarkable for the uniformly perfect manner in which,
in good seasons, the ears are tipped, or filled out. In point of
productiveness, it compares favorably with the common New-England
Eight-rowed; the yield per acre varying from fifty to seventy bushels,
according to soil, culture, and season.

Much prized for mealing, both on account of its quality, and its
peculiar, bright, rich color. In cultivation, the hills are made three
feet and a half apart in each direction, and five or six plants allowed
to a hill.


HILL.

Whitman. Whitman's Improved. Webster. Smutty White. Old-Colony Premium.

Stalk six feet or more in height, moderately strong at the ground, but
comparatively slender above the ear; foliage not abundant; the ears are
produced low on the stalk, often in pairs, are uniformly eight-rowed,
well filled at the tips, and, when fully grown, ten or eleven inches in
length; cob white, and comparatively small; kernel dusky,
transparent-white, large and broad, but not deep.

The Hill Corn is nearly of the season of the Common New-England
Eight-rowed, and is unquestionably the most productive of all field
varieties. In Plymouth County, Mass., numerous crops have been raised of
a hundred and fifteen bushels and upwards to the acre; and, in two
instances, the product exceeded a hundred and forty.

This extraordinary yield is in a degree attributable to the small size
of the plant, and the relative large size of the ear. The largest crops
were obtained by planting three kernels together, in rows three feet
asunder, and from fifteen to eighteen inches apart in the rows.

No variety is better adapted for cultivation for farm consumption; but
for market, whether in the kernel or in the form of meal, its dull,
white color is unattractive, and it commands a less price than the
yellow descriptions.

From the most reliable authority, the variety was originated by Mr.
Leonard Hill, of East Bridgewater, Plymouth County, Mass.; and was
introduced to public notice in 1825-6. Though at present almost
universally known as the "Whitman," it appears to have been originally
recognized as the "Hill;" and, of the numerous names by which it has
since been called, this is unquestionably the only true and legitimate
one.


ILLINOIS YELLOW.

Western Yellow.

Stalk ten feet or more high; foliage abundant; ears high on the stalk,
single or in pairs, twelve to sixteen rowed, eleven to thirteen inches
long, broadest at the base, and tapering gradually towards the tip,
which is bluntly rounded; kernel bright-yellow, long and narrow, or
tooth-formed, paler at the outer end, but not indented; cob white.

The variety ripens perfectly in the Middle States, but is not suited to
the climate of New England.


ILLINOIS WHITE.

Western White.

Similar in its general character to the Illinois Yellow. Kernel
rice-white; cob generally white, but sometimes red.


KING PHILIP, OR BROWN.

Improved King Philip.

Ears ten to twelve inches in length, uniformly eight-rowed when the
variety is pure or unmixed; kernel copper-red, rather large, somewhat
broader than deep, smooth and glossy; cob comparatively small,
pinkish-white; stalk six feet in height, producing one or two ears,
about two feet and a half from the ground.

In warm seasons, it is sometimes fully ripened in ninety days from the
time of planting; and may be considered as a week or ten days earlier
than the Common New-England Eight-rowed, of which it is apparently an
improved variety.

Very productive, and recommended as one of the best field sorts now in
cultivation. In good soil and favorable seasons, the yield per acre is
from seventy-five to ninety bushels; although crops are recorded of a
hundred and ten, and even of a hundred and twenty bushels.

As grown in different localities, and even in the product of the same
field, there is often a marked variation in the depth of color, arising
either from the selection of paler seed, or from the natural tendency of
the variety toward the clear yellow of the New-England Eight-rowed. A
change of color from yellowish-red to paler red or yellow should be
regarded as indicative of degeneracy.

Said to have originated on one of the islands in Lake Winnipiseogee,
N.H.


NEW-ENGLAND EIGHT-ROWED.

Stalk six or seven feet high, producing one or two ears, which are from
ten to eleven inches long, and uniformly eight-rowed; kernel broader
than deep, bright-yellow, smooth and glossy; cob comparatively small,
white.

The variety is generally grown in hills three feet and a half apart in
each direction, and five or six plants allowed to a hill; the yield
varying from fifty to seventy bushels to the acre, according to season,
soil, and cultivation. It is a few days later than the King Philip, but
ripens perfectly in the Middle States and throughout New England;
except, perhaps, at the extreme northern boundary, where the Canada
Yellow would probably succeed better.

It often occurs with a profuse intermixture of red, sometimes streaked
and spotted, sometimes copper-red, like the King Philip, and
occasionally of a rich, bright, clear blood-red. As the presence of this
color impairs its value for marketing, and particularly for mealing,
more care should be exercised in the selection of ears for seed; and
this, continued for a few seasons, will restore it to the clear yellow
of the Dutton or Early Canada.

Many local sub-varieties occur, the result of selection and cultivation,
differing in the size and form of the ear; size, form, and color of the
kernel; and also in the season of maturity. The Dutton, Early Canada,
King Philip, and numerous other less important sorts, are but improved
forms of the New-England Eight-rowed.


PARKER.

A variety remarkable for the extraordinary size of the ears, which, if
well grown, often measure thirteen or fourteen inches in length: they
are comparatively slender, and uniformly eight-rowed. Cob white and
slim; kernels bright-yellow, rounded, broader than deep.

Productive, but some days later than the Common New-England Eight-rowed.


WHITE HORSE-TOOTH.

Southern White.

Stalk twelve feet or more in height, with large, luxuriant foliage; ears
single, often in pairs, short and very thick, sixteen to twenty-two
rowed; kernel remarkably large, milk-white, wedge-formed, indented at
the outer end; cob red.


YELLOW HORSE-TOOTH.

Southern Yellow.

Plant similar to that of the White Horse-tooth; kernel very large,
bright-yellow, indented; cob red.

Extensively cultivated throughout the Southern States, but not adapted
to the climate of the Middle or Northern.

       *       *       *       *       *

EGG-PLANT.

Solanum melongena.

The Egg-plant is a native of Africa, and is also indigenous to Tropical
America. It is a tender annual, with an erect, branching stem, and
oblong, bluish-green, powdered leaves. The flowers are one-petaled,
purple, and produced on short stems in the axils of the branches; the
fruit is often somewhat oblong, but exceedingly variable in form, size,
and color; the seeds are small, yellowish, reniform, flattened, and
retain their germinative properties seven years.

_Soil._--The Egg-plant will thrive well in any good garden soil, but
should have the benefit of a sheltered situation.

_Sowing and Culture._--The seed should be sown in a hot-bed in March, at
the time and in the manner of sowing tomato seed. The young plants are,
however, more tender; and should not be allowed to get chilled, as they
recover from its effects very slowly. The plant being decidedly tropical
in character, the seedlings should not be transplanted into the open
ground until the commencement of summer weather; when they may be set
out in rows two feet apart, and two feet asunder in the rows. Keep the
ground free from weeds, earth up the plants a little in the process of
cultivation, and by the last of August, or beginning of September,
abundance of fruit will be produced for the table.

If no hot-bed is at hand, sufficient seedling plants for a small garden
may be easily raised by sowing a few seeds in March in common
flower-pots, and placing them in the sunny window of the sitting-room or
kitchen.

In favorable seasons, a crop may be obtained by sowing the seeds in May
in the open ground, and transplanting the seedlings, when two or three
inches high, in a warm and sheltered situation.

_Use._--"It is used both boiled and stewed in sauces like the Tomato. A
favorite method among the French is to scoop out the seeds, fill up the
cavity with sweet herbs, and fry the fruit whole."--_M'Int._

A common method of cooking and serving is as follows: Cut the fruit in
slices half an inch thick; press out as much of the juice as possible,
and parboil; after which, fry the slices in batter, or in fresh butter
in which grated bread has been mixed; season with pepper, salt, and
sweet herbs, to suit; or, if preferred, the slices may be broiled as
steaks or chops.

_Varieties._--


AMERICAN LARGE PURPLE.

[Illustration: American Large Purple Egg-plant.]

Fruit remarkably large,--often measuring eight inches in depth, seven
inches in diameter, and weighing four or five pounds; skin deep-purple,
with occasional stripes of green about the stem; plant hardy and stocky.

The American Large Purple is more generally cultivated in this country
than any other variety. The plants produce two (and rarely three)
fruits; but the first formed are invariably the best developed.

It is similar to, if not identical with, the Round Purple of English and
French authors.


CHINESE LONG WHITE. _Vil._

Quite distinct from the Common White or the Purple. Plant of low growth,
with comparatively pale foliage; fruit white, eight or nine inches long,
two inches and a half in diameter, and often more or less curved,
particularly when the end is in contact with the ground.

It is later than the White or Purple varieties, and nearly of the season
of the Scarlet-fruited. To obtain the fruit in full perfection, the
plants must be started in a hot-bed.


GUADALOUPE STRIPED. _Vil._

Fruit nearly ovoid, smaller than the Round or Long Purple; skin white,
streaked and variegated with red.


LONG PURPLE. _Trans._

The plants of this variety are of the height of the Round Purple, but
are subject to some variation in the color of the branches and in the
production of spines; flowers large, purple, with a spiny calyx; the
fruit is oblong, somewhat club-shaped, six or eight inches in length,
sometimes straight, but often slightly bent; at maturity, the skin is
generally deep-purple, but the color varies much more than the Large
Round; it is sometimes pale-purple, slightly striped, sometimes
variegated with longitudinal, yellowish stripes, and always more deeply
colored on the exposed side.

It is early, of easy culture, hardy and productive, excellent for the
table, thrives well in almost any section of the Northern States, and,
if started in a hot-bed, would perfect its fruit in the Canadas.


NEW-YORK IMPROVED.

A sub-variety of the Large Round, producing the same number of fruits,
which are generally of a deeper color, and average of larger size. The
leaves are often spiny; and, if the variety is genuine, the plants will
be readily distinguished from those of the last named by their more
dense or compact habit of growth.

It is, however, comparatively late, and better suited to the climate of
the Middle States than to that of New England; though it is successfully
cultivated in the vicinity of Boston, Mass., by starting the plants in a
hot-bed, and setting them in a warm and sheltered situation.


ROUND PURPLE. _Trans._

Large Round Purple.

Plant from two to three feet high, branching, generally tinged with
purple, producing two and sometimes three fruits; the leaves are large,
downy, oblong, lobed on the borders, with scattered spines on the
midribs; flowers large, pale-purple,--the flower-stem and calyx invested
with purple spines; the fruit is obovate, four or five inches in
diameter, six or seven inches deep, slightly indented at the apex, and
of a fine deep-purple when well matured,--specimens sometimes occur
slightly striped or rayed with yellowish-green.

The American Large Purple, if not the same, is but an improved form of
this variety.


SCARLET-FRUITED EGG-PLANT. _Hov. Mag._

A highly ornamental variety, introduced from Portugal. The plant attains
the height of three feet, with leaves about six inches long. In general
appearance, it resembles the Common Egg-plant; but the fruit, which is
about the size of a hen's egg, is of a beautiful scarlet.

It is rarely if ever used for food, but is principally cultivated for
its peculiar, richly colored, and ornamental fruit, which makes a fine
garnish.

The variety is late, and comparatively tender. The seeds should be
started early in a hot-bed, and the plants grown in a warm and sheltered
situation.


WHITE EGG-PLANT.

Fruit milk-white, egg-shaped, varying from three to five inches in
length, and from two inches and a half to three inches and a half in
diameter.

It is the earliest, hardiest, and most productive of all varieties. The
plants frequently produce five or six fruits each; but the first formed
are generally the largest.

If sown in the open ground early in May, the plants will often perfect a
portion of their fruit; but they are most productive when started in a
hot-bed.

The fruit is sometimes eaten cooked in the manner of the Purple
varieties, but is less esteemed.

       *       *       *       *       *

MARTYNIA.

Unicorn Plant. _Gray._ Martynia proboscidea.

[Illustration: The Martynia.]

A hardy, annual plant, with a strong, branching stem two feet and a half
or three feet high. The leaves are large, heart-shaped, entire or
undulated, downy, viscous, and of a peculiar, musk-like odor when
bruised or roughly handled; the flowers are large, bell-shaped, somewhat
two-lipped, dull-white, tinged or spotted with yellow and purple, and
produced in long, leafless racemes, or clusters; the seed-pods are
green, very downy or hairy, fleshy, oval, an inch and a half in their
greatest diameter, and taper to a long, comparatively slender, incurved
horn, or beak. The fleshy, succulent character of the pods is of short
duration: they soon become fibrous, the elongated beak splits at the
point, the two parts diverge, the outer green covering falls off, and
the pod becomes black, shrivelled, hard, and woody. The seeds are
large, black, wrinkled, irregular in form, and retain their germinative
properties three years.

_Sowing and Cultivation._--The Martynia is of easy cultivation. As the
plants are large and spreading, they should be two feet and a half or
three feet apart in each direction. The seeds may be sown in April or
May, in the open ground where the plants are to remain; or a few seeds
may be sown in a hot-bed, and the seedlings afterwards transplanted.

_Gathering and Use._--The young pods are the parts of the plant used.
These are produced in great abundance, and should be gathered when about
half grown, or while tender and succulent: after the hardening of the
flesh, they are worthless. They are used for pickling, and by many are
considered superior to the Cucumber, or any other vegetable employed for
the purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *

OIL RADISH. _Law._

Raphanus sativus.

A variety of the Common Radish, particularly adapted for the production
of oil, and distinguished by the name _R. sativus olifer_, or Oil
Radish. Its stems are dwarf, from a foot and a half to two feet in
height, much branched, spreading, and produce more seed-pods than the
Common Radish. It is grown rather extensively in China for its oil; from
whence it has been introduced into and cultivated in some parts of
Europe: but it does not appear with any particular success, though much
has been said and written in its favor.

It seems best suited for southern latitudes, where it may be sown in
September, and harvested the following May or June: but, in the northern
portions of the United States, it will be found too tender to withstand
the winter; and the seed will therefore require to be sown in spring.

The oil is obtained from the seed, and is considered superior to
rape-seed oil, but is extracted with greater difficulty.

       *       *       *       *       *

OKRA, OR GUMBO.

Ocra. Hibiscus esculentus.

Okra is a half-hardy annual, from Central America. Stem simple,
sometimes branched at the top, and from two to six feet in height,
according to the variety; the leaves are large, palmate, deep-green; the
flowers are large, five-petaled, yellowish on the border, purple at
the centre; the seed-pods are angular, or grooved, more or less
sharply pointed, an inch or an inch and a half in diameter at the
base, and from four to eight inches in length; the seeds are large,
round-kidney-shaped, of a greenish-drab color, black or dark-brown at
the eye, and retain their power of germination five years.

_Soil, Sowing, and Cultivation._--Okra may be raised in any common
garden soil, and is propagated by seeds sown in April or May. The Dwarf
varieties may be grown in rows two feet apart, and a foot from each
other in the rows; but the taller sorts require a space of at least
three feet between the rows, and nearly two feet from plant to plant in
the rows. Keep the soil about the plants loose and open; and, in the
process of cultivation, earth up the stems slightly in the manner of
earthing pease. The pods will be fit for use in August and September.

It requires a long, warm season; and is most productive when started in
a hot-bed, and grown in a warm, sheltered situation.

_Use._--The green pods are used while quite young, sliced in soups and
similar dishes, to which they impart a thick, viscous, or gummy
consistency. Thus served, they are esteemed not only healthful, but very
nutritious.

The ripe seeds, roasted and ground, furnish a palatable substitute for
coffee.

_Varieties._--


BUIST'S DWARF OKRA. _Count. Gent._

A variety recently introduced by Mr. Robert Buist, of Philadelphia.
Height two feet; being about half that of the old variety. Its
superiority consists in its greater productiveness, and the little space
required for its development; while the fruit is of larger size and
superior quality. It is said to produce pods at every joint.


DWARF OKRA.

[Illustration: Dwarf Okra.]

Stem two feet and a half high, sometimes branched at the top, but
generally undivided; leaves large, and, as in all varieties, five-lobed;
flowers yellow, purple at the centre; pods erect, obtusely pointed,
nearly as large in diameter as those of the Giant, but generally about
five inches in length.

It is the earliest of the Okras, and the best variety for cultivation in
the Northern and Eastern States.

Between this and the Tall, or Giant, there are numerous sub-varieties;
the result both of cultivation and climate. The Tall sorts become
dwarfish and earlier if long cultivated at the North; and the Dwarfs, on
the contrary, increase in height, and grow later, if long grown in
tropical climates.

The seeds of all the sorts are similar in size, form, and color.


PENDENT-PODDED.

The plants of this variety differ slightly, if at all, from those of the
Common or Dwarf Okra. It is principally, if not solely, distinguished by
the pendulous or drooping character of its pods; those of all other
sorts being erect.


TALL OR GIANT OKRA.

White-podded.

Stem five to six feet in height; pods erect, sharply tapering to a
point, eight to ten inches in length, and about an inch and a half in
diameter near the stem or at the broadest part.

With the exception of its larger size, it is similar to the Dwarf; and,
if long cultivated under the influence of short and cool seasons, would
probably prove identical.

It yields abundantly, but is best adapted to the climate of the Middle
and Southern States.

       *       *       *       *       *

PEPPER.

Capsicum. Capsicum annuum.

Of the Capsicum there are many species, both annual and perennial; some
of the latter being of a shrubby or woody character, and from four to
six feet in height. As they are mostly tropical, and consequently
tender, none but the annual species can be successfully grown in open
culture in the Middle States or New England.

The _Capsicum annuum_, or Common Garden-pepper, is a native of India.
The stalks vary in height from a foot to nearly three feet; the flowers
are generally white or purple; the pods differ in a remarkable degree in
size, form, color, and acridness; the seeds are yellow, nearly circular,
flattened, and, like the flesh or rind of the fruit, remarkable for
their intense piquancy,--nearly forty-five hundred are contained in an
ounce, and their vitality is retained five years.

_Propagation and Cultivation._--The plants are always propagated from
seeds. Early in April, sow in a hot-bed, in shallow drills six inches
apart, and transplant to the open ground when summer weather has
commenced. The plants should be set in warm, mellow soil, in rows
sixteen inches apart, and about the same distance apart in the rows; or,
in ordinary seasons, the following simple method may be adopted for a
small garden, and will afford an abundant supply of peppers for family
use: When all danger from frost is past, and the soil is warm and
settled, sow the seeds in the open ground, in drills three-fourths of an
inch deep, and fourteen inches apart; and, while young, thin out the
plants to ten inches apart in the rows. Cultivate in the usual manner,
and the crop will be fit for use early in September.

_Use._--"The pod, or fruit, is much used in pickles, seasonings, and
made dishes; as both the pod and seeds yield a warm, acrid oil, the heat
of which, being imparted to the stomach, promotes digestion, and
corrects the flatulency of vegetable aliments. The larger and more
common sorts are raised in great quantities, by market gardeners in the
vicinity of populous towns, for the supply of pickle-warehouses."

_Species and Varieties._--


BELL-PEPPER.

Large Bell. Bull-nose.

[Illustration: Bell-pepper.]

Plant two feet and upwards in height, stocky and branching, the stem and
branches often stained or clouded with purple; leaves large, on long
stems, smaller, smoother, and less sharply pointed, than those of the
Squash-pepper; flowers white, sometimes measuring nearly an inch and a
half in diameter.

The pods, which are remarkably large, and often measure nearly four
inches deep and three inches in diameter, are pendent, broadest at the
stem, slightly tapering, and generally terminate in four obtuse,
cone-like points. At maturity, the fruit changes to brilliant, glossy,
coral red.

The Bell-pepper is early, sweet and pleasant to the taste, and much less
acrid or pungent than most of the other sorts. In many places, it is
preferred to the Squash-pepper for pickling, not only because of its
mildness, but for its thick, fleshy, and tender rind.

In open culture, sow in May, in drills sixteen inches apart, and thin
the plants to twelve inches in the drills.

In England, they are pickled as follows: The pods are plucked while
green, slit down on one side, and, after the seeds are taken out,
immersed in salt and water for twenty-four hours; changing the water at
the end of the first twelve. After soaking the full time, they are laid
to drain an hour or two; put into bottles or jars; and boiled vinegar,
after being allowed to cool, poured over them till they are entirely
covered. The jars are then closely stopped for a few weeks, when the
pods will be fit for use. In this form, they have been pronounced the
best and most wholesome of all pickles.


BIRD-PEPPER. _Vil._

Stem fifteen to eighteen inches high; leaves very small; flowers white,
about two-thirds of an inch in diameter; pods erect, sharply conical, an
inch and three-quarters long, about half an inch in diameter, and of a
brilliant coral-red when ripe.

The variety is late. If sown in the open ground, some of the pods, if
the season be favorable, will be fit for use before the plants are
destroyed by frost; but few will be fully perfected unless the plants
are started under glass.

The Bird-pepper is one of the most piquant of all varieties, and is less
valuable as a green pickle than many milder and thicker-fleshed sorts.
It is cultivated in rows fourteen inches apart, and ten or twelve inches
asunder in the rows. If sown in the open ground, make the rows the same
distance apart, and thin the young plants to the same space in the rows.

The "Cayenne Pepper-pot" of commerce is prepared from Bird-pepper in the
following manner: "Dry ripe peppers well in the sun, pack them in
earthen or stone pots, mixing common flour between every layer of pods,
and put all into an oven after the baking of bread, that they may be
thoroughly dried; after which, they must be well cleansed from the
flour, and reduced to a fine powder. To every ounce of this, add a pound
of wheat-flour, and as much leaven as is sufficient for the quantity
intended. After this has been properly mixed and wrought, it should be
made into small cakes, and baked in the same manner as common cakes of
the same size; then cut them into small parts, and bake them again, that
they may be as dry and hard as biscuit, which, being powdered and
sifted, is to be kept for use."


CAYENNE PEPPER.

C. frutescens.

The pods of this variety are quite small, cone-shaped, coral-red when
ripe, intensely acrid, and furnish the Cayenne Pepper of commerce. Like
the other species of the family, it is of tropical origin; and being a
perennial, and of a shrubby character, will not succeed in open culture
at the North.

Both the green and ripe pods are used as pickles, and also for making
Chili vinegar or pepper-sauce; which is done by simply putting a handful
of the pods in a bottle, afterwards filled with the best vinegar, and
stopping it closely. In a few weeks, it will be fit for use.

The process of preparing Cayenne Pepper is as follows. The pods are
gathered when fully ripe. "In India, they are dried in the sun; but in
cooler climates they should be dried on a slow hot-plate, or in a
moderately heated oven: they are then pulverized, and sifted through a
fine sieve, mixed with salt, and, when dried, put into close, corked
bottles, for the purpose of excluding the air. This article is subject
to great adulteration, flour being often mixed with it; and, still
worse, red lead, which is much of the same color, and greatly increases
the weight.

"A better method is to dry the pods in a slow oven, split them open,
extract the seeds, and then pulverize them (the pods) to a fine powder,
sifting the powder through a thin muslin sieve, and pulverizing the
parts that do not pass through, and sifting again, until the whole is
reduced to the finest possible state. Place the powder in air-tight
glass bottles; but add no salt or other ingredient whatever."--_M'Int._

The pods of either of the long-fruited sorts, or those of the
Cherry-pepper, prepared as above, will furnish a quality of "Cayenne"
Pepper greatly superior to that ordinarily sold by grocers, or even by
apothecaries and druggists.

The larger and milder kinds, powdered in the same manner, make a
wholesome and pleasant grade of pepper of sufficient pungency for a
majority of palates.


CHERRY-PEPPER.

Capsicum cerasiforme.

[Illustration: Cherry-pepper.]

Stem twelve to fifteen inches high, strong and branching; leaves
comparatively small, long, narrow, and sharply pointed; flowers white,
three-fourths of an inch in diameter; pod, or fruit, erect, nearly
globular or cherry-form, and, at maturity, of a deep, rich, glossy,
scarlet color. It is remarkable for its intense piquancy; exceeding in
this respect nearly all the annual varieties.

It is not so early as some of the larger sorts; but in favorable seasons
will perfect a sufficient portion of its crop in the open ground, both
for seed and pickling. For the latter purpose, the peppers should be
plucked while still green, put into a common jar or wide-mouthed bottle,
and vinegar added to fill the vessel. In a few weeks, they will be fit
for use.

When in perfection, the plants are very ornamental; the glossy,
coral-red of the numerous pods presenting a fine contrast with the
deep-green foliage by which they are surrounded.

A variety occurs with larger, more conical, and pendent pods. The plant
is also much larger, and quite distinct in its general character.


CHERRY-PEPPER.

Yellow-fruited.

This is a variety of the Red Cherry. The plants have the same general
habit, require the same treatment, and perfect their fruit at the same
season. There is little real difference between the sorts, with the
exception of the color of the fruit; this being clear yellow.

To preserve either of these varieties for use in the dry state, all that
is necessary is to cut off the plants close to the roots when the fruit
is ripe, and hang them, with the fruit attached, in any warm and dry
situation. They will retain their piquancy for years.


CHILI PEPPER. _Vil._

Pods pendent, sharply conical, nearly two inches in length, half an inch
in diameter, of a brilliant scarlet when ripe, and exceedingly piquant;
plant about eighteen inches high; leaves numerous, of small size, and
sharply pointed; flowers white, nearly three-fourths of an inch in
diameter.

Sow in a hot-bed in April, and transplant to the open ground in May,
about fourteen inches apart in each direction. Requires a long, warm
season.


LONG RED PEPPER.

[Illustration: Long Red Pepper.]

Fruit brilliant, coral-red, generally pendulous, sometimes erect,
conical, often curved towards the end, nearly four inches in length, and
from an inch to an inch and a half in diameter; skin, or flesh, quite
thin, and exceedingly piquant.

Stalk about two feet high; foliage of medium size, blistered and
wrinkled; flowers an inch in diameter, white.

The variety yields abundantly, but attains its greatest perfection when
started in a hot-bed. The ripe pods, dried and pulverized as directed
for Cayenne Pepper, make an excellent substitute for that article.

The plants, with ripe fruit, are very ornamental.


LONG YELLOW. _Vil._

Pods pendent, long, and tapering, three to four inches in length, and
about an inch in their greatest diameter. At maturity, they assume a
lively, rich, glossy yellow; and the plants are then showy and
ornamental.

Stem two feet and upwards in height, slightly colored with purple at
the intersection of the branches and insertion of the leaf-stems; leaves
of medium size, smaller and paler than those of the Long Red; flowers
white, nearly an inch in diameter. Like the last named, it is very
piquant. It is also late; and, to obtain the variety in perfection, the
seed should be started in a hot-bed in April.


PURPLE OR BLUE PODDED.

Black-podded.

Fruit erect, on long stems, bluntly cone-shaped, two inches and a half
in length, and a half or three-fourths of an inch in diameter at the
broadest part. Before maturity, the skin is green or reddish-green,
clouded or stained with black or purplish-brown; but, when ripe, changes
to rich, deep, indigo-blue.

Plant two feet or upwards in height, more erect and less branched than
other varieties, and much stained with purple at the intersection of the
branches and at the insertion of the leaf-stems; leaves of medium size,
or small, long, and sharply pointed; leaf-stems long, deep-green;
flowers white, tipped with purple, about three-fourths of an inch in
diameter; flower-stems long, purple.

A rare, richly colored, and beautiful pepper, but not cultivated or of
much value as an esculent. For its full perfection, a long, warm season
is requisite. The plants should be started in a hot-bed in March or
April, and transplanted in May to the open ground, fifteen inches apart.


QUINCE-PEPPER.

Piment cydoniforme. _Vil._

This variety is similar to the Sweet Spanish; but the fruit is rather
longer, and its season of maturity is somewhat later. Its flavor is
comparatively mild and pleasant; but, like the Sweet Spanish, it is not
generally thick-fleshed. At maturity, the fruit is a brilliant
coral-red.


ROUND OR LARGE RED CHERRY-PEPPER.

Rond. _Vil._ Cerise grosse.

This is but a sub-variety of the Common Red Cherry-pepper, differing
only in its larger size.

It is quite late, and should be started in a hot-bed.


SQUASH-PEPPER.

Tomato-shaped.

Fruit compressed, more or less ribbed, about two inches and
three-quarters in diameter, and two inches in depth; skin smooth and
glossy,--when ripe, of a brilliant coral-red; flesh thick, mild and
pleasant to the taste, though possessing more piquancy than the Large
Bell or Sweet Spanish.

Plant about two feet high, stout and branching; leaves broad and large;
flowers white, an inch and a quarter in diameter; fruit drooping, the
fruit-stem short and thick.

The Squash-pepper is extensively grown for the market, and is most in
use in the pickle warehouses of the Eastern and Middle States. In
field-culture, the plants are started in hot-beds in April, and, after
the beginning of summer weather, transplanted to the open ground,
fourteen to eighteen inches apart, according to the quality of the soil.
The fruit is generally sold by weight; and an acre of land, in a fair
state of cultivation, will yield about three tons,--a bushel of the
thick-fleshed sort weighing nearly thirty-two pounds. An excellent
pickle may be made by preparing the peppers in the manner directed for
the Bell variety.

As grown by different market-men and gardeners, there are several
sub-varieties of the Squash-pepper, differing both in form and in the
thickness of the flesh; the latter quality, however, being considered
of the greater importance, as the thick-fleshed sorts not only yield a
greater weight to the acre, but are more esteemed for the table.

The Squash-pepper succeeds well when sown in the open ground in May, in
drills fourteen inches apart. The plants should be ten or twelve inches
apart in the rows; for, when grown too closely, they are liable to draw
up, making a weakly, slender growth, and yield much less than when
allowed sufficient space for their full development. Low-growing,
stocky, and branching plants are the most productive.


SWEET MOUNTAIN PEPPER.

This variety resembles the Large Bell, if it is not identical. The Sweet
Mountain may be somewhat larger; but, aside from this, there is no
perceptible difference in the varieties.


SWEET SPANISH.

Piment monstreux. _Vil._

Fruit obtusely conical, often four inches in length, and nearly three
inches in diameter,--brilliant glossy scarlet at maturity; stem strong
and sturdy, two feet or more in height; leaves large, but narrower than
those of the Large Bell; flowers white, and of large size,--usually an
inch and a half in diameter; fruit sometimes erect, but generally
drooping.

Though one of the largest varieties, the Sweet Spanish is also one of
the earliest. The flesh is sweet, mild, and pleasant; and the variety is
much esteemed by those to whom the more pungent kinds are objectionable.
When prepared in the same form, it makes a pickle equally as fine as the
Large Bell.

The Sweet Spanish Pepper succeeds well if sown in the open ground in
May. Make the rows sixteen inches apart, and thin the plants to a foot
apart in the rows.


YELLOW SQUASH-PEPPER. _Vil._

Yellow Tomato-formed.

Fruit similar in form to the Squash-pepper, but of smaller size, erect
or pendulous; orange-yellow at maturity.

The variety is later than the last named; much less productive; and, for
pickling, is comparatively not worthy of cultivation.

       *       *       *       *       *

RHUBARB.

Pie-plant. Rheum sp. et var.

This is a hardy, perennial plant, cultivated almost exclusively for its
leaf-stalks. Its general character may be described as follows:
Root-leaves large, round-heart-shaped, deep-green, and more or less
prominently blistered; leaf-stems large, succulent, furrowed,
pale-green, often stained or finely spotted with red, varying from two
to three inches in diameter at the broadest part, and from a foot to
three feet in length. The flower-stalk is put forth in June, and is from
five to seven feet in height, according to the variety; the flowers are
red or reddish-white, in erect, loose, terminal spikes; the seeds are
brown, triangular, membranous at the corners, and retain their
germinative properties three years.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Rhubarb succeeds best in deep, somewhat
retentive soil: the richer its condition, and the deeper it is stirred,
the better; as it is scarcely possible to cultivate too deeply, or to
manure too highly.

It may be propagated by seeds, or by a division of the roots; the latter
being the usual method. When grown from seeds, the plants not only
differ greatly in size and quality, but are much longer in attaining a
growth suitable for cutting.

"Whether grown from seed, or increased by a division of the roots, a
deep, rich soil, trenched to the depth of two or even three feet, is
required to insure the full development of the leaf-stalks; for upon
their size, rapidity of growth, and consequent tenderness of fibre, much
of their merit depends. The seed should be sown in April, in drills a
foot asunder; thinning the plants, when a few inches high, to nine
inches apart. In the autumn or spring following, they will be fit for
transplanting in rows three feet asunder, and the plants set three feet
apart. If propagated by dividing the roots, it may be done either in
autumn or spring; the same distance being given to the sets that is
allowed for seedling plants. As, however, some of the varieties grow to
a much larger size than others, a corresponding distance should be
accorded them, extending to five feet between the rows, and three feet
from plant to plant.

"The plants should be set out singly, and not in threes, as is so often
done. For the first year, the ground between the rows may be cropped
with lettuce, turnips, beans, or similar low-growing crops; but, after
the second year, the leaves will cover the whole space, and require it
also for their full development."--_M'Int._

_After-Culture._--This consists in keeping the soil well enriched, open,
and clear of weeds; and in breaking over the flower-stalks, that they
may not weaken the roots, and consequently reduce the size and impair
the quality of the leaf-stalks.

_Gathering the Crop._--"This is usually done in spring; commencing as
soon as the stalks have attained a serviceable size. No leaves, however,
should be plucked the first year, and only a few of the largest and
first formed during the second; and this plucking should not be made too
early in the season, because, in that case, the plants would be
weakened. From the third year, as long as the roots or plantations last,
it may be gathered with freedom. A plantation in good soil, and not
overmuch deprived of its foliage, will last from ten to fifteen years.

"When the leaves are about half expanded, they may be plucked for use;
but, when the largest returns are expected (as in the case of
market-gardens), they should be allowed to attain their full size. In
removing them, they should be pulled off close to the base, and not cut,
to prevent an unnecessary escape of sap, which, in all succulent plants,
flows more copiously from a clean cut than from one slightly lacerated
or torn. The footstalks should then be separated from the leaves, and
tied up in bundles of suitable size for market."--_M'Int._

Rhubarb is sometimes blanched. This may be effected without removing the
plants, by means of sea-kale pots, or by empty casks open at the top,
put over the crowns in March. It can, however, be more perfectly done by
taking up the roots, and placing them in some dark place, with a
temperature of 55 deg. or 60 deg.; where they should be slightly covered with
soil to prevent them from drying. When so treated, they are much more
tender, crisp, and delicate than when grown exposed to the sun and air:
but the quality is greatly impaired; the pulp, though somewhat acid,
being generally comparatively flavorless.

_Use._--As before remarked, it is cultivated for its leaf-stalks; which
are used early in the season, as a substitute for fruit, in pies, tarts,
and similar culinary preparations. When fully grown, the expressed juice
forms a tolerably palatable wine, though, with reference to health, of
doubtful properties. "As an article of commercial importance in the
vegetable markets, it is of very recent date. In 1810, Mr. Joseph
Myatts, of Deptford, England, long known for his successful culture of
this plant, sent his two sons to the borough-market with five bunches of
Rhubarb-stalks, of which they could sell but three." It is now disposed
of by the ton, and many acres in the vicinity of nearly all large towns
and cities are devoted exclusively to its cultivation.

_Varieties._--These are very numerous, as they are readily produced from
the seed; but the number really deserving of cultivation is
comparatively limited. Old kinds are constantly giving place to new,
either on account of superior earliness, size, productiveness, or
quality. The following are the prominent sorts cultivated:--


CAHOON.

Leaves remarkably large, often broader than long, and more rounded than
those of most varieties; stalk short and thick,--if well grown,
measuring from twelve to sixteen inches in length, and three inches or
more in diameter; skin thick, uniformly green.

Its remarkable size is its principal recommendation. The texture is
coarse, the flavor is harsh and strong, and it is rarely employed for
culinary purposes.

In some localities, it is cultivated to a limited extent for the
manufacture of wine; the juice being expressed from the stalks, and
sugar added in the ratio of three pounds and a half to a gallon. This
wine, though quite palatable, has little of the fine aroma of that made
from the grape; and, if not actually deleterious, is much less safe and
healthful. Any of the other varieties may be used for the same purpose;
the principal superiority of the Cahoon consisting in its larger stalks,
and consequently its greater product of juice.


DOWNING'S COLOSSAL.

A large variety, nearly of the size of Myatt's Victoria. It is described
as being less acid than the last named, and of a fine, rich, aromatic
flavor.


EARLY PRINCE IMPERIAL.

Stalks of medium size; recommended by D. T. Curtis, Esq., Chairman of
the Vegetable Committee of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society, as
in all respects the best flavored of any variety ever tested; and
commended for general cultivation, as particularly adapted to the wants
of the family, if not to the wishes of the gardener, to whom size and
productiveness are more than flavor. It invariably turns red in cooking,
which makes it preferable for the table as a sauce. When cooked, it is
of the color of currant-jelly, and remarkably fine flavored.

In 1862, it received the first prize of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society, as the best for family use.


ELFORD. _Thomp._

Buck's Rhubarb.

An early sort, well adapted for forcing. The stalks are rather slender,
covered with a thin skin of a bright-scarlet color; and their substance
throughout is of a fine red, which they retain when cooked, if not
peeled,--a process which, owing to the thinness of the skin, is not
considered necessary. Even when grown in the dark, the stalks still
preserve the crimson tinge. It was raised from the seed of _Rheum
undulatum_.


HAWKE'S CHAMPAGNE.

A new variety, said to equal the Prince Albert in earliness, and also to
be of a deeper and finer color, and much more productive. It forces
remarkably well; is hardy in open culture; and commands the highest
market prices, both from its great size, and fine, rich color.


MITCHELL'S ROYAL ALBERT. _Thomp._

Stalks large, red, and of excellent flavor. Early and prolific.


MYATT'S LINNAEUS.

Linnaeus.

A medium-sized or comparatively small variety, recently introduced.
"Besides being the earliest of all, and remarkably productive as well as
high flavored, and possessing little acidity, it has a skin so thin,
that removing it is hardly necessary; and its pulp, when stewed, has the
uniform consistence of baked Rhode-Island Greenings; and it continues
equally crisp and tender throughout the summer and early autumn." One of
the best sorts for a small garden or for family use.


MYATT'S VICTORIA.

Victoria.

Leaves large, broader than long, deep-green, blistered on the surface,
and much waved or undulated on the borders. Leaf-stalks very large,
varying from two inches and a half to three inches in their broadest
diameter, and frequently measuring upwards of two feet and a half in
length: the weight of a well-developed stalk, divested of the leaf, is
about two pounds. They are stained with red at their base, and are often
reddish, or finely spotted with red, to the nerves of the leaf.

It has rather a thick skin, is more acid than many other varieties, and
not particularly high flavored: but no kind is more productive; and
this, in connection with its extraordinary size, makes it not only the
most salable, but one of the most profitable, kinds for growing for the
market.

It requires a deep, highly-manured soil; and the roots should be divided
and reset once in four or five years. It is about a fortnight later than
the Linnaeus.


NEPAL.

Rheum Australe. _Thomp._ Rheum Emodi.

The leaf-stalks attain an immense size, but are unfit for use on account
of their strongly purgative properties: but the leaves, which are
frequently a yard in diameter, are useful in covering baskets containing
vegetables or fruit; and for these the plant is sometimes cultivated.


TOBOLSK RHUBARB.

Early Red Tobolsk.

Leaves comparatively small; leaf-stalks below medium size, stained with
red at the base. It is perceptibly less acid than most varieties, and
remarkable for fineness of texture and delicacy of flavor.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUNFLOWER.

Tall Sunflower. Annual Sunflower. Helianthus annuus.

Stem from five to eight feet or more in height; leaves heart-shaped,
rough, three-nerved; flowers very large, terminal, nodding; the seeds
are large, ovoid, angular, or compressed, nearly black, sometimes
striped with white, and retain their germinative properties five years.

The plant is a native of South America.


DWARF SUNFLOWER. _Law._

H. Indicus.

This species, which was introduced from Egypt, differs from the last
principally in its more dwarfish habit of growth, but also in being less
branched. The flowers are much smaller, and generally of a lighter
color.

_Soil and Cultivation._--The Sunflower will thrive in almost any soil or
situation, but succeeds best on land adapted to the growth of Indian
Corn. It is always grown from seed, which should be sown in April, or
the beginning of May, in drills three feet apart. When the plants are
well up, they should be thinned to a foot asunder, and afterwards
cultivated in the usual manner; stirring the ground occasionally, and
keeping the plants free from weeds. The flowers appear in July, and the
seeds ripen in August and September. The central flower is first
developed; attains a larger size than any that succeed it; and ripens
its seeds in advance of those on the side-branches. The heads of seeds
should be cut as they successively mature, and spread in a dry, airy
situation for three or four weeks; when the seeds will become dry and
hard, and can be easily rubbed or threshed out.

_Use._--"The seeds of both species yield an oil little inferior to that
of the Olive for domestic purposes, and which is also well adapted for
burning. In Portugal, the seeds are made into bread, and also into a
kind of meal. They are also sometimes roasted, and used as a substitute
for coffee; but the purpose for which they seem best adapted is the
feeding of domestic fowls, pheasants and other game. The greatest
objection to its culture is, that it is a most impoverishing crop,
particularly the Large or Common Tall species."--_M'Int._

       *       *       *       *       *

TOBACCO.

Nicotiana, sp.

All the species and varieties of Tobacco in common cultivation are
annuals; and most, if not all, are natives of this continent. "Like
other annual plants, it may be grown in almost every country and
climate, because every country has a summer; and that is the season of
life for all annual plants. In hot, dry, and short summers, like the
northern summers of Europe or America, Tobacco-plants will not attain a
large size; but the Tobacco produced will be of delicate quality and
good flavor. In long, moist, and not very warm summers, the plants will
attain a large size,--perhaps as much so as in Virginia; but the Tobacco
produced will not have that superior flavor, which can only be given by
abundance of clear sunshine, and free, dry air. By a skilful
manufacture, and probably by mixing the Tobacco of cold countries with
that of hot countries, by using different species, and perhaps by
selecting particular varieties of the different species, the defects in
flavor arising from climate may, it is likely, be greatly remedied."

The species and varieties are as follow:--


CONNECTICUT SEED-LEAF.

Peach-leaf. Virginia Tobacco. Nicotiana tabacum.

[Illustration: Connecticut Seed-leaf.]

Leaves oblong, regularly tapering, stemless and clasping, eighteen
inches to two feet long, and from nine to twelve inches in diameter.
When fully developed, the stem of the plant is erect and strong, five
feet high, and separates near the top into numerous, somewhat open,
spreading branches; the flowers are large, tubular, rose-colored, and
quite showy and ornamental; the capsules are ovoid, or somewhat conical,
and, if well grown, nearly half an inch in their greatest diameter; the
seeds, which are produced in great abundance, are quite small, of a
brownish color, and retain their germinative properties four years.

This species is extensively cultivated throughout the Middle and
Southern States, and also in the milder portions of New England. In the
State of Connecticut, and on the banks of the Connecticut River in
Massachusetts, it is a staple product; and in some towns the value of
the crop exceeds that of Indian Corn, and even that of all the cereals
combined.


GUATEMALA TOBACCO.

A variety with white flowers. In other respects, similar to the
foregoing.

Numerous other sorts occur, many of which are local, and differ
principally, if not solely, in the size or form of the leaves. One of
the most prominent of these is the Broad-leaved, which is considered
not only earlier and more productive, but the best for manufacturing.

_Propagation._--It is propagated by seeds sown annually. Select a warm,
rich locality in the garden; spade it thoroughly over; pulverize the
surface well; and the last of April, or beginning of May, sow the seeds
thinly, broadcast; cover with a little fresh mould, and press it well
upon them either by the hoe or back of the spade. As they are
exceedingly minute, much care is requisite in sowing, especially that
they should not be too deeply covered. When the plants appear, keep them
clear of weeds, and thin them out sufficiently to allow a free growth. A
bed of seedlings nine or ten feet square will be sufficient for an acre
of land. If preferred, the plants may be raised in drills eight inches
apart, slightly covering the seeds, and pressing the earth firmly over
them, as above directed. When the seedlings are four or five inches
high, they are ready for transplanting.

_Soil and Cultivation._--Tobacco requires a warm, rich soil, not too dry
or wet; and, though it will succeed well on recently turned sward or
clover-turf, it gives a greater yield on land that has been cultivated
the year previous, as it is less liable to be infested by worms, which
sometimes destroy the plants in the early stages of their growth. The
land should be twice ploughed in the spring; first as soon as the frost
will permit, and again just previous to setting. Pulverize the surface
thoroughly by repeated harrowing and rolling, and it will be ready to
receive the young plants. The time for transplanting is from the 1st to
the 20th of June; taking advantage of a damp day, or setting them
immediately after a rain. If the ground is not moist at the time of
transplanting, it will be necessary to water the plants as they are set.

"The ground should be marked in straight rows three feet apart, and
slight hills made on these marks two feet and a half apart; then set the
plants, taking care to press the earth firmly around the roots. As soon
as they are well established, and have commenced growing, run a
cultivator or horse-hoe between the rows, and follow with the hand-hoe;
resetting where the plants are missing. The crop should be hoed at least
three times, at proper intervals; taking care to stir the soil all over.

"When the plants begin to flower, the flower-stem should be broken or
cut off; removing also the suckers, if any appear; leaving from twelve
to sixteen leaves to be matured."

_Harvesting and Curing._--In ordinary seasons, the crop will be ready
for harvesting about the beginning of September; and should all be
secured by the 20th of the month, or before the occurrence of frost. The
stalks must be cut at the surface of the ground, and exposed long enough
to the sun to wilt them sufficiently to prevent breaking in handling.
They should then be suspended in a dry, airy shed or building, on poles,
in such a manner as to keep each plant entirely separate from the
others, to prevent mouldiness, and to facilitate the drying by
permitting a free circulation of the air. Thirty or forty plants may be
allowed to each twelve feet of pole. The poles may be laid across the
beams, about sixteen inches apart.

"When erected for the purpose, the sheds are built of sufficient height
to hang three or four tiers; the beams being about four feet apart, up
and down. In this way, a building forty feet by twenty-two will cure an
acre and a half of Tobacco. The drying-shed should be provided with
several doors on either side, for the free admission of air."

When the stalk is well dried (which is about the last of November or
beginning of December), select a damp day, remove the plants from the
poles, strip off the leaves from the stalk, and form them into small
bunches, or hanks, by tying the leaves of two or three plants together,
winding a leaf about them near the ends of the stems; then pack down
while still damp, lapping the tips of the hanks, or bunches, on each
other, about a third of their length, forming a stack with the buts, or
ends, of the leaf-stems outward; cover the top of the stack, but leave
the ends or outside of the mass exposed to the air. In cold weather, or
by mid-winter, it will be ready for market; for which it is generally
packed in damp weather, in boxes containing from two to four hundred
pounds.

A fair average yield per acre is from fourteen to eighteen hundred
pounds.

_To save Seed._--"Allow a few of the best plants to stand without
removing the flowering-shoots. In July and August, they will have a fine
appearance; and, if the season be favorable, each plant will produce as
much seed as will sow a quarter of an acre by the drill system, or stock
half a dozen acres by transplanting." A single capsule, or seed-pod,
contains about a thousand seeds.


GREEN TOBACCO.

Turkish Tobacco. Nicotiana rustica.

Leaves oval, from seven to ten inches long, and six or seven inches
broad, produced on long petioles. Compared with the preceding species,
they are much smaller, deeper colored, more glossy, thicker, and more
succulent. When fully grown, the plant is of a pyramidal form, and about
three feet in height. The flowers are numerous, greenish-yellow,
tubular, and nearly entire on the borders; the seed-vessels are ovoid,
more depressed at the top than those of the Connecticut Seed-leaf, and
much more prolific; seeds small, brownish.

[Illustration: Green Tobacco.]

The Green Tobacco is early, and remarkably hardy, but not generally
considered worthy of cultivation in localities where the Connecticut
Seed-leaf can be successfully grown. It is well adapted to the northern
parts of New England and the Canadas; where it will almost invariably
yield an abundance of foliage, and perfect its seeds.

"It is very generally cultivated, almost to the exclusion of the other
species, in the north of Germany, Russia, and Sweden, where almost every
cottager grows his own Tobacco for smoking. It also seems to be the
principal sort grown in Ireland."

There are several varieties, among which may be mentioned the Oronoco
and the Negro-head, both of which have the hardiness and productiveness
common to the species, but are not considered remarkably well flavored.

The plants should be started in spring, and transplanted as directed for
the Connecticut Seed-leaf; but, on account of its smaller size and
habit, two feet, or even twenty inches, between the plants, will be all
the space required.

       *       *       *       *       *

TOMATO.

Love-apple. Solanum lycopersicum.

The Tomato is a native of South America. It is a half-hardy annual, and
is said to have been introduced into England as early as 1596. For a
long period, it was very little used; and the peculiar, specific term,
_lycopersicum_, derived from _lykos_, "wolf," and _persicon_, "a peach"
(referring to the beautiful but deceptive appearance of the fruit), more
than intimates the kind of estimation in which it was held.

It first began to be generally used in Italy, subsequently in France,
and finally in England. In this country, its cultivation and use may be
said to have increased fourfold within the last twenty years; and it is
now so universally relished, that it is furnished to the table, in one
form or another, through every season of the year. To a majority of
tastes, its flavor is not at first particularly agreeable; but, by those
accustomed to its use, it is esteemed one of the best, as it is also
reputed to be one of the most healthful, of all garden vegetables.

When fully grown, the Tomato-plant is from four to seven feet and
upwards in height or length, with a branching, irregular, recumbent
stem, and dense foliage. The flowers are yellow, in branching groups, or
clusters; the fruit is red, white, or yellow, and exceedingly variable
in size and form; the seeds are lens-shaped, yellowish-white, or
pale-gray,--twenty-one thousand are contained in an ounce, and they
retain their vitality five years.

_Propagation._--The Tomato is raised from seeds, which should be sown in
a hot-bed in March, or in the open ground as soon as the frost will
permit. As the plants, even in the most favorable seasons, seldom
perfectly mature their full crop, they should be started as early and
forwarded as rapidly as possible, whether by hot-bed or open-air
culture. If the seeds are sown in a hot-bed, the drills should be made
five inches apart, and half an inch deep. When the plants are two
inches high, they should be removed to another part of the bed, and
pricked out four or five inches apart, or removed into small pots,
allowing a single plant to a pot. They are sometimes twice transplanted,
allowing more space or a larger pot at each removal; by which process,
the plants are rendered more sturdy and branching than they become by
being but once transplanted.

As early in May as the weather is suitable, the plants may be set in the
open ground where they are to remain, and should be three feet apart in
each direction; or, if against a wall or trellis, three feet from plant
to plant. Water freely at the time of transplanting, shelter from the
sun for a few days or until they are well established, and cultivate in
the usual form during summer.

If sown in the open ground, select a sheltered situation, pulverize the
soil finely, and sow a few seeds in drills, as directed for the hot-bed.
This may be done in November (just before the closing-up of the ground),
or the last of March, or first of April. In May, when the plants are
three or four inches high, transplant to where they are to remain, as
before directed.

In gardens where tomatoes have been cultivated, young plants often
spring up abundantly from the seeds of the decayed fruit of the
preceding season. These, if transplanted, will succeed as well, and
frequently produce fruit as early, as plants from the hot-bed or
nursery-bed.

Sufficient plants for the garden of a small family may be started with
little trouble by sowing a few seeds in a garden-pan or large
flower-pot, and placing it in a sunny window of the sitting-room or
kitchen. If the seed is sown in this manner about the middle or 20th of
March, the plants will be of good size for setting by the time the
weather will be suitable for their removal.

_Forcing the Crop._--"The ripening of the fruit may be hastened by
setting the plants against a south wall or close fence. As the plants
increase in size, they must be nailed or otherwise attached to the wall
or fence; and, if the weather be dry, liberally watered. When the two
first trusses of bloom have expanded over each shoot, the shoot should
be stopped by pinching off the portion which is beyond the leaf above
the second truss, and no more lateral shoots should be suffered to grow;
but the leaves must be carefully preserved, especially those near the
trusses of bloom. The number of shoots on each plant will vary according
to the strength and vigor of the particular plant; but three or four
will be quite enough, leaving about half a dozen trusses of fruit.

"As the fruit ripens, it must be well exposed to the sun. There will be
nothing gained by allowing a great many fruit to ripen. The number above
given will be sufficient, and the tomatoes will be much earlier and
larger than if they were more numerous."

_Culture and Training._--A convenient, simple, and economical support
for the plants may be made from three narrow hoops,--one twelve, another
fifteen, and the third eighteen or twenty inches in diameter,--and
attaching them a foot from each other to three stakes about four feet in
length; placing the lower hoop so that it may be about ten inches from
the surface of the ground after the stakes are driven. The adjoining
figure illustrates this method of training. It secures abundance of
light, free access of air, and, in skilful hands, may be made quite
ornamental.

[Illustration: Hoop-training of the Tomato.]

[Illustration: Trellis-training.]

Or a trellis may be cheaply formed by setting common stakes, four feet
in length, four feet apart, on a line with the plants, and nailing
laths, or narrow strips of deal, from stake to stake, nine inches apart
on the stakes; afterwards attaching the plants by means of bass, or
other soft, fibrous material, to the trellis, in the manner of
grape-vines or other climbing plants. By either of these methods, the
plants not only present a neater appearance, but the ripening of the
fruit is facilitated, and the crop much more conveniently gathered when
required for use.

The French mode of raising tomatoes is as follows: "As soon as a cluster
of flowers is visible, they top the stem down to the cluster, so that
the flowers terminate the stem. The effect is, that the sap is
immediately impelled into the two buds next below the cluster, which
soon push strongly, and produce another cluster of flowers each. When
these are visible, the branch to which they belong is also topped down
to their level; and this is done five times successively. By this means,
the plants become stout, dwarf bushes, not above eighteen inches high.
In order to prevent their falling over, sticks or strings are stretched
horizontally along the rows, so as to keep the plants erect. In
addition to this, all laterals that have no flowers, and, after the
fifth topping, all laterals whatsoever, are nipped off. In this way, the
ripe sap is directed into the fruit, which acquires a beauty, size, and
excellence unattainable by other means."--_Gard. Chron._

_Varieties._--These are quite numerous. Some are merely nominal, many
are variable or quite obscure, and a few appear to be distinct, and, in
a degree, permanent. The principal are as follow:--


APPLE-TOMATO.

Apple-shaped.

Fruit somewhat flattened, inclining to globular, depressed about the
stem, but smooth and regular in its general outline. The size is quite
variable; but, if well grown, the average diameter is about two inches
and a half, and the depth two inches. Skin deep, rich crimson; flesh
bright-pink, or rose-color,--the rind being thick and hard, and not
readily reduced to a pulp when cooked.

[Illustration: Apple-tomato.]

The Apple-tomato is early, hardy, productive, keeps well, and, for salad
and certain forms of cookery, is much esteemed; but it is more liable to
be hollow-hearted than any other of the large varieties.

In form, as well as in the thick, tough character of its rind, it
resembles the Bermuda.


BERMUDA.

This is a red or rose-colored, apple-formed sort, extensively imported
from Bermuda into the Middle and Northern States in May and the early
summer months.

Like the preceding variety, it varies considerably in size,--some
specimens measuring little more than an inch in diameter; while others
from the same plant, matured at nearly the same season, frequently
exceed a diameter of two inches and a half.

It possesses a thick, rather tough rind, which rarely becomes pulpy in
the process of cooking; and, besides, is quite light and hollow-hearted.
In size and form, it somewhat resembles the Apple-tomato. When
cultivated in New England or the Middle States, it has little merit,
either for its productiveness or early maturity.


FEJEE.

Fruit quite large, red, often blushed or tinged with pinkish-crimson,
flattened, sometimes ribbed, often smooth, well filled to the centre;
flesh pink, or pale-red, firm, and well flavored; plant hardy, healthy,
and a strong grower.

Seeds received from different reliable sources, and recommended as being
strictly true, produced plants and fruit in no respects distinguishable
from the Perfected.


FIG-TOMATO.

Red Pear-shaped Tomato.

[Illustration: Fig-tomato.]

A small, red, pyriform or pear-shaped sort, measuring from an inch and a
quarter to an inch and a half in length, and nearly an inch in its
broadest diameter. Flesh pale-red, or pink, very solid and compact, and
generally completely filling the centre of the fruit.

Like the Plum-tomato, it is remarkably uniform in size, and also in
shape; but it is little used except for preserving,--other larger
varieties being considered more economical for stewing, making catchup,
and like purposes.

The variety is usually employed for making tomato-figs, which are thus
prepared:--

"Pour boiling water over the tomatoes, in order to remove the skin;
after which, weigh, and place in a stone jar, with as much sugar as
tomatoes, and let them stand two days; then pour off the sirup, and boil
and skim it till no scum rises; pour it over the tomatoes, and let them
stand two days as before; then boil, and skim again. After the third
time, they are fit to dry, if the weather is good; if not, let them
stand in the sirup until drying weather. Then place them on large
earthen plates, or dishes, and put them in the sun to dry, which will
take about a week; after which, pack them down in small wooden boxes,
with fine, white sugar between every layer. Tomatoes prepared in this
manner will keep for years."--_Mrs. Eliza Marsh, in Hov. Mag._


GIANT TOMATO. _Hov. Mag._

Mammoth.

An improved variety of the Common Large Red, attaining a much larger
size. Fruit comparatively solid, bright-red, sometimes smooth, but
generally ribbed, and often exceedingly irregular; some of the larger
specimens seemingly composed of two or more united together. The fruit
is frequently produced in masses or large clusters, which clasp about
the stem, and rest so closely in the axils of the branches as to admit
of being detached only by the rending asunder of the fruit itself; flesh
pale-pink, and well flavored.

Like most of the other varieties, the amount of product is in a great
degree dependent on soil, culture, and season. Under favorable
conditions, twenty-five pounds to a single plant is not an unusual
yield; single specimens of the fruit sometimes weighing four and even
five or six pounds.

The Giant Tomato is not early, and, for the garden, perhaps not superior
to many other kinds; but for field-culture, for market, for making
catchup in quantities, or for the use of pickle-warehouses, it is
recommended as one of the best of all the sorts now cultivated.


GRAPE OR CLUSTER TOMATO.

Solanum sp.

This variety, or more properly species, differs essentially in the
character of its foliage, and manner of fructification, from the Garden
Tomato. The leaves are much smoother, thinner in texture, and have
little of the musky odor peculiar to the Common Tomato-plant. The fruit
is nearly globular, quite small, about half an inch in diameter, of a
bright-scarlet color, and produced in leafless, simple, or compound
clusters, six or eight inches in length, containing from twenty to sixty
berries, or tomatoes; the whole having an appearance not unlike a large
cluster, or bunch of currants.

The plants usually grow about three feet in height or length; and, in
cultivation, should be treated in all respects like those of other
varieties. Flowers yellow, and comparatively small. Early.

Though quite ornamental, it is of little value in domestic economy, on
account of its diminutive size.


LARGE RED TOMATO.

[Illustration: Large Red Tomato.]

Fruit sometimes smooth, often irregular, flattened, more or less ribbed;
size large, but varied much by soil and cultivation,--well-grown
specimens are from three to four inches in diameter, two inches and a
half in depth, and weigh from eight to twelve ounces; skin smooth,
glossy, and, when ripe, of a fine red color; flesh pale-red, or
rose-color,--the interior of the fruit being comparatively well filled;
flavor good.

Not early, but one of the most productive of all the varieties; the
plants, when properly treated, producing from twelve to fifteen pounds
each.

From the time of the introduction of the Tomato to its general use in
this country, the Large Red was almost the only kind cultivated, or even
commonly known. The numerous excellent sorts now almost everywhere
disseminated, including the Large Red, Oval, Fejee, Seedless, Giant, and
Lester's Perfected, are but improved sub-varieties, obtained from the
Common Large Red by cultivation and selection.


LARGE RED OVAL-FRUITED TOMATO.

A sub-variety of the Large Red. Fruit oval, flattened, much less ribbed,
more symmetrical, and more uniform in size, than the last named;
well-grown specimens measure about four inches in one direction, three
inches in the opposite, and two inches in depth; skin fine, deep-red,
smooth and shining; flesh paler, the interior of the fruit well filled
with pulp, and, when cooked, yielding a large product in proportion to
the bulk. Prolific and well flavored, but not early; ripening at the
time of the Large Red.

The variety is exceedingly liable to degenerate, constantly tending
towards the Large Red; and can only be maintained in its purity by
exclusive cultivation, and a continued use of seeds selected from the
fairest, smoothest, best ripened tomatoes, having the peculiar oval form
by which the variety is distinguished.


LARGE YELLOW.

Plant, in its general character, not distinguishable from the Large Red.
The fruit also is quite similar in form and size; the principal mark of
distinction being its color, which is a fine, clear, semi-transparent
yellow. Flesh yellow, well filling the centre, and perhaps a little
sweeter or milder than the Red; though generally not distinguishable
when stewed or otherwise prepared for the table.

The variety is hardy, yields abundantly, and comes to perfection with
the Large Red. It is, however, not generally cultivated; the Red
descriptions being more commonly used, and consequently better adapted
for cultivation for the market.


MEXICAN.

Fruit large, comparatively smooth, frequently of an oval form,
bright-red, often tinted with rose or bright-pink; flesh pink, solid,
filling the fruit to the centre.

It is similar to, if not identical with, the Perfected.


PERFECTED.

Lester's Perfected. Pomo d'Oro Lesteriano.

A recently introduced and comparatively distinct variety. Plant
remarkably healthy and vigorous, often attaining a height or length of
six or eight feet, and, in strong soil, of more than ten feet; fruit
pinkish-red, or rose-red, of large size, comparatively smooth and
regular, flattened, remarkably solid and well filled to the centre, and,
when cooked, yielding a large return in proportion to its bulk; flesh
firm, well flavored, with comparatively few seeds intermixed. In this
last respect, not unlike the Seedless.

When started at the same time, it ripens two weeks after the early
varieties, and continues to yield in great abundance until the plants
are destroyed by frost. It is considered one of the best sorts for
cultivation for the market, and by many is preferred to all others for
the garden.

On the authority of a recent writer, the variety has already, to some
extent, degenerated. Impure seed, or the influence of some peculiar
locality, may have furnished grounds for the statement; but if the
variety is genuine or unmixed, it will, in almost any soil or exposure,
commend itself by its hardiness, solidity, and great productiveness.


RED CHERRY-TOMATO.

A small, red Tomato, nearly spherical, and about half an inch in
diameter. The fruit is produced in great profusion, in large bunches, or
clusters; but is comparatively of little value, on account of its small
size. It is sometimes used as a preserve, and by some is esteemed for
pickling.


RED PLUM-TOMATO.

Fruit bright-red or scarlet, oval, solid, an inch and a quarter or an
inch and a half in depth, and about an inch in diameter; flesh pink, or
rose-red, mild and well flavored; seeds comparatively few.

The variety is remarkable for its symmetry and for its uniform size.
When ripe, the fruit is not easily distinguished from some varieties of
scarlet plums. It is hardy, early, and yields abundantly: but the fruit
is employed principally for pickling and preserving; its small size
rendering it of little value for stewing or for catchup.

Mixed with the Yellow, they make a fine garnish, and are excellent for
salad.


ROUND RED.

A small, round, red variety, measuring about an inch in diameter. It is
one of the earliest of all the cultivated sorts, but of little value
except for pickling or preserving.


ROUND YELLOW.

Of the size and form of the foregoing, differing only in color.


SEEDLESS.

Very similar to, if not identical with, the Perfected. Fruit almost
rose-red, solid, and with comparatively few seeds.


TREE-TOMATO. _Vil._ _Hov. Mag._

New Upright. Tomate de Laye.

A new variety, raised from seed by Grenier, gardener to M. de Fleurieux,
at a place in France called Chateau de Laye (whence the name), and
introduced by M. Vilmorin of Paris.

It is distinct from all others; rising quite erect to the height of two
feet or upwards, with a stem of remarkable size and strength. The
branches are not numerous, and comparatively short, usually eight or ten
inches in length,--thus requiring no heading-in; leaves not abundant,
rather curled, much wrinkled, very firm, closely placed on the sturdy
branches, and of a remarkably deep, shining-green color; fruit
bright-red, of large size, comparatively smooth, and well filled to the
centre,--in many respects, resembling the Perfected, though more regular
in form.

From the peculiar, tree-like character of the plants, the variety is
remarkably well adapted for cultivation in pots; but its late maturity
greatly impairs its value as a variety for forcing. It is a slow grower,
tardy in forming and perfecting its fruit, and, for ordinary garden
culture, cannot be recommended as being preferable to the Perfected and
other earlier and much more prolific varieties. It has been described as
strictly self-supporting: but, though the fruit is produced in a
remarkably close and almost clasping manner about the sturdy stem and
branches, its weight often brings the plants to the ground; and
consequently, in exposed situations, it will be necessary to provide
stakes, or some similar means of support; though the plants never
exhibit the rambling, recumbent character of the Common Tomato.


WHITE TOMATO.

Plant similar in habit to the Large Red; fruit large, generally ribbed,
often irregular, but sometimes comparatively smooth. Its distinguishing
characteristic is its color, which, if the fruit be screened by foliage
or if grown in the shade, is almost clear white; if much exposed to the
sun, it assumes a yellowish tinge, much paler, however, than the Large
Yellow. Flesh yellowish, more watery than that of the Large Red, and of
a somewhat peculiar flavor, much esteemed by some, and unpalatable to
others.

The variety is hardy, remarkably productive, as early as the Large Red,
and equally large and solid: but its color, before and after being
cooked, is unattractive; and it is rarely seen in the markets, and
seldom cultivated for family use.


WHITE'S EXTRA EARLY.

Early Red. Extra Early.

A medium-sized Red variety, generally round, but frequently of an oval
form, flattened, sometimes ribbed, but comparatively smooth, and, when
fully matured, of a deeper color than the later Red sorts. Average
specimens measure about two inches and a half in diameter, and an inch
and a half in depth. The plants are moderately vigorous, and readily
distinguished by their peculiar curled and apparently withering foliage.

Flesh pale-red, quite firm, mild, not very seedy, and well filling the
fruit, which is considerably heavier than the Apple-shaped. When cooked,
it yields a much greater product, in proportion to its size, than the
last-named and similar hollow-hearted varieties. Productive, and of good
quality.

Planted at the same time with the Common Red varieties, it will ripen
about two weeks earlier. An excellent sort for the garden, and
recommended for general cultivation.

In order to retain this or any other early variety in its purity, seed
for planting should be saved from the smoothest, best formed, and
earliest ripened fruit. Few of the numerous kinds now cultivated possess
much permanency of character; and rapidly degenerate, if raised from
seed taken from the scattered, irregular, and comparatively immature
tomatoes remaining upon the plants at the close of the season.


YELLOW CHERRY-TOMATO.

A yellow variety of the Red Cherry-tomato,--differing only in color.

Quite showy, but of little value for culinary purposes.


YELLOW PEAR-SHAPED TOMATO.

Yellow Fig-tomato.

A sub-variety of the Red Pear-shaped, with a clear, semi-transparent,
yellow skin and yellow flesh. Like the preceding, it is little used
except for preserving and pickling.


YELLOW PLUM-TOMATO.

A variety of the Red Plum, of the same size and form, and equally
symmetrical; distinguished only by the color of its skin, which is a
fine, clear, transparent yellow. It is used principally for preserving;
its small size rendering it comparatively valueless for use in any other
form.

When the two varieties are intermixed, the colors present a fine
contrast; and a basket of the fruit is quite a beautiful object.




INDEX.


  Agaricus campestris, 580.
    " comatus, 585.
    " deliciosus, 585.
    " exquisitus, 585.
    " Georgii, 585.
    " oreades, 587.
    " personatus, 586.
    " prunulus, 586.

  Alecost, 416.

  Alexanders, 315.
    Perfoliate, 316.

  Alisanders, 315.

  Alkekengi, 592.
    Purple, 593.
    Tall, 593.

  Alliaceous Plants, 122.

  Allium ampeloprasum, 124.
    " Ascalonicum, 143.
    " cepa, 129.
    " fistulosum, 147.
    " porrum, 125.
    " sativum, 123.
    " schoenoprasum, 122.
    " scorodoprasum, 143.

  Allspice, 429.

  Amaranthus, 287.
    Chinese, 287.
    Early, 288.
    Hantsi Shanghai, 288.
    Mirza, 288.

  American Brooklime, 316.

  American Garden-bean, 450.

  American Winter-cress, 403.

  Anethum graveolens, 418.

  Angelica, 406.
    " archangelica, 406.

  Anise, 407.

  Annual Phytolacca, 169.

  Anthemis nobilis, 563.
    " nobilis flore pleno, 563.

  Apium graveolens, 321.
    " petroselinum, 430.

  Arrach, 296.

  Arachys hypogea, 556.

  Aromatic Nigella, 429.

  Artemesia abrotanum, 576.
    " absynthium, 576.
    "  dracunculus, 400.
    "  maritimum, 577.
    "  pontica, 577.

  Artichoke, 149.
    Camus de Bretagne, 153.
    Common, 152.
    Dark Red-spined, 152.
    Early Purple, 152.
    French, 162.
    Globe, 152.
    Green, 152.
    Green Globe, 152.
    Green Provence, 153.
    Gros Vert de Laon, 153.
    Laon, 153.
    Large Flat Brittany, 153.
    Large Round-headed, 152.
    Purple, 152.
    Purple Globe, 152.
    Purplish-red, 153.
    Violet, 152.

  Asparaginous Plants, 149.

  Asparagus, 153.
    Asperge d'Allemagne, 161.
    Battersea, 160.
    Deptford, 161.
    Dutch, 161.
    German, 161.
    Giant Purple-top, 161.
    Grayson's Giant, 161.
    Gravesend, 161.
    Green-top, 161.
    Mortlake, 161.
    Reading, 161.
    Red-top, 161.

  Asparagus officinalis, 153.

  Astragalus hamosus, 405.

  Atriplex hortensis, 296.

  Aviles Cabbage, 275.


  Balm, 409.

  Balsamita vulgaris, 416.

  Barbadoes Gooseberry, 592.

  Barbarea praecox, 403.
    "  vulgaris, 403.

  Basella alba, 292.
    " cordifolia, 292.
    " rubra, 293.

  Basil, 410.
    Bush, 411.
    Common, 410.
    Fin Vert, 411.
    Fin Violet, 411.
    Grand Violet, 410.
    Green Bush, 411.
    Large Sweet, 410.
    Lettuce-leaved, 411.
    Purple, 410.
    Purple Bush, 411.

  Bean, American Garden, 450.
    Dwarf varieties, 450.
    Bagnolet, 451.
    Black-eyed China, 452.
    Blue Pod, 453.
    Canada Yellow, 454.
    Canadian, 463.
    Chilian, 455.
    China, 460.
    Crescent-eyed, 455.
    Dun-colored, 456.
    Dwarf Case-knife, 459.
    Dwarf Cimeter, 459.
    Dwarf Cranberry, 457.
    Dwarf Horticultural, 458.
    Dwarf Sabre, 459.
    Dwarf Soissons, 460.
    Dwarf White Cranberry, 479.
    Dwarf Yellow, 472.
    Early China, 460.
    Early Mohawk, 464.
    Early Rachel, 461.
    Early Valentine, 462.
    Golden Cranberry, 463.
    Kidney, 478.
    Large White Kidney, 478.
    Long Yellow Six-weeks, 464.
    Mohawk, 464.
    Newington Wonder, 465.
    Pea, 467.
    Pottawottomie, 468.
    Red-eyed China, 460.
    Red Flageolet, 469.
    Red-speckled, 469.
    Refugee, 470.
    Rice, 471.
    Rob-Roy, 472.
    Round American Kidney, 454, 463.
    Round Yellow, 472.
    Round Yellow Six-weeks, 472.
    Royal Dwarf, 478.
    Scarlet Flageolet, 469.
    Scarlet Swiss, 474.
    Six-weeks, 464.
    Solitaire, 473.
    Swiss Crimson, 474.
    Tampico, 475.
    Thousand to One, 470.
    Turtle-soup, 475.
    Valentine, 462.
    Variegated Dwarf Prague, 458.
    Victoria, 476.
    White's Early, 476.
    White Egg, 479.
    White Flageolet, 477.
    White Kidney, 478.
    White Marrow, 479.
    White Marrowfat, 479.
    Yellow-eyed China, 480.
    Yellow Flageolet, 464.
    Yellow Six-weeks, 464.

  Beans, Running or Pole, 481.
    Algerian, 484.
    Asparagus, 494.
    Butter, 484.
    Carolina, 499.
    Carolina Sewee, 499.
    Case-knife, 481.
    Cimeter, 490.
    Corn, 482.
    D' Alger, 484.
    Green Lima, 496.
    Horticultural, 483.
    Indian Chief, 484.
    Lima, 495.
    London Horticultural, 483.
    Long-podded Dolichos, 494.
    Marbled Prague, 483.
    Mottled Cranberry, 485.
    Mottled Lima, 497.
    Mottled Prolific, 485.
    Mottled Sieva, 500.
    Painted Lady-runner, 499.
    Predhomme, 486.
    Princess, 487.
    Red Cranberry, 487.
    Red Orleans, 488.
    Rhode-Island Butter, 489.
    Saba, 499.
    Sabre, 490.
    Scarlet Orleans, 488.
    Scarlet-runner, 497.
    Sieva, 499.
    Small Lima, 499.
    Soissons, 491.
    Wax, 484.
    West-Indian, 499.
    White Cranberry, 491.
    White-runner, 499.
    Wild-goose, 492.
    Yellow Cranberry, 493.

  Bean, English, 503.
    Bog, 505.
    Cluster, 505.
    Dark-red, 509.
    Dutch Long Pod, 505.
    Dwarf Fan, 505.
    Early Dwarf, 505.
    Early Dwarf Crimson-seeded, 505.
    Early Long Pod, 508.
    Early Malta, 506.
    Early Mazagan, 506.
    Evergreen Long Pod, 506.
    Green China, 507.
    Green Genoa, 506.
    Green Julienne, 507.
    Green Long Pod, 506.
    Green Nonpareil, 506.
    Green Windsor, 507.
    Hang-down Long Pod, 508.
    Horse-bean, 503, 507.
    Johnson's Wonderful, 508.
    Kentish Windsor, 511.
    Large Toker, 510.
    Lisbon, 508.
    Long-podded, 508.
    Marshall's Early Dwarf Prolific, 508.
    Mumford, 511.
    Purple, 510.
    Red-blossomed, 509.
    Red Windsor, 509.
    Royal Dwarf Cluster, 509.
    Sandwich, 508.
    Scarlet-blossomed, 509.
    Scarlet Windsor, 509.
    Scotch, 507.
    Sword Long Pod, 508.
    Taylor's Large Windsor, 511.
    Toker, 507, 510.
    Turkey Long Pod, 508.
    Vilmorin's Dwarf Red-seeded, 505.
    Violet, 510.
    Violette, 510.
    White-blossomed Long Pod, 510.
    White Broad Windsor, 511.
    Windsor, 511.
    Wrench's Improved Windsor, 511.

  Bean, French, 450.

  Bean, Kidney, 450.

  Beet, 1.
    Bark-skinned, 6.
    Barrott's New Crimson, 7.
    Bassano, 7.
    Betterave Blanche, 17.
    Betterave Globe Rouge, 16.
    Betterave Jaune Globe, 19.
    Cattell's Dwarf Blood, 8.
    Common Long Blood, 13.
    Cow-horn Mangel Wurzel, 8.
    Cow-horn Scarcity, 8.
    Disette Blanche a Collet Verte, 14.
    Disette d'Allemagne, 10.
    Disette Hative, 8.
    Dwarf Blood, 11.
    Early Blood Turnip-rooted, 9.
    Early Flat Bassano, 7.
    Early Half Long Blood, 11.
    Early Mangel Wurzel, 8.
    Early Scarcity, 8.
    Early Turnip Beet, 9.
    Fine Dwarf Red, 11.
    German Red Mangel Wurzel, 10.
    German Yellow Mangel Wurzel, 11.
    Green Mangel Wurzel, 11.
    Green-top White Sugar, 14.
    Half Long Blood, 11.
    Improved Long Blood, 12.
    Jaune d'Allemagne, 11.
    Jaune Grosse, 15.
    Long Blood, 13.
    Long Red Mangel Wurzel, 13.
    Long Smooth Blood, 12.
    Long White Green-top Mangel Wurzel, 14.
    Long White Mangel Wurzel, 14.
    Long Yellow Mangel Wurzel, 15.
    Marbled Field, 13.
    Oak Bark-skinned, 6.
    Pine-apple Short-top, 15.
    Red Castelnaudary, 16.
    Red Globe Mangel Wurzel, 16.
    Red Mangel Wurzel, 13.
    Rouge de Whyte, 18.
    Rouge Nain, 11.
    Rouge Plate de Bassano, 7.
    Serpent-like, 8.
    Turnip-rooted Bassano, 7.
    White Globe Mangel Wurzel, 17.
    White Silesian, 17.
    White Sugar, 17.
    White Turnip-rooted, 18.
    Whyte's Dark Crimson, 18.
    Wyatt's Dark Crimson, 18.
    Yellow Castelnaudary, 19.
    Yellow Globe Mangel Wurzel, 19.
    Yellow Turnip-rooted, 20.

  Beet, Leaf, 289.

  Beet, Sea, 302.

  Belle-Isle Cress, 403.

  Bene-plant, 561.
    Biformed-leaved, 562.
    Oval-leaved, 562.
    Trifid-leaved, 562.

  Beta cicla, 289.
    " maritima, 302.
    " vulgaris, 1.

  Black Cumin, 429.

  Black Nightshade, 288.

  Black Oyster-plant, 95.

  Black Salsify, 95.

  Blitum Bonus Henricus, 313.

  Boletus edulis, 587.
    " scaber, 587.

  Borage, 412.
    Blue-flowering, 412.
    Red-flowering, 412.
    Variegated, 412.
    White-flowering, 412.

  Borago officinalis, 412.

  Borecole, or Kale, 229.
    Asparagus, 231.
    Branchu du Poitou, 236.
    Buda, 231.
    Cabbaging, 231.
    Canada Dwarf Curled, 233.
    Caulet de Flanders, 233.
    Cesarean, 232.
    Cesarean Cabbage, 232.
    Chou a Faucher, 233.
    Chou a Mille Tetes, 236.
    Chou Cavalier, 232.
    Chou de Lannilis, 234.
    Chou Frise de Naples, 234.
    Chou Frise Prolifere, 232.
    Chou Moellier, 234.
    Chou Palmier, 235.
    Chou vivace de Daubenton, 232.
    Coxcomb, 232.
    Cow-cabbage, 232.
    Curled Brown 235.
    Curled Proliferous, 232.
    Daubenton's Creeping, 232.
    Dwarf Feather, 231.
    Dwarf Curled, 233.
    Dwarf Curlies, 233.
    Dwarf Green Curled, 233.
    Field Cabbage, 233.
    Field Kale, 233.
    Flanders, 233.
    Frise a Pied Court, 233.
    Frise Grand du Nord, 236.
    Frise Panache, 237.
    Frise Rouge Grand, 235.
    Green Marrow-stem, 234.
    Green Scotch, 233.
    Imperial Hearting, 231.
    Lannilis, 234.
    Lannilis Tree-cabbage, 234.
    Manchester, 231.
    Neapolitan, 234.
    Neapolitan Curled, 234.
    Oak-leaved, 231.
    Palm, 235.
    Purple, 235.
    Red, 235.
    Red Marrow-stem, 236.
    Red-stalked, 236.
    Russian, 231.
    Tall Green, 236.
    Tall Green Curled, 236.
    Tall German Greens, 236.
    Tall Purple, 235.
    Tall Scotch, 236.
    Thousand-headed, 236.
    Tree-cabbage, 232.
    Variegated, 237.
    Variegated Canadian, 237.
    Variegated Coxcomb, 237.
    Woburn Perennial, 237.

  Bottle Gourd, 179, 180.

  Brassica campestris, 394.
    " campestris Ruta-baga, 86.
    " caulo rapa, 38.
    " chinensis, 276.
    " eruca, 395.
    " napa, 393.
    " oleracea, 238, 249, 251.
    " oleracea bullata, 277.
    " oleracea sabellica, 229.
    " praecox, 394.
    " rapa, 104, 393.

  Brassicaceous Plants, 229.

  Broccoli, 238.
    Adam's Early White, 247.
    Ambler's Early White, 241.
    Asparagus, 242.
    Autumn White, 243.
    Autumnal Cape, 244.
    Bath White, 244.
    Blue Cape, 246.
    Brimstone, 247.
    Cauliflower, 247.
    Chappell's Large Cream, 241.
    Chappell's New Cream, 241.
    Covent-Garden Market, 247.
    Cream-colored, 246.
    Danish, 241.
    Devonshire White, 243.
    Dilliston's Late White, 245.
    Dwarf Brown Close-headed, 242.
    Dwarf Danish, 245.
    Dwarf Roman, 244.
    Dwarf Swedish, 245.
    Early Branching, 242.
    Early Gem, 245.
    Early Purple, 242.
    Early Purple Cape, 246.
    Early Purple Sprouting, 242.
    Early White, 243, 247.
    Early White Cornish, 246.
    Edinburgh Sulphur, 247.
    Ellertson's Gigantic Late White, 243.
    Ellertson's Mammoth, 243.
    Fine Early White, 243.
    Fine Late Sulphur, 247.
    Frogmore Protecting, 243.
    Gem, 245.
    Gillespie's, 243.
    Gill's Yarmouth White, 247.
    Grange's Cauliflower, 247.
    Grange's Early Cape, 246.
    Grange's Early Cauliflower, 244.
    Grange's Early White, 244.
    Green Cape, 244.
    Green Close-headed Winter, 244.
    Hammond's White Cape, 244.
    Hampton Court, 245.
    Hopwood's Early White, 244.
    Howden's Superb Purple, 246.
    Imperial Early White, 247.
    Invisible, 244.
    Invisible Late White, 245.
    Italian Purple, 245.
    Italian Sprouting, 242.
    Kent's Late White, 245.
    Kidderminster, 245.
    Knight's Protecting, 245.
    Lake's Gem, 245.
    Late Brimstone, 247.
    Late Danish, 241.
    Late Dwarf Purple, 245.
    Late Green, 241, 244.
    Late Willcove, 248.
    Maher's Hardy Cape, 244.
    Maher's New Dwarf, 246.
    Marshall's Early White, 244.
    Miller's Dwarf, 246.
    Miller's Late White, 246.
    Mitchell's Ne Plus Ultra, 246.
    Mitchinson's Early White, 246.
    Mitchinson's Penzance, 246.
    Naples White, 247.
    Neapolitan White, 247.
    North's Early Purple, 242.
    Portsmouth, 246.
    Purple Cape, 246.
    Purple Silesian, 246.
    Siberian, 241, 244.
    Snow's Spring White, 247.
    Snow's Superb White Winter, 247.
    Southampton, 246.
    Sulphur, 247.
    Walcheren, 248.
    Ward's Superb, 248.
    Waterloo Late White, 245.
    White Cape, 248.
    Willcove, 248.

  Brook-lime, 316.
    American, 316.

  Brussels Sprouts, 249.
    Dwarf, 250.
    Giant, 250.
    Tall, 250.

  Buckshorn Plantain, 317.

  Burnet, 318.
    Hairy-leaved, 319.
    Large-seeded, 319.
    Smooth-leaved, 319.

  Cabbage, 251.
    American Drumhead, 258.
    American Green Glazed, 258.
    Atkins's Matchless, 252.
    Barnes's Early, 253.
    Barnes's Early Dwarf, 253.
    Bergen Drumhead, 253.
    Champion of America, 253.
    Chou de Vaugirard, 265.
    Coeur de Boeuf Petit, 262.
    Dwarf Battersea, 254.
    Early Battersea, 254.
    Early Cornish, 254.
    Early Drumhead, 255.
    Early Dutch Drumhead, 256.
    Early Dutch Twist, 255.
    Early Dwarf Battersea, 254.
    Early Hope, 255.
    Early Low Dutch, 256.
    Early Nonpareil, 256.
    Early Sugar-loaf, 256.
    Early Wakefield, 257.
    Early York, 257.
    East Ham, 258.
    Great American, 253.
    Green Glazed, 258.
    Large Bergen, 253.
    Large Flat Dutch, 261.
    Large French Ox-heart, 260.
    Large German Drumhead, 253.
    Large Late Drumhead, 258.
    Large Ox-heart, 260.
    Large York, 259.
    Marblehead Mammoth Drumhead, 260.
    Mason, 260.
    Paignton, 254.
    Penton, 254.
    Pentonville, 254.
    Pointed-head, 265.
    Pomeranian, 261.
    Premium Flat Dutch, 261.
    Quintal, 253.
    Shilling's Queen, 262.
    Small Ox-heart, 262.
    St. Denis, 262.
    Stone-mason, 263.
    Suttons's Dwarf Comb, 264.
    Vannack, 264.
    Vaugirard, 265.
    Waite's New Dwarf, 265.
    Winnigstadt, 265.

  Cabbage: Red Varieties, 266.
    Chou Noiratre d'Utrecht, 267.
    Early Blood-red, 266.
    Early Dwarf-red, 266.
    Large Red Dutch, 266.
    Small Red, 266.
    Superfine Black, 267.
    Utrecht Red, 267.

  Calabash, or Common Gourd, 179.
    Bottle Gourd, 179, 180.
    Courge Massue d'Hercule, 180.
    Courge Poire a Poudre, 181.
    Courge Siphon, 181.
    Hercules Club, 180.
    Powder-horn, 181.
    Siphon, 181.

  Calendula officinalis, 425.

  Camomile, 563.
    Common, 563.
    Double-flowering, 563.
    Campanula rapunculus, 84.

  Capsicum, 616.

  Capucine, 388.
    Dwarf, 390.

  Caraway, 413.

  Cardamine pratensis, 344.

  Cardoon, 162.
    Artichoke-leaved, 166.
    Blood-ribbed, 166.
    Cardon de Tours, 166.
    Common, 165.
    D'Espagne, 165.
    Lance-leaved, 166.
    Large Purple, 166.
    Large Smooth, 165.
    Large Spanish, 165.
    Large Tours Solid, 166.
    Plein Inerme, 165.
    Puvis, 166.
    Puvis de Bourg, 166.
    Red, 166.
    Red-stemmed, 166.
    Smooth Large Solid, 165.
    Tours, 166.

  Carolina Potato, 99.

  Carrot, 20.
    Altrincham, 23.
    Altringham, 23.
    Blanche des Vosges, 29.
    Blood Red, 29.
    Common White, 28.
    Dutch Horn, 25.
    Earliest Short Forcing Horn, 24.
    Early Forcing Horn, 24.
    Early Frame, 24.
    Early Half Long Scarlet, 25.
    Early Horn, 25.
    Early Scarlet Horn, 25.
    Early Short Dutch, 25.
    Early Short Scarlet, 24.
    Flander's Large Pale Scarlet, 26.
    Flander's Pale-red, 26.
    Green-top White, 30.
    Half-long Red, 25.
    James's Scarlet, 28.
    Long Lemon, 27.
    Long Orange, 26.
    Long Red, 28.
    Long Red Altringham, 23.
    Long Red Belgian, 27.
    Long Red Brunswick, 30.
    Long Surrey, 28.
    Long White, 28.
    Long Yellow, 27.
    New Intermediate, 28.
    Purple, 29.
    Short White, 29.
    Studley, 30.
    Transparent White, 31.
    Violette, 29.
    White Belgian, 30.
    White Belgian Horn, 31.
    Yellow Belgian, 27.
    Yellow Green-top Belgian, 27.

  Carthamus tinctorius, 575.

  Carum carui, 413.

  Caterpillar, 319.
    Common, 320.
    Furrowed, 320.
    Grosse, 320.
    Hairy, 321.
    Prickly, 321.
    Rayee, 320.
    Small, 321.
    Velue, 321.
   Villous, 321.

  Cauliflower, 267.
    Early Leyden, 271.
    Early London, 270.
    Early Paris, 270.
    Erfurt's Early, 270.
    Erfurt's Extra Early, 270.
    Fitch's Early London, 270.
    Large Asiatic, 270.
    Legge's Walcheren Broccoli, 271.
    Le Normand, 271.
    London Particular, 270.
    Mitchell's Hardy Early, 271.
    Stadthold, 271.
    Waite's Alma, 271.
    Walcheren, 271.
    Wellington, 272.

  Celeriac, 331.
    Curled-leaved, 332.
    Early Erfurt, 332.
    Frise, 332.
    Rave d'Erfurt, 332.

  Celery, 321.
    a couper, 329.
    Boston-Market, 326.
    Cole's Superb Red, 326.
    Cole's Superb White, 326.
    "Dwarf-curled White, 326.
    Early Dwarf Solid White, 327.
    Fine White Solid, 330.
    Giant Patagonian, 327.
    Giant White, 330.
    Italian, 327.
    Laing's Improved Mammoth Red, 327.
    Large Upright, 327.
    Lion's Paw, 330.
    Manchester Red, 328.
    Manchester Red Giant, 328.
    Nain Frise, 326.
    New Large Purple, 328.
    New Large Red, 328.
    Nutt's Champion White, 328.
    Plein Blanc, 330.
    Plein Blanc Court Hatif, 327.
    Prussian, 330.
    Red Solid, 328.
    Seymour's Superb White Solid, 328.
    Seymour's White Champion, 329.
    Shepherd's Giant Red, 329.
    Shepherd's Red, 329.
    Small Dutch, 329.
    Sutton's White Solid, 329.
    Tours Purple, 328.
    Turc, 330.
    Turkey, 330.
    Turkish Giant Solid, 330.
    Violet de Tours, 328.
    Wall's White, 330.
    White Lion's Paw, 330.
    White Solid, 330.

  Chaerophyllum bulbosum, 31.
    "   cerefolium, 333.

  Champignon, 580.

  Chardon, 162.

  Chardoon, 162.

  Chenille, 319.

  Chenopodium quinoa, 301.

  Chervil, 333.
    Common, 333.
    Curled, 333.
    Double-curled, 333.
    French, 333.
    Frise, 333.
    Frizzled-leaved, 333.
    Parsnip, 31.
    Plain-leaved, 333.
    Sweet-scented, 399.
    Turnip-rooted, 31.

  Chiccory, 334.
    Brunswick Large-rooted, 337.
    Coffee, 336.
    Improved, 335.
    Improved Variegated, 336.
    Large-rooted, 336.
    Magdebourg Large-rooted, 337.
    Sauvage amelioree, 335.
    Spotted, 336.
    Turnip-rooted, 336.
    Variegated, 336.

  Chickling Vetch, 502.
    White-flowered, 503.

  Chick-pea, 501.
    Red, 502.
    White, 502.
    Yellow, 502.

  Chinese Amaranthus, 287.
    "  Cabbage, 275, 276.
    "  Potato, 32.
    "  Spinach, 287.

  Chives, 122.

  Chufa, 34.

  Ciboule, 147.

  Cicer arietinum, 501.

  Cichorium endivia, 347.
    "  intybus, 334.

  Cive, 122.

  Clary, 414.
    Sage, 414.

  Clavaria, 587.

  Climbing Nightshade, 292.

  Cochlearia armoracia, 356.
    "  officinalis, 397.

  Cole-seed, 393.

  Colewort, 272.
    Rosette, 273.

  Collards, 272.

  Collet, 272.

  Coltsfoot, 564.

  Colza, 394.

  Concombre chate, 178.
    des prophetes, 179.

  Convolvulus batatus, 99.

  Corchorus, 338.
    "  olitorius, 338.

  Corette potagere, 338.

  Coriander, 415.

  Coriandrum sativum, 415.

  Corn, 594.

  Corn: Garden varieties, 594.
    Adam's Early White, 594.
    Black Sweet, 594.
    Burr's Improved, 595.
    Burr's Sweet, 595.
    Darling's Early, 596.
    Darling's Early Sweet, 596.
    Early Jefferson, 596.
    Golden Sweet, 597.
    Golden Sugar, 597.
    Old-Colony, 597.
    Parching Corn, white kernel, 598.
    Pop Corn, 598.
    Pop Corn, yellow, 599.
    Red-cob Sweet, 599.
    Rice, Red Kernel, 600.
    " White Kernel, 600.
    " Yellow Kernel, 600.
    Slate Sweet, 594.
    Stowell's Evergreen, 601.
    Stowell's Evergreen Sweet, 601.
    Turkey Wheat, 601.
    Tuscarora, 601.
    Twelve-rowed Sweet, 602.

  Corn: Field varieties, 602.
    Brown, 605.
    Canada Yellow, 602.
    Dutton, 603.
    Early Canada, 602.
    Early Dutton, 603.
    Hill, 604.
    Illinois White, 605.
    Illinois Yellow, 605.
    Improved King Philip, 605.
    King Philip, 605.
    New-England Eight-rowed, 606.
    Old-Colony Premium, 604.
    Parker, 607.
    Smutty White, 604.
    Southern White, 607.
    Southern Yellow, 607.
    Webster, 604.
    Western White, 605.
    Western Yellow, 605.
    White Horse-tooth, 607.
    Whitman, 604.
    Whitman Improved, 604.
    Yellow Horse-tooth, 607.

  Corn Salad, 339.
    Common, 340.
    Italian, 340.
    Large Round-leaved, 340.
    Large Seeded Round, 340.

  Costmary, 416.
    Hoary-leaved, 417.

  Couve Tronchuda, 273.
    " a Cotes Blanches, 275.
    " Dwarf, 274.
    " Fringed, 275.
    " Large-ribbed, 273.
    " White-ribbed, 275.

  Crambe maritima, 283.

  Cress, or Peppergrass, 341.
    Broad-leaved, 342.
    Common, 342.
    Curled, 342.
    Garnishing, 342.
    Golden, 343.
    Normandy Curled, 343.
    Plain-leaved, 342.

  Crithmum maritimum, 396.

  Crummock, 97.

  Cuckoo Flower, 344.
    Double Purple Flowering, 344.
    Double White Flowering, 344.
    Purple, 344.
    White, 344.

  Cucumber, 170.
    Carter's Superior, 174.
    Conqueror of the West, 174.
    Cuthill's Black Spine, 174.
    Doctor, 174.
    Early Cluster, 172.
    Early Green Cluster, 172.
    Early Frame, 173.
    Early Long Green Prickly, 176.
    Early Russian, 173.
    Early Short Green Prickly, 177.
    Early White-spined, 177.
    Eggleston's Conqueror, 174.
    Egyptian, 178.
    Extra Long Green Turkey, 176.
    Flanigan's Prize, 174.
    Globe, 179.
    Hairy, 178.
    Hunter's Prolific, 174.
    Improved Sion House, 174.
    Irishman, 175.
    Jamaica, 199.
    London Long Green, 173.
    Long Green Prickly, 176.
    Long Green Turkey, 176.
    Long Prickly, 176.
    Lord Kenyon's Favorite, 175.
    Manchester Prize, 175.
    Nepal, 175.
    New-York Market, 177.
    Norman Stitchworth-park Hero, 175.
    Old Sion House, 175.
    Prize-fighter, 175.
    Rifleman, 175.
    Ringleader, 175.
    Roman Emperor, 175.
    Round-leaved Egyptian, 178.
    Serpent, 206.
    Short Green, 173.
    Short Green Prickly, 177.
    Short Prickly, 177.
    Snake, 206.
    Southgate, 175.
    Sponge, 198.
    Underwood's Short Prickly, 177.
    Victory of Bath, 175.
    West-Indian, 199.
    White Spanish, 177.
    White-spined, 177.

  Cucumis acutangulus, 198.
    "  anguria, 199.
    "  chate, 178.
    "  flexuosus, 206.
    "  melo, 183.
    "  prophetarum, 179.
    "  sativus, 170.

  Cucurbita aurantiaca, 212.
    "  citrullus, 192.
    "  lagenaria, 179.
    "  maxima, 219.
    "  ovifera, 210.
    "  piliformis, 222.
    "  pepo, 200.
    "  verrucosa, 208.

  Cucurbitaceous Plants, 170.

  Cultivated Lathyrus, 502.

  Cumin, 417.
    "  cyminum, 417.

  Cynara cardunculus, 162.

  Cynarus scolymus, 149.

  Cyperus esculentus, 34.


  Dandelion, 345.

  Daucus carota, 20.

  Deppe's Oxalis, 43.

  Dill, 418.

  Dioscorea batatas, 32.

  Dolichos sesquipedalis, 494.


  Earth Almond, 34.

  Earth Nut, 556.

  Eatable-podded Pease, 552.

  Eatable-rooted Pea, 103.

  Edible Cyperus, 34.

  Egg-plant, 607.
    American Large Purple, 609.
    Chinese Long White, 609.
    Guadaloupe Striped, 610.
    Large Round Purple, 611.
    Long Purple, 610.
    New-York Improved, 610.
    Round Purple, 611.
    Scarlet-fruited, 611.
    White, 611.

  Egyptian Cucumber, 178.

  Egyptian Pea, 501.

  Elecampane, 565.

  Endive, 347.

  Endives, Batavian, 349.
    Broad-leaved, 349.
    Common Yellow, 349.
    Curled, 350.
    Large, 350.
    Lettuce-leaved, 351.
    Scarolle Blonde, 351.
    Scarolle Courte, 351.
    Scarolle Grande, 350.
    Small, 351.
    White, 351.

  Endives, Curled, 351.
    Chicoree Frisee de Ruffec, 354.
    " Mousse, 355.
    Dutch Green Curled, 352.
    Early Fine Curled Rouen, 354.
    Ever-blanched, 355.
    Green Curled, 352.
    Green Curled Summer, 352.
    Italian Green Curled, 353.
    Large Green Curled, 353.
    Long Italian Green, 353.
    Picpus Fine Curled, 354.
    Ruffec Curled, 354.
    Small Green Curled, 352.
    Staghorn, 354.
    Triple-curled Moss, 355.
    White Curled, 355.
    Winter Moss, 356.

  English Bean, 503.

  English Turnip, 104.

  Ervum lens, 512.
    " monanthos, 513.

  Esculent Roots, 1.

  Evening Primrose, 35.


  Faber vulgaris arvensis, 507.

  Fedia cornucopiae, 401.

  Fennel, 419.
    Bitter, 420.
    Common, 420.
    Dark Green-leaved, 420.
    Florence, 420.
    Italian, 420.
    Malta, 421.
    Sweet, 421.
    Sweet Azorian, 420.

  Fetticus, 339.

  Finochio, 420.

  Foeniculum dulce, 420.
    "  officinale, 421.
    "  vulgare, 420.

  Four Spices, 429.

  French Bean, 450.

  French Spinach, 296.

  French Turnip, 86.


  Garden Bean, American, 450.

  Garden Bean, English, 503.

  Garden Patience, 299.

  Garden Picridium, 390.

  Garden Rocket, 395.

  Garget, 168.

  Garlic, 123.
    Common, 123.
    Early Pink, 124.
    Early Rose, 124.
    Great-headed, 124.

  German Rampion, 35.

  Gherkin, 199.

  Globe Cucumber, 179.

  Glycyrrhiza glabra, 567.

  Golden Samphire, 397.

  Good King Henry, 313.

  Goosefoot, 301, 313.

  Gourd, 179.

  Green Mint, 444.

  Ground Bean, 556.

  Ground Cherry, 592.
    " Purple, 593.
    " Tall, 593.

  Ground Nut, 556.

  Gumbo, 614.


  Hairy Cucumber, 178.

  Haricot, 450.

  Hedeoma pulegioides, 569.

  Helianthus annuus, 632.
    "  Indicus, 632.
    "  tuberosus, 36.

  Herb Patience, 299.

  Hibiscus esculentus, 614.

  Hoarhound, 566.

  Hoosung, 168.

  Hop, 167.

  Horse-bean, 503, 507.

  Horse-radish, 356.

  Humulus lupulus, 167.

  Hyssop, 566.
    Blue-flowering, 566.
    Common, 566.
    Red-flowering, 567.
    White-flowering, 567.

  Hyssopus officinalis, 566.


  Indian Cress, 388.

  Inula crithmifolia, 397.
    " helenium, 565.

  Ipomoea batatas, 99.


  Jamaica Cucumber, 199.

  Japanese Yam, 32.

  Jerusalem Artichoke, 36.
    Common White, 37.
    Purple-skinned, 38.
    Red-skinned, 38.
    Yellow-skinned, 38.


  Kale (see   "Borecole  "), 229.

  Kidney-bean, 450.

  Kohl Rabi, 38.
    Artichoke-leaved, 40.
    Cut-leaved, 40.
    Early Dwarf White, 40.
    Early Purple Vienna, 40.
    Early White Vienna, 40.
    Green, 41.
    Purple, 41.
    White, 41.


  Lactuca intybacea, 382.
    " perennis, 383.
    " quercina, 383.
    " sativa, 357.

  Lamb's Lettuce, 339.

  Large-ribbed Borecole, 273.

  Large Stinging Nettle, 293.

  Lathyrus sativus, 502.
    " tuberosus, 103.

  Lavender, 422.
    Blue-flowering, 423.
    Broad-leaved, 423.
    Common, 423.
    Narrow-leaved Blue-flowering, 423.
    Narrow-leaved White-flowering, 423.
    Spike, 423.

  Lavendula spica, 422.

  Leaf-beet, or Swiss Chard, 289.
    a Carde Rouge, 291.
    Carde Jaune, 291.
    Common, 291.
    Curled, 291.
    Great White, 292.
    Green, 291.
    Large-ribbed Curled, 291.
    Large-ribbed Scarlet Brazilian, 291.
    Large-ribbed Silver, 292.
    Large-ribbed Yellow Brazilian, 291.
    Red-stalked, 291.
    Sea-kale, 292.
    Silver-leaf, 292.
    Swiss Chard, 292.
    Yellow-stalked, 291.

  Leek, 125.
    Broad Flag, 127.
    Common Flag, 126.
    Edinburgh Improved, 127.
    English Flag, 127.
    Gros Court, 127.
    Gros de Rouen, 127.
    Jaune du Poitou, 128.
    Large Flag, 127.
    Large Rouen, 127.
    Little Montagne, 127.
    London Flag, 127.
    Long Flag, 126.
    Musselburgh, 127.
    Proliferous, 128.
    Scotch Flag, 127.
    Small Early Netherland, 128.
    Small Summer Brabant, 128.
    Yellow Poitou, 128.

  Leak-leaved Salsify, 92.

  Leguminous Plants, 450.

  Lentil, 512.
    Canada, 558.
    Common, 512.
    Green, 513.
    Large, 513.
    One-flowered, 513.
    Petite, 514.
    Red, 514.
    Small, 514.
    Verte du Puy, 513.
    Yellow, 512.
    of Spain, 502.

  Leontodon taraxacum, 345.

  Lepidium sativum, 341.

  Lettuce, 357.

  Lettuces, Cabbage, 361.
    American Brown Dutch, 375.
    Black-seeded Gotte, 363.
    Blond Versailles, 373.
    Boston Curled, 364.
    Brown, 370.
    Brown Batavian, 361.
    Brown Dutch, Black-seeded, 361.
    Brown Silesian, 361.
    Brown Winter, 362.
    Button, 372.
    Capuchin, 372.
    Curled, 364.
    De Malte, 369.
    Drumhead, 369, 374.
    Early Cape, 362.
    Early Dwarf Dutch, 365.
    Early Frame, 365.
    Early Simpson, 363.
    Early White Spring, 363.
    Endive-leaved, 364.
    English Endive-like Curled-leaved, 364.
    Gotte lente a Monter, 371.
    Green Ball, 372.
    Green Curled, 364.
    Green Dutch, 365.
    Green Winter, 365.
    Grosse Brune Paresseuse, 367.
    Hammersmith Hardy, 365.
    Hardy Green Hammersmith, 365.
    Hardy Hammersmith, 372.
    Hardy Winter Cabbage, 365.
    Hative de Simpson, 363.
    Ice, 366, 369.
    Ice Cos, 369.
    Imperial Head, 366.
    India, 367.
    Laitue Chicoree, 364.
    Large Brown Cabbage, 367.
    Large Brown Winter, 362.
    Large Drumhead, 374.
    Large Golden Summer, 375.
    Large Gray, 367.
    Large India, 367.
    Large Red, 368.
    Large Winter, 368.
    Large White, 371.
    Madeira, 368.
    Malta, 369.
    Mammoth, 367.
    Marseilles, 361.
    Mogul, 367.
    Morine, 365.
    Naples, 369.
    Neapolitan, 369.
    Palatine, 370.
    Passion, 368.
    Red-bordered, 373.
    Rouge Charteuse, 368.
    Royal, 371.
    Royal Cape, 362.
    Sanguine a Graine Blanche, 370.
    Sanguine a Graine Noire, 370.
    Spanish, 374.
    Spotted, Black-seeded, 370.
    Spotted, White-seeded, 370.
    Stone Tennis-ball, 371.
    Sugar, 371, 373.
    Summer Blond, 371.
    Summer Cabbage, 371.
    Summer Cape, 362.
    Swedish, 373.
    Tennis-ball, 372.
    Turkey Cabbage, 366, 373.
    Union, 366.
    Versailles, 373.
    Victoria, 373.
    White, 369.
    White Batavian, 374.
    White Dutch, 375.
    White Gotte, Black-seeded, 374.
    White Gotte, White-seeded, 374.
    White Silesian, 374.
    White Stone Cabbage, 375.
    White Tennis-ball, 374.
    Yellow-seeded Brown Dutch, 375.

  Lettuces, Cos, 376.
    Ady's Fine Large, 378.
    a Feuille de Chene, 380.
    Aleppo, 380.
    Alphange, Black-seeded, 376.
    Alphange, White-seeded, 376.
    Artichoke-leaved, 377.
    Bath, 378.
    Bath Green, 377.
    Bearfield, 378.
    Bloody, 380.
    Brown, 378.
    Endive-leaved, 382.
    Florence, Black-seeded, 376.
    Florence, White-seeded, 376.
    Gray Paris, 378.
    Green Paris, 378.
    Green Winter, 379.
    Kensington, 378.
    London White, 382.
    Magnum Bonum, 376.
    Monstrous Brown, 379.
    Oak-leaved, 380, 383.
    Panachee a Graine Noire, 380.
    Perennial, 383.
    Red-spotted, 380.
    Red Winter, 380.
    Spinach Lettuce, 383.
    Spotted, Black-seeded, 380.
    Spotted, White-seeded, 381.
    Sutton's Berkshire Brown, 378.
    Sutton's Superb Green, 378.
    Sutton's Superb White, 382.
    Two-headed, 379.
    Waite's White, 381.
    Wellington, 378.
    White Brunoy, Black-seeded, 381.
    White Brunoy, White-seeded, 381.
    White Paris, 382.
    White-seeded Brown, 378.
    Wood's Improved Bath, 378.

  Licorice, 567.

  Ligusticum levisticum, 424.

  Lima Bean, 495.
    Green, 496.

  Long-podded Dolichos, 494.

  Lotus tetragonolobus, 559.

  Lovage, 424.

  Love-apple, 639.

  Lupine, 514.
    White, 515.
    Yellow, 515.

  Lupinus albus, 515.
    "  luteus, 515.


  Mache, 339.

  Madras Radish, 384.

  Malabar Nightshade, 292.
    Baselle Blanche, 292.
    Baselle Rouge, 293.
    Large-leaved Chinese, 292.
    Red, 293.
    Tres Large Feuille de Chine, 292.
    White, 292.

  Malabar Spinach, 292.

  Mallow, Curled-leaved, 384.

  Malva crispa, 384.

  Marigold, 425.
    Childing, 426.
    Common Orange-flowered, 426.
    Double Lemon-flowering, 426.
    Double Orange-flowering, 426.
    Lemon-flowered, 426.
    Pot, 425.
    Proliferous, 426.

  Marjoram, 427.
    Common, 427.
    Knotted, 427.
    Pot, 428.
    Sweet, 427.
    Winter Sweet, 429.

  Marsh Speedwell, 316.

  Martynia, 612.
    "  proboscidea, 612.

  Marrubium vulgare, 566.

  Maw, 569.

  Medicago orbicularis, 398.

  Medicinal Plants, 561.

  Melissa officinalis, 409.

  Melon, 181.

  Melon, Musk, 183.
    Beechwood, 184.
    Black-rock Cantaloupe, 184.
    Christiana, 184.
    Citron, 185.
    Common Musk, 186.
    Early Cantaloupe, 185.
    Green Citron, 185.
    Green-fleshed Citron, 185.
    Hardy Ridge, 186.
    Large-ribbed Netted Musk, 186.
    Munroe's Green Flesh, 186.
    Nutmeg, 187.
    Orange Cantaloupe, 187.
    Pine-apple, 187.
    Prescott's Cantaloupe, 187.
    Skillman's Fine-netted, 188.
    Victory of Bath, 188.

  Melon, Persian varieties, 188.
    Dampsha, 189.
    Daree, 189.
    Geree, 189.
    Germek, 190.
    Green Hoosainee, 190.
    Green Valencia, 190.
    Ispahan, 190.
    Large Germek, 190.
    Melon of Keiseng, 191.
    Melon of Seen, 191.
    Small Germek, 191.
    Striped Hoosainee, 192.
    Sweet Ispahan, 190.

  Melon, Water, 192.
    Apple-seeded, 193.
    Black Spanish, 193.
    Bradford, 193.
    California Pie, 197.
    Carolina, 194.
    Citron, 194.
    Clarendon, 194.
    Dark-speckled, 194.
    Ice-cream, 195.
    Imperial, 195.
    Mountain Sprout, 195.
    Mountain Sweet, 196.
    Odell's Large White, 196.
    Orange, 197.
    Pie, 197.
    Ravenscroft, 198.
    Spanish, 193.
    Souter, 198.

  Mentha piperita, 435.
    " viridis, 444.

  Miscellaneous Vegetables, 592.

  Morchella esculenta, 588.

  Morel, 588.

  Morelle, 288.

  Mountain Spinach, 296.

  Murciana, 274.

  Mushroom, 580.
    Blewits, 586.
    Blue Hats, 586.
    Common, 580.
    Di Genoa, 587.
    Fairy-ring, 587.
    St. George's, 585.
    Sweet, 585.

  Musk-melon, 183.

  Mustard, 385.
    a Feuille de Chou, 386.
    Black, 385.
    Brown, 385.
    Cabbage-leaved, 386.
    Chinese, 386.
    Curled, 387.
    Cut-leaved, 387.
    Lacinee, 387.
    Pekin, 386.
    Red, 385.
    White, 387.


  Napolean Pea, or Vetch, 558.

  Nasturtium, 388.
    Dark-flowering, 390.
    Small, 390.
    Tall, 389.
    Variegated, 390.

  Nasturtium armoracia, 356.
    "  officinale, 401.

  Nettle, 293.

  New-Zealand Spinach, 295.

  Nicotiana, 633.
    "  tabacum, 634.
    "  rustica, 637.

  Nigella sativa, 429.

  Nut Rush, 34.


  Oca, 41.
    Blanca, 42.
    Colorado, 42.

  Ocra, 614.

  Ocymum basilicum, 410.
    "  minimum, 411.

  OEnothera biennis, 35.

  Oily Grain, 561.

  Oil Radish, 613.

  Okra, 614.
    Buist's Dwarf, 615.
    Dwarf, 615.
    Giant, 616.
    Pendent-podded, 616.
    Tall, 616.
    White-podded, 616.

  Oleraceous Plants, 406.

  Onion, 129.
    Blanc Hatif, 133.
    Blanc Hatif de Nocera, 132.
    Blood-red, 130.
    Brown Deptford, 132.
    Brown Portugal, 131.
    Brown Spanish, 131.
    Brunswick Deep Blood-red, 136.
    Cambrai, 131.
    Cambridge, 141.
    Corne de Boeuf, 134.
    Cow-horn, 134.
    Danvers, 131.
    Danvers Yellow, 131.
    De Belle Garde, 135.
    De James, 134.
    De Madere Plat, 140.
    De Madere Rond, 135.
    Deptford, 132.
    Double Tige, 140.
    Dutch, 139.
    Dutch Blood-red, 130.
    Early Lisbon, 141.
    Early Red Wethersfield, 133.
    Early Silver Nocera, 132.
    Early Silver-skin, 133.
    Early Small Silver Nocera, 132.
    Egyptian, 139.
    Essex, 139.
    Flanders, 139.
    Flat Madeira, 140.
    French Blood-red, 130.
    Fusiform, 134.
    Intermediate Red Wethersfield, 134.
    James's Keeping, 134.
    James's Long-keeping, 134.
    Jaune des Vertus, 136.
    Large Globe Tripoli, 135.
    Large Red, 134.
    Lisbon, 141.
    Madeira, 135.
    New Deep Blood-red, 136.
    Oporto, 131.
    Pale-red, 136.
    Paris Straw-colored, 136.
    Pear-shaped, 136.
    Potato, 136.
    Romain, 135.
    Rouge Pale, de Niort, 136.
    Rouge tres Fonce de Brunswick, 136.
    Silver-skin, 137.
    Silver-skin of New England, 142.
    Soufre d'Espagne. 141.
    Spanish, 141.
    Strasburg, 139.
    St. Thomas, 130.
    Top, 139.
    Tree, 139.
    Tripoli, 140.
    Two-bladed, 140.
    Underground, 136.
    Wethersfield Large Red, 134.
    White Florence, 141.
    White Globe, 140.
    White Lisbon, 141.
    White Nocera, 132.
    White Portugal, 137--141.
    White Reading, 141.
    White Spanish, 141.
    Yellow, 142.
    Yellow Globe, 141.
    Yellow Strasburg, 139.

  Oosung, 168.

  Orach, 296.
    Dark-green, 297.
    Dark-purple, 298.
    Dark-red, 298.
    Deep-green, 297.
    Green, 297.
    Lurid, 298.
    Pale-green, 299.
    Pale-red, 298.
    Purple, 298.
    Purple-bordered Green, 299.
    Red, 298.
    Red-stalked Green, 299.
    Red-stalked White, 299.
    White, 299.
    White French Spinach, 299.
    Yellow, 299.

  Origanum heracleoticum, 429.
    "      marjorana, 427.
    "      onites, 428.
    "      vulgare, 427.

  Osmorrhiza odorata, 399.

  Oxalis, 41.
    "     acetocella, 404.
    "     crenata, 41.
    "     Deppei, 43.
    "     Deppe's, 43.
    "     Red Tuberous-rooted, 42.
    "     Tuberous-rooted, 41.
    "     White-rooted, 42.

  Oyster-plant, 92.


  Pak-Choei, 275.

  Palmate-leaved Rhubarb, 573.

  Papangaye, 198.

  Papanjay, 198.

  Papaver somniferum, 569.

  Parsley, 430.
    Celery, 434.
    Celery-leaved, 434.
    Common, 433.
    Curled, 432.
    Dwarf Curled, 432.
    Hamburg, 433.
    Large-rooted, 433.
    Mitchell's Matchless Winter, 432.
    Myatt's Extra Fine Curled, 432.
    Myatt's Garnishing, 432.
    Myatt's Triple-curled, 432.
    Naples, 434.
    Neapolitan, 434.
    Plain, 433.
    Rendle's Treble Garnishing, 433.
    Sutton's Dwarf Curled, 432.
    Turnip-rooted, 433.
    Usher's Dwarf Curled, 432.
    Windsor Curled, 432.

  Parsley-pert, 396.

  Parsnip, 45.
    Common, 49.
    Dutch, 49.
    Early Short Horn, 49.
    Guernsey, 49.
    Hollow-crowned, 50.
    Hollow-crowned Guernsey, 50.
    Hollow-headed, 50.
    Long Jersey, 50.
    Long Smooth Dutch, 49.
    Panais de Siam, 50.
    Panais Long, 49.
    Panais Rond, 50.
    Siam, 50.
    Swelling, 49.
    Turnip-rooted, 50.
    Yellow, 50.

  Parsnip Chervil, 31.

  Pastinaca sativa, 45.

  Patience, 299.

  Patience Dock, 299.

  Pea, 516.
    Auvergne, 520.
    Batt's Wonder, 521.
    Beck's Eclipse, 524.
    Beck's Gem, 545, 549.
    Beck's Morning-star, 551.
    Beck's Prize-taker, 521.
    Bedman's Imperial, 521.
    Bellamy's Early Green Marrow, 522.
    Bishop's Early Dwarf, 522.
    Bishop's New Long-podded, 523.
    Black-eyed Marrow, 523.
    Blue Cimeter, 524.
    Blue Fan, 526.
    Blue Imperial, 524.
    Blue Prussian, 525.
    Blue Sabre, 524.
    Blue Spanish Dwarf, 526.
    British Queen, 526.
    Brompton Hotspur, 529.
    Burbridge's Eclipse, 527.
    Bush, 549.
    Carter's Earliest, 533.
    Carter's Eclipse, 528.
    Carter's Victoria, 528.
    Cedo Nulli, 535.
    Champion of England, 536.
    Champion of Paris, 530.
    Charlton, 528.
    Charlton Hotspur, 529.
    Climax, 530.
    Dantzic, 531.
    Dickson's Early Favorite, 531.
    Dickson's Favorite, 531.
    Dillistone's Early, 532.
    Dunnett's First Early, 533.
    Dwarf Blue Imperial, 524.
    Dwarf Blue Prussian, 525.
    Dwarf Fan, 547.
    Dwarf Marrow, 533.
    Dwarf Marrowfat, 533.
    Dwarf Prolific, 546.
    Dwarf Sabre, 524.
    Dwarf White Marrow, 533.
    Early Charlton, 528.
    Early Dan O'Rourke, 533.
    Early Double-blossomed Frame, 534.
    Early Dwarf Frame, 534.
    Early Dwarf Marrowfat, 533.
    Early Emperor, 551.
    Early Frame, 534.
    Early Golden Hotspur, 535.
    Early Hotspur, 535.
    Early Kent, 544.
    Early May, 544.
    Early Nicol's Hotspur, 529.
    Early Prince Albert, 544.
    Early Railway, 551.
    Early Ringwood, 545.
    Early Spanish Dwarf, 547.
    Early Surprise, 537.
    Early Warwick, 535.
    Early Washington, 535.
    Early Wonder, 551.
    Erin's Queen, 526.
    Essex Champion, 534.
    Essex Hotspur, 529.
    Eugenie, 535.
    Excelsior, 530.
    Fairbeard's Champion of England, 536.
    Fairbeard's Nonpareil, 537.
    Fairbeard's Surprise, 537.
    Flack's Imperial, 538.
    Flack's New Large Victoria, 538.
    Flack's Victoria, 538.
    Flack's Victory, 538.
    Flander's Hotspur, 529.
    Flanagan's Early, 545.
    General Wyndham, 539.
    Golden Hotspur, 529, 535.
    Green Prussian, 525.
    Groom's Superb, 526.
    Hair's Defiance, 526.
    Hair's Dwarf Mammoth, 539.
    Harrison's Glory, 539.
    Harrison's Perfection, 540.
    Hill's Early, 529.
    Hovey's Extra Early, 529.
    Jay's Conqueror, 544.
    King of the Marrows, 540.
    Knight's Dwarf Blue Marrow, 541.
    Knight's Dwarf Green Marrow, 541.
    Knight's Dwarf Green Wrinkled Marrow, 541.
    Knight's Dwarf White Marrow, 541.
    Knight's Dwarf White Wrinkled Marrow, 541.
    Knight's Tall Blue Marrow, 541.
    Knight's Tall Green Marrow, 542.
    Knight's Tall White Marrow, 542.
    Knight's Tall White Wrinkled Marrow, 542.
    Landreth's Extra Early, 529.
    Large Carolina, 548.
    Lincoln Green, 546.
    Matchless Marrow, 542.
    Master's Hotspur, 529.
    Milford Marrow, 543.
    Missouri Marrow, 543.
    Missouri Marrowfat, 543.
    Napoleon, 530.
    Ne Plus Ultra, 544.
    New Sabre, 524.
    Noble's Early Green Marrow, 544.
    Nonpareil, 551.
    Paradise Marrow, 530.
    Pois Nain Hatif Extra, 549.
    Poor Man's Profit, 546.
    Prince Albert, 544.
    Prize-taker, 521.
    Prussian Blue, 525.
    Queen of the Dwarfs, 545.
    Race-horse, 535.
    Reading Hotspur, 529, 535.
    Ringwood Marrow, 545.
    Rising-sun, 521.
    Royal Dwarf, 546.
    Sabre, 524.
    Sangster's Number One, 533.
    Sebastopol, 547.
    Shillings Grotto, 547.
    Single-blossomed Frame, 534.
    Spanish Dwarf, 547.
    Strawberry, 547.
    Stuart's Paradise, 530.
    Stubb's Dwarf, 527.
    Superfine Early, 535.
    Surprise, 537.
    Tall Marrowfat, 548.
    Tall White Mammoth, 526.
    Tall White Marrow, 548.
    Taylor's Early, 549.
    Thurstan's Reliance, 549.
    Tom Thumb, 549.
    Veitch's Perfection, 550.
    Victoria Marrow, 550.
    Waite's Dan O'Rourke, 533.
    Warner's Early Conqueror, 551.
    Warner's Early Emperor, 551.
    White Cimeter, 520.
    White Prussian, 546.
    White Sabre, 520.
    Woodford's Marrow, 551.

  Pease, eatable-podded or string, 552.
    Australian, 554.
    Blue-podded, 554.
    Botany-Bay, 554.
    Broadsword, 554.
    Chocolate, 555.
    Common Dwarf, 552.
    Dwarf Crooked-podded, 552.
    Early Dwarf de Grace, 553.
    Early Dwarf Dutch, 553.
    Giant, 553.
    Large Crooked, 554.
    Late Dwarf, 555.
    Purple-podded, 554.
    Red-flowered, 555.
    Six-inch Pod, 554.
    Tamarind, 555.
    White-podded, 555.
    Yellow-podded, 556.

  Pea, Tuberous-rooted, 103.

  Pea-nut, 556.
    African, 558.
    Carolina, 558.
    Tennessee, 558.
    Wilmington, 558.

  Pennyroyal, 569.

  Pepper, 616.
    Bell, 617.
    Bird, 618.
    Black-podded, 623.
    Blue-podded, 623.
    Bull-nose, 617.
    Cayenne, 619.
    Cerise Grosse, 624.
    Cherry, 620.
    Cherry Yellow-fruited, 621.
    Chili, 622.
    Cydoniforme, 623.
    Large Bell, 617.
    Large Red Cherry, 624.
    Long Red, 622.
    Long Yellow, 622.
    Monstreux, 625.
    Purple-podded, 623.
    Quince, 623.
    Rond, 624.
    Round, 624.
    Squash, 624.
    Sweet Mountain, 625.
    Sweet Spanish, 625.
    Tomato-shaped, 624.
    Yellow Squash, 626.
    Yellow Tomato-formed, 626.

  Peppergrass, 341.

  Peppermint, 435.

  Perennial Phytolacca, 168.

  Perennial Spinach, 313.

  Persian Melons, 188.

  Pe-Tsai, 276.

  Physalis edulis, 592.

     "     pubescens, 593.

  Phaseolus lunatus, 495, 499.

      "     multiflorus, 497.

      "     vulgaris, 450.

  Phytolacca decandra, 168.

      "      esculenta, 169.

  Picridium, 390.

      "      vulgare, 390.

  Pie-plant, 626.

  Pigeon Berry, 168.

  Pimpinella anisum, 407.

  Pindar Nut, 556.

  Pisum sativum, 516.

    "   macrocarpum, 552.

  Plantago coronopus, 317.

  Poke, 168.

  Poppy, 569.
    Gray, 571.
    Oil, 571.
    Opium, 571.
    White, 571.

  Portugal Borecole, 273.

  Portugal Cabbage, 273.

  Portulaca, 391.

      "      oleracea, 392.

      "      oleracea var. aurea, 392.

      "      sativa, 392.

  Potato, 51.
    Abington Blue, 72.
    Ash-leaved Early, 57.
    Ash-leaved Kidney, 58.
    Biscuit, 58.
    Black Chenango, 58.
    Black Mercer, 58.
    Buckeye, 59.
    Calico, 59.
    California Red, 59.
    Carter, 59.
    Chenango, 72.
    Churchill, 60.
    Cow-horn, 69.
    Cristy, 60.
    Cups, 60.
    Danvers Red, 60.
    Danvers Seedling, 60.
    Davis's Seedling, 61.
    Dover, 73.
    Dykeman, 61.
    Early Blue, 62.
    Early Cockney, 62.
    Early Manly, 62.
    Flour-ball, 63.
    Fluke Kidney, 63.
    Forty-fold, 63, 71.
    Garnet Chili, 64.
    Gillyflower, 64.
    Green-top, 64.
    Hill's Early, 64.
    Irish Cups, 65.
    Jackson White, 65.
    Jenny Lind, 66.
    Lady's Finger, 66.
    Laplander, 71.
    Lapstone Kidney, 67.
    Long Red, 67.
    Mercer, of New York, 72.
    Mexican, 67.
    Nichol's Early, 67.
    Nova-Scotia Blue, 68.
    Old Kidney, 68.
    Peach-blow, 68.
    Pink-eyed, 68.
    Poggy, 69.
    Porgee, 69.
    Quarry, 69.
    Rhode-Island Seedling, 66.
    Riley, 73.
    Rohan, 70.
    Ruffort Kidney, 66.
    Shaw's Early, 70.
    State of Maine, 70.
    St. Helena, 71.
    Taylor's Forty-fold, 71.
    Tolon, 71.
    Vermont White, 72.
    Veto, 72.
    White Chenango, 72.
    White Cups, 73.
    White-Mountain, 73.
    Worcester Seedling, 73.

  Poterium sanguisorba, 318.

  Pot Marigold, 425.

  Prickly-fruited Gherkin, 199.

  Pumpkin, 200.
    Canada, 201.
    Cheese, 201.
    Common Yellow Field, 202.
    Connecticut Field, 203.
    Hard-shell, 204.
    Long Yellow Field, 203.
    Nantucket, 204.
    Nigger-head, 204.
    Small Sugar, 205.
    Striped Field, 204.
    Sugar, 205.
    Vermont, 201.

  Purple Goat's Beard, 92.

  Purslain, 391.
    Common, 392.
    Dore, 392.
    Golden, 392.
    Green, 392.
    Large-leaved Golden, 392.
    Vert, 392.


  Quatre Epices, 429.

  Quinoa, 301.
    Black-seeded, 301.
    Red-seeded, 302.
    White, 301.
    White-seeded, 301.


  Radish, 74.

  Radishes, Spring or Summer, 76.
    Crimson Turnip-rooted, 80.
    Early Black, 76.
    Early Frame, 79.
    Early Long Purple, 77.
    Early Purple Turnip-rooted, 77.
    Early Scarlet Short-top, 79.
    Early Scarlet Turnip-rooted, 77.
    Early White Turnip-rooted, 77.
    Gray Olive-shaped, 77.
    Gray Summer, 78.
    Gray Turnip-rooted, 78.
    Long Purple, 78.
    Long Salmon, 78.
    Long Scarlet, 79.
    Long Scarlet Salmon, 78.
    Long White, 81.
    Long White Purple-top, 81.
    Naples, 81.
    New-London Particular, 81.
    Noir Hatif, 76.
    Oblong Brown, 82.
    Oblong Rose-colored, 79.
    Olive-shaped Scarlet, 79.
    Purple Turnip-rooted, 80.
    Rave Violette Hative, 77.
    Rond Blanc Hatif, 77.
    Rond Rose Hatif, 77.
    Round Brown, 78.
    Scarlet Turnip-rooted, 80.
    Small Early Yellow Turnip-rooted, 80.
    Tortillee du Mans, 80.
    White Crooked, 80.
    White Italian, 81.
    White Transparent, 81.
    White Turnip-rooted, 81.
    Wood's Frame, 81.
    Yellow Summer, 81.
    Yellow Turnip-rooted, 81.

  Radishes, Autumn and Winter, 82.
    Autumn White, 84.
    Black Spanish, 82.
    Blanc d'Augsbourg, 84.
    Large Purple Winter, 83.
    Long Black Winter, 83.
    Long-leaved White Chinese, 83.
    Purple Chinese, 84.
    Purple Spanish, 83.
    Rose-colored Chinese, 84.
    Scarlet Chinese Winter, 84.
    Winter White Spanish, 84.

  Rampion, 84.

  Rape, 393.
    Annual, 394.
    Annual Rough-leaved Summer, 393.
    Cole-seed, 393.
    Colza, 394.
    Common, 393.
    Early, 394.
    German, 394.
    Smooth-leaved Summer, 394.
    Summer, 394.
    Turnip, 393.
    Wild Navew, 394.
    Winter, 393.

  Raphanus, 384.

      "     sativus, 74, 613.

  Red Beet, 1.

  Red Birdsfoot Trefoil, 559.

  Rheum, 626.
    Australe, 631.
    Emodi, 631.

  Rhubarb, 626.
    Buck's, 630.
    Cahoon, 629.
    Downing's Colossal, 629.
    Early Prince Imperial, 629.
    Early Red Tobolsk, 632.
    Elford, 630.
    Hawkes's Champagne, 630.
    Linnaeus, 630.
    Mitchell's Royal Albert, 630.
    Myatt's Linnaeus, 630.
    Myatt's Victoria, 631.
    Nepal, 631.
    Tobolsk, 632.
    Victoria, 631.

  Rocambole, 143.

  Rocket, 395.
    Garden, 395.

  Roquette, 395.

  Rosmarinus officinalis, 436.

  Rosemary, 436.
    Common, 437.
    Green-leaved, 437.
    Gold-striped, 437.
    Narrow-leaved, 438.
    Silver-striped, 438.

  Rue, 573.
    Broad-leaved, 574.
    Narrow-leaved, 574.

  Rumex, 304.
    "    acetosa, 306.
    "    montanus, 308.
    "    nivalis, 305.
    "    patientia, 299.
    "    scutatus, 308.

  Russian Turnip, 86.

  Ruta-baga Turnip, 86.

  Ruta graveolens, 573.


  Safflower, 575.

  Saffron, 575.

  Sage, 438.
    Balsamic, 439.
    Broad-leaved Green, 439.
    Common, 440.
    Green-leaved, 440.
    Green-top, 440.
    Narrow-leaved Green, 441.
    Purple-top, 440.
    Red-leaved, 440.
    Red-top, 440.
    Sage of Virtue, 441.
    Variegated Green-leaved, 441.
    Variegated Red-leaved, 441.

  Salad Plants, 315.

  Salsify, 92.

  Salvia officinalis, 440.

    "    sclarea, 414.

  Samphire, 396.

  Saturjea capitata, 442.

     "     hortensis, 442.

     "     montana, 443.

     "     viminea, 442.

  Savory, 442.
    Headed, 442.
    Shrubby, 442.
    Summer, 442.
    Winter, 443.

  Savoy, 277.

  Savoy Cabbage, 277.
    Cape, 278.
    Chou Milan Dore a Tete Longue, 279.
    Chou Milan a Tete Longue, 281.
    Drumhead, 278.
    Dwarf Green Curled, 282.
    Earliest Ulm, 279.
    Early Dwarf, 279.
    Early Flat Green Curled, 279.
    Early Green, 279.
    Early Long Yellow, 279.
    Early Ulm, 279.
    Early Yellow, 280.
    Feathered-stem, 280.
    Golden, 280.
    Green Curled, 281.
    Green Globe, 281.
    Large Green, 281.
    Large Late Yellow, 283.
    Long-headed, 281.
    Marcelin, 282.
    New Ulm, 279.
    Pancalier de Tourraine, 282.
    Tours, 282.
    White, 283.
    Yellow Curled, 283.

  Scandix odorata, 399.

  Scarlet-runner Bean, 497.

     "    Painted-lady, 499.

     "    White-runner, 499.

  Scolymus, 94.

  Scolymus Hispanicus, 94.

  Scorpiurus, 319.

       "      muricata, 321.

       "      subvillosa, 321.

       "      sulcata, 320.

       "      vermiculata, 320.

  Scorzonera, 95.

       "      Hispanica, 95.

  Scotch Bean, 507.

  Scurvy-grass, 397, 403.

  Sea-beet, 302.
    English, 302.
    Irish, 303.

  Sea-fennel, 396.

  Sea-kale, 283.

  Serpent Cucumber, 206.

  Sesamum sp., 561.

  Shallot, 143.
    Common, 145.
    Echalote Grosse, 146.
    Echalote Grosse d'Alencon, 146.
    Echalote Ordinaire, 145.
    Jersey, 145.
    Large, 146.
    Large Alencon, 146.
    Long-keeping, 146.
    Small, 145.

  Shepherd's Purse, 303.

  Sicilian Beet, 289.

  Sinapis alba, 387.

     "    nigra, 385.

     "    Pekinensis, 386.

  Sisymbrium nasturtium, 401.

  Sium sisarum, 97.

  Skinless Pease, 552.

  Skirret, 97.

  Smallage, 321.

  Small Water-cress, 344.

  Smyrnium olusatrum, 315.

      "    perfoliatum, 316.

  Snails, 398.

  Snail Trefoil, 398.

  Snake Cucumber, 206.

  Solanum lycopersicum, 639.

     "    melongena, 607.

     "    nigrum, 288.

     "    tuberosum, 51.

  Sorrel, 304.
    Alpine, 305.
    Belleville, 306.
    Blistered-leaf, 306.
    Blistered-leaf Mountain, 308.
    Blond de Sarcelle, 307.
    Broad-leaved, 306.
    Common, 306.
    Common Garden, 307.
    Fervent's New Large, 307.
    French, 308.
    Green, 307.
    Green-Mountain, 309.
    Mountain, 308.
    Oseille de Fervent, 307.
    Oseille des Neiges, 305.
    Oseille Large de Belleville, 306.
    Oseille Rond, 308.
    Oseille Verge, 308.
    Roman, 308.
    Round-leaved, 308.
    Sarcelle Blond, 307.

  Southernwood, 576.

  Spanish Potato, 99.

  Spanish Oyster-plant, 94.

  Spanish Scolymus, 94.

  Spearmint, 444.
    Curled-leaved, 445.

  Spinacea oleracea, 309.

  Spinaceous Plants, 287.

  Spinach, 309.
    a Feuille de Laitue, 312.
    Blond a Feuille d'Oseille, 313.
    Common Prickly, 313.
    d'Angleterre, 311.
    d'Hollande, 312.
    Flanders, 311.
    Gaudry, 312.
    Large Prickly-seeded, 311.
    Large Winter, 311.
    Lettuce-leaved, 312.
    Ordinaire, 313.
    Round Dutch, 312.
    Round-leaved, 312.
    Sorrel-leaved, 312.
    Summer, 312.
    White Sorrel-leaved, 313.
    Winter, 313.
    Yellow Sorrel-leaved, 313.

  Sponge Cucumber, 198.

  Squash, 206.

  Squash (Summer Varieties), 207.
    Apple, 207.
    Bush Summer Warted Crookneck, 208.
    Cymbling, 208, 209.
    Early Apple, 207.
    Early Summer Crookneck, 208.
    Early White Bush Scolloped, 208.
    Early Yellow Bush Scolloped, 209.
    Egg, 210.
    Green Bush Scolloped, 211.
    Green Striped Bergen, 211.
    Large Summer Warted Crookneck, 211.
    Orange, 212.
    Pattison Blanc, 208.
    Pattison Panache, 212.
    Pattison Vert, 211.
    Pattypan, 209.
    Variegated Bush Scolloped, 212.
    White Pattypan, 208.
    White Summer Scolloped, 208.
    Yellow Summer Scolloped, 209.
    Yellow Summer Warted Crookneck, 208.

  Squash (Autumn and Winter Varieties), 212.
    Acorn, 222.
    Autumnal Marrow, 212.
    Boston Marrow, 212.
    Canada Crookneck, 214.
    Cashew, 215.
    Cocoa, 215.
    Cocoa-nut, 215.
    Commodore Porter, 223.
    Courge a la Moelle, 225.
    Courge Coucourzelle, 219.
    Courge de l'Ohio, 212.
    Courge Plein de Naples, 220.
    Cuckaw, 226.
    Cushaw Pumpkin, 215.
    Custard, 216.
    Egg-shaped, 217.
    Giraumon Turban, 222.
    Honolulu, 217.
    Hubbard, 218.
    Italian Vegetable Marrow, 219.
    Large Yellow Gourd, 219.
    Mammoth, 219.
    Mammoth Pumpkin, 219.
    Neapolitan, 220.
    Patagonian, 221.
    Porter's Valparaiso, 223.
    Potiron Jaune, 219.
    Puritan, 221.
    Reeve's, 217.
    Stetson's Hybrid, 225.
    Succade Gourd, 225.
    Sweet Potato, 222.
    Turban, 222.
    Turk's Cap, 222.
    Valparaiso, 223.
    Vegetable Marrow, 225.
    Wilder, 225.
    Winter Crookneck, 226.
    Winter Striped Crookneck, 227.

  Star of the Earth, 317.

  Strawberry Tomato, 592.
    Purple, 593.
    Tall, 593.

  St. Peter's Herb, 396.

  String-pease, 552.

  Succory, 334.

  Sugar-pease, 552.

  Sunflower, 632.
    Annual, 632.
    Dwarf, 632.
    Tall, 632.

  Swede or Ruta-baga Turnip, 86.
    Ashcroft, 87.
    Common Purple-top Yellow, 88.
    Early Stubble, 88.
    Green-top White, 89.
    Green-top Yellow, 88.
    Laing's Improved Purple-top, 89.
    Long White French, 92.
    Purple-top White, 90.
    River's, 90.
    Skirving's Improved Purple-top, 90.
    Skirving's Liverpool, 90.
    Skirving's Purple-top, 90.
    Southold, 90.
    Sweet German, 91.
    White French, 92.

  Sweet Cicely, 399.

  Sweet Potato, 99.
    American Red, 101.
    Kentucky Early Red, 100.
    Large White, 100.
    Nansemond, 101.
    New-Orleans Purple, 101.
    Patate Blanche, 100.
    Patate Violette, 101.
    Purple-skinned, 101.
    Red Nansemond, 100.
    Red-skinned, 101.
    Rose-colored, 102.
    Yellow-Carolina, 102.
    Yellow Nansemond, 101.
    Yellow-skinned, 102.

  Sweet-scented Chervil, 399.

  Swiss Chard, 289.


  Tanacetum vulgare, 445.

  Tansy, 445.
    Curled-leaved, 446.
    Double, 446.
    Large-leaved, 447.
    Variegated, 447.

  Tare, 558.
    Summer, 559.
    White, 558.
    Winter, 559.

  Tarragon, 400.

  Tetragonia expansa, 295.

  Thlaspi Bursa Pastoris, 303.

  Thousand-headed Cabbage, 249.

  Thyme, 447.
    Broad-leaved, 447.
    Common, 447.
    Evergreen, 447.
    Lemon, 449.
    Narrow-leaved, 448.
    Variegated, 448.

  Thymus citriodorus, 449.

    "    vulgaris, 447.

  Tobacco, 633.
    Broad-leaved, 635.
    Connecticut Seed-leaf, 634.
    Green, 637.
    Guatemala, 635.
    Negro-head, 638.
    Oronoco, 638.
    Peach-leaf, 634.
    Turkish, 637.
    Virginian, 634.

  Tomato, 639.
    Apple, 643.
    Apple-shaped, 643.
    Bermuda, 643.
    Cluster, 646.
    Early Red, 651.
    Extra Early, 651.
    Fejee, 644.
    Fig, 644.
    Giant, 645.
    Grape, 646.
    Large Red, 646.
    Large Red Oval, 647.
    Large Yellow, 647.
    Lester's Perfected, 648.
    Mammoth, 645.
    Mexican, 648.
    New Upright, 650.
    Perfected, 648.
    Pomo d'Oro Lesteriano, 648.
    Red Cherry, 649.
    Red Pear-shaped, 644.
    Red Plum, 649.
    Round Red, 649.
    Round Yellow, 649.
    Seedless, 650.
    Tomate de Laye, 650.
    Tree, 650.
    White, 651.
    White's Extra Early, 651.
    Yellow Cherry, 652.
    Yellow Fig, 652.
    Yellow Pear-shaped, 652.
    Yellow Plum, 652.

  Tota Bona, 313.

  Tragopogon porrifolius, 92.

  Trauxuda Kale, 273.

  Tree Primrose, 35.

  Tropaeolum, 388.

      "      majus, 389.

      "      minus, 390.

      "      tuberosum, 103.

  Truffle, 589.
    Common, 589.
    Piedmontese, 590.

  Tuber cibarium, 589.

    "   magnatum, 590.

    "   melanosporum, 590.

  Tuberous-rooted Chickling Vetch, 103.
    Pea, 103.
    Tropaeolum, 103.
    Wood-sorrel, 41.

  Turkey Rhubarb, 573.

  Turnip-rooted Celery, 331.

  Turnip, 104.
    Altrincham, 106.
    Altringham, 106.
    Autumn Stubble, 115.
    Border Imperial, 106.
    Border Imperial Purple-top Yellow, 106.
    Chiva's Orange Jelly, 106.
    Common Field Globe, 118.
    Cow-horn, 107.
    Dale's Hybrid, 107.
    Decanter, 110.
    Early Dwarf, 115.
    Early Flat Dutch, 107.
    Early Stone, 119.
    Early White Dutch, 107.
    Early Yellow Dutch, 108.
    Finland, 108.
    Freneuse, 108.
    Golden Ball, 109.
    Golden Maltese, 120.
    Green Globe, 109.
    Green Norfolk, 110.
    Green Round, 110.
    Green Tankard, 110.
    Green-top Flat, 110.
    Green-top Norfolk, 110.
    Green-top White Globe, 109.
    Green-top Yellow Aberdeen, 111.
    Green-top Yellow Bullock, 111.
    Hungarian Green-top Globe, 109.
    Lincolnshire Red Globe, 111.
    Liverpool Yellow, 112.
    Long Black, 111.
    Long Early White Vertus, 107.
    Long White Clairfontaine, 111.
    Long White Maltese, 111.
    Maltese, 120.
    Mouse-tail, 119.
    Navet Boule de Neige, 116.
    Navet Gros d'Alsace, 119.
    Petrosowoodsks, 112.
    Pomeranian Globe, 112.
    Preston, 112.
    Purple-top Aberdeen, 114.
    Purple-top Flat, 112.
    Purple-top Strap-leaved, 113.
    Purple-top Yellow Aberdeen, 114.
    Purple-top Yellow Bullock, 114.
    Red Globe, 114.
    Red Norfolk, 114.
    Red Round, 114.
    Red Tankard, 115.
    Red-top Flat, 112.
    Red Mouse-tail, 119.
    Red-top Norfolk, 114.
    Robertson's Golden Stone, 115.
    Round Black, 115.
    Six-weeks, 115.
    Small Berlin, 117.
    Small Long Yellow, 116.
    Snow-ball, 116.
    Stone Globe, 116.
    Tankard, 110.
    Teltau, 117.
    Teltow, 117.
    Waite's Hybrid Eclipse, 117.
    White Dutch, 107.
    White Garden Stone, 119.
    White Globe, 118.
    White Norfolk, 118.
    White Round, 118.
    White Stone, 119.
    White Tankard, 119.
    White-top Flat, 120.
    White-top Strap-leaved, 120.
    Yellow Altrincham, 106.
    Yellow Dutch, 108.
    Yellow Finland, 108.
    Yellow Globe, 109.
    Yellow Malta, 120.
    Yellow Scarisbrick, 121.
    Yellow Stone, 121.
    Yellow Tankard, 121.

  Turnip Cabbage, 38.

  Turnip-rooted Chervil, 31.

  Tussilago farfara, 564.


  Unicorn Plant, 612.

  Urtica dioica, 293.


  Valeriana, 401.

      "      cornucopiae, 401.
      "      locusta, 339.

  Valerianella eriocarpa, 340.

  Vegetable Oyster, 92.

  Veronica beccabunga, 316.

  Vetch, or Tare, 558.
    Napoleon Pea, 558.
    Summer, 559.
    White, 558.
    Winter, 559.

  Vicia faba, 503.

    "   sativa, 558.


  Water-cress, 401.

  Water-melon, 192.

  Welsh Onion, 147.
    Ciboule Blanche Hative, 147.
    Common, 147.
    Early White, 147.
    Red, 147.
    White, 147.

  West-Indian Bean, 499.

  West-Indian Cress, 387.

  West-Indian Cucumber, 199.

  White Beet, 289.

  Wild Endive, 334.

  Wild Navew, 394.

  Wild Spinach, 313.

  Winged Pea, 559.

  Winter Cherry, 592.
    Purple, 593.

  Winter Cress, 403.
    Common, 403.

  Wood-sorrel, 404.

  Worms, 405.

  Wormwood, 576.
    Common, 576.
    Roman, 577.
    Sea, 577.


  Yellow Rocket, 403.

  Ysano, 103.


  Zea mays, 594.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Field and Garden Vegetables of
America, by Fearing Burr

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIELD AND GARDEN ***

***** This file should be named 21682.txt or 21682.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/6/8/21682/

Produced by Janet Blenkinship, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
