The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sagas of Olaf Tryggvason and of Harald
The Tyrant (Harald Haardraade), by Snorri Sturluson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Sagas of Olaf Tryggvason and of Harald The Tyrant (Harald Haardraade)

Author: Snorri Sturluson

Illustrator: Halfdan Egedius; Christian Krogh; Gerhard Munthe; Hjalmar Eilif Emanuel Peterssen; Erik Theodor Werenskiold; Wilhelm Laurits Wetlesen

Translator: Ethel Harriet Hearn and Gustav Storm

Release Date: July 17, 2007 [EBook #22093]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SAGAS OF OLAF TRYGGVASON ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Charlene Taylor, Ted Garvin and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






  [Transcriber's Note:

  The printed book's only clue about authorship is in the Notes. All
  other information comes from the Norwegian edition.

    Original author: Snorri Sturluson
      (generally spelled Snorre Sturlason in Norwegian).
    Modern (1899) Norwegian translation: Gustav Storm.
    English translation (based on modern Norwegian, not on original):
      Ethel Harriet Hearn.

  The html version of this e-text includes illustrations, also taken
  from the Norwegian edition.]




  The Sagas of
  OLAF TRYGGVASON
  and of
  HARALD THE TYRANT
  (Harald Haardraade)




  London
  Williams and Norgate
  MCMXI




The places of notes in the text are indicated thus Sec..
The relative matter will be found at the end
of the book in due order
as to page and line.

  [Footnote markers shown in brackets [Sec.] were missing from the
  printed text and have been supplied by the transcriber.]




THE SAGA OF OLAF TRYGGVASON, CMLXVIII-M


Now it befell in the days of King Tryggvi Olafson that the woman he had
wedded was Astrid & she was the daughter of Eirik Biodaskalli, a wealthy
man who dwelt at Oprostad.

When the downfall of Tryggvi had been accomplished, Astrid fled away
bearing with her what chattels she might. And with her went her
foster-father Thorolf Louse-Beard, who never left her, whereas other
trusty men, loyal to her, fared hither and thither to gather tidings of
her foes or to spy out where they might lurk. Now Astrid being great
with child of King Tryggvi caused herself to be transported to an islet
on a lake & there took shelter with but few of her company.

In due time she bare a man-child, and at his baptism he was called Olaf
after his father's father. All that summer did she abide there in
hiding. But when the nights grew as long as they were dark and the
weather waxed cold, she set forth once more and with her fared Thorolf
and the others of her train. Only by night could they venture in those
parts of the country that were inhabited being in fear lest they should
be seen of men or meet with them. In time, at even, came they to the
homestead of Eirik of Oprostad. And since they were journeying by
stealth, Astrid sent a messenger to the goodman of the house, who bade
them to be led to an outhouse & there had set before them the best of
cheer. Thence, when Astrid had abided for a while, her followers went
unto their homes, but she remained there & with her to bear her company
were two women, her babe Olaf, Thorolf Louse-Beard and his son Thorgills
who was six winters old. They rested in that place until the winter was
done.


|| After they had made an end to slaying Tryggvi Olafson, Harald
Grey-Cloak and Gudrod his brother hied them to the homesteads that had
been his. But ere they came thither Astrid had fled & of her learned
they no tidings save a rumour that she was with child of King Tryggvi.

In the autumn fared they to the north, as has been related beforetime,
and when they were face to face with their mother Gunnhild, told they
her all that had befallen them on their journey. Closely did she
question them concerning Astrid, and they imparted to her what they had
heard. But because the sons of Gunnhild were that same autumn and the
next winter at strife with Earl Hakon, as hath already ere now been set
forth, made they no search for Astrid and her son.


|| When the spring was come, Gunnhild despatched spies to the Uplands,
and even as far as Vik, to get news of Astrid. And when the spies
returned it was with the tidings that she was with her father Eirik &
there most like was she rearing the son that she had borne to King
Tryggvi that was dead. Forthwith Gunnhild chose messengers and equipped
them handsomely both with weapons and wearing apparel: thirty men chose
she, and their leader was Hakon, a man of influence and a friend to
herself. She bade them make their way to Oprostad to Eirik and from
thence take the son of Tryggvi and bring him unto herself.

Thereupon the messengers set out on their way, but when they were come
nigh to Oprostad learned the friends of Eirik concerning their journey
and went one evening unto him with the tidings.

Straightway when night had fallen, Eirik bade Astrid make ready to
leave, furnished her with sure guides, & set her eastwards with her face
towards Sweden, to his friend Hakon the Old, who was a man in the
exercise of potent sway. They adventured when the night was not far
spent, & next day, towards even, were they come to a country-side called
Skaun, and seeing there a homestead thither went they craving lodging
for the night. Of their names they made a secret & their garb was but
meanly. The yeoman who abode in the place was called Biorn Venom-Sore,
a wealthy man was he but withal churlish, and he drave them away, & they
came that same evening to another homestead which was called Vizkar.

Thorstein was the yeoman who dwelt there & he gave them shelter and good
cheer for the night, and there they slept in good beds.


|| Next day betimes came Hakon with the men of Gunnhild to Oprostad and
asked for Astrid and her son, but Eirik said that she was not there,
so Hakon and his men ransacked the homestead and bided till late even
toward sundown, and gat them some tidings of Astrid's road. Then rode
they forth the same day and came almost as night fell to the house of
Biorn Venom-Sore in Skaun, and there took harbour.

Then Hakon asked Biorn if he had aught to tell concerning Astrid; and he
said that some wayfarers had come there during the day and had asked for
a night's lodging, 'I sent them away, and it is likely they sought a
refuge elsewhere in the neighbourhood.' Now a workman that had been of
the household of Thorstein, being on his way to pass out from the
forest, that same even happened to chance on the homestead of Biorn and
learned that guests were tarrying, & further of what fashion was their
errand; and all this he forthwith sped back to tell to Thorstein the
yeoman.

So while there was still a third of the night unspent, Thorstein aroused
his guests and bade them begone, urging them harshly to bestir
themselves. When they had passed a little way from the house then did
Thorstein open unto them that the emissaries from Gunnhild were hard by
at the house of Biorn seeking for them.

They besought him for succour, and he set them on their way with a guide
& some food, and their guide led them into the forest where there was a
lake & an islet overgrown with reeds. They were able to wade out unto
the islet & thereon hid they themselves among the reeds.

Early on the morrow Hakon rode out from the homestead of Biorn over the
countryside, asking withersoever he went for Astrid. When he was come
unto the house of Thorstein demanded he if they had thither been and
Thorstein said that certain folk had fared thither & had gone on at
daybreak eastwards through the forest. Then did Hakon bid Thorstein come
with him because he was skilled in the knowledge of the tracks and
hiding-places: and Thorstein set forth. But when they were come to the
forest led he them away from where Astrid was.

The whole of that day did they go seeking for them, but found them not.
Then they came back on their road & related unto Gunnhild what had
befallen. Astrid & her followers went forth on their way till they were
come unto Sweden to the home of Hakon the Old, and there Astrid and her
son dwelt a long while, and it was well with them.


|| Gunnhild, she that was mother to the King, hearing that Astrid & her
son Olaf were in Sweden, once more sent forth Hakon and a brave
following with him, this time eastward to Eirik King of Sweden, with
goodly gifts and fair words. The messengers were made welcome and given
good entertainment, and thereafter Hakon made known his errand to the
King, saying that Gunnhild had sent craving the King's help so that he
might take Olaf back with him to Norway: 'Gunnhild will foster him,'
quoth he.

Then did the King give him men to go with him, and they rode to the
house of Hakon the Old, and there Hakon offered with fair words to take
Olaf with him. Hakon the Old returned a friendly answer and said that it
must so happen that the mother of the child should decide about his
going, but Astrid would in nowise suffer the boy to fare forth with
them. So the messengers went their way & brought back the answer unto
King Eirik and they made them ready to return home; but once more prayed
they the King to grant them help to bear off the boy whether Hakon the
Old were willing or not. So the King yet again gave them a company of
men & the messengers returned to Hakon the Old and demanded that the boy
be allowed to fare forth with them, but as Hakon was unwilling that this
should be, resorted they to big words and threats of violence, and bore
themselves wrathfully. Then did a thrall spring forward whose name was
Bristle, and would have smitten Hakon but that he & they that were of
his company withdrew hastily so that in nowise might they be beaten of
the thrall: and back fared they to Norway and recounted to Gunnhild all
the happenings of their journey & likewise that they had seen Olaf
Tryggvason.


|| Now Astrid had a brother, the son of Eirik Biodaskalli, whose name was
Sigurd: long had he been remote from the land, sojourning in the realm
of Garda (western Russia) with King Valdamar,Sec. by whom was he held in
great honour. Now Astrid conceived the desire that she should hie unto
this her brother Sigurd. Therefore Hakon the Old furnished her with
trusty followers & handsome equipment after the best manner. And she
journeyed in the company of certain merchants. It was for the space of
two winters she had abode with Hakon the Old, and Olaf was now three
winters old. It came to pass as they were heading eastwards across the
sea some vikings fell upon them, men of Eistland (Esthonia) and took
possession both of folk and goods, and some of the folk they killed &
some they shared among themselves as thralls. Thus was Olaf withdrawn
from his mother and passed into the custody of one Klerkon, an
Eistlander. Together with him were committed Thorolf and Thorgills.
Klerkon deemed Thorolf too old for a thrall, and that he would be of no
use, therefore slew he him, but took the boys with him and sold them to
a man, hight Klerk, for a good he-goat.

A third man bought Olaf, and gave for him a good tunic or cloak. The man
was named Reas, his wife Rekon, & their son Rekoni. There tarried Olaf
long and it fared well with him, and always was he mightily beloved by
the churl. Six winters did Olaf sojourn thus in Eistland.


|| Sigurd Eirikson had come unto Eistland as an emissary of Valdamar King
of Holmgard (Novgarod) to collect the tribute belonging to the King & he
travelled as a man of wealth with many folk much beladen in his train.

Now it chanced that in the marketplace his eye lit on a certain fine boy
whom he knew could not be of the country, & asking him his name gat for
answer that he was called Olaf and his father Tryggvi Olafson and his
mother Astrid, the daughter of Eirik Biodaskalli. Thus did Sigurd learn
that Olaf was son unto his very own sister, and he asked him after what
manner he had come to that place: and Olaf told him all that had
befallen him. Sigurd bade him come with him to the peasant Reas, and
when they were come to the churl paid he him what price was covenanted
between them for the boys and bare them with him to Holmgard. But never
a word did he relate of the lineage of Olaf, yet held he him in high
favour.


|| It was that one day in the marketplace lingered Olaf Tryggvason when
there was a gathering of many people. And it chanced that amongst them,
spied he Klerkon who had slain his fosterfather Thorolf Louse-Beard. Now
Olaf had a small axe in his hand, and he drave it into the head of
Klerkon so that it went right down into his brain: forthwith ran he home
to his lodging and told his kinsman Sigurd thereof. Straightway did
Sigurd take Olaf to the house of the Queen, and to her made known what
had befallen. Her name was Allogia, and Sigurd prayed for her grace to
protect the lad. The Queen beheld the boy and said that one so young and
so well favoured must not be slain, and proclaimed her readiness to
summon men fully armed. Now it fell in Holmgard that so great was the
respect paid unto peace that it was lawful to slay any man who himself
had slain another who was uncondemned; and therefore in accordance with
their law and custom the people made assemblage together to take into
custody the person of the boy.

Then were they told that he was in the house of the Queen in the midst
of an armed band; and this was also brought to the ears of the King.

He made him ready to go over to these armed men & give them his
commission not to fight, and forthwith did he, the King, adjudge the
geld-levy, the fine thereof being paid down by the Queen. Thereafter did
Olaf abide in the house of the Queen and waxed to find much favour in
her eyes.


|| Now it was the law in Garda that men of royal blood should not dwell
there save with the consent of the King, therefore Sigurd made known
unto the Queen from what stock Olaf was descended and in what manner he
had come thither, saying that because of dissensions he could not
prudently be in his own country, and he prayed her to speak with the
King upon this matter. Then did she approach the King beseeching him
that he would help this son of a king even because so hard a fate had
befallen him: & the outcome of her prayers was that the King pledged her
his word and taking Olaf under his protection treated him with honour,
as it was seemly the son of a king should be held in honour.

Olaf was nine winters old when he came to Garda, & nine more winters
dwelt he with King Valdamar. Olaf was exceeding fair & tall to look upon
and of mighty stature & of great strength withal. And in prowess in
sports, so it is told, was he the best of all the Norsemen.


|| Earl Hakon Sigurdson abode with the Danish King, Harald Gormson,
during the winter after he had fled from Norway before the sons of
Gunnhild.

Now Hakon had so much on his mind that winter that he took to his bed,
and often lay wakeful, eating & drinking only so much as would maintain
the strength in his body. Then secretly sent he his men northwards to
Throndhjem to his friends there, & counselled them that they should slay
King Erling if it might be that they could compass that deed; adding
furthermore that he himself would fare back to his realm in summer-time.
That winter they that were of Throndhjem slew Erling, as is aforewrit.

Betwixt Hakon and Gold Harald was there a friendship close as that of
brothers that have been laid in the same cradle and Harald would lay
bare his thoughts unto Hakon. Harald confessed he desired to settle on
the land and no more live on his ship of war, and he questioned Hakon if
he thought Harald would share his kingdom with him were he to demand the
half. 'Methinks,' quoth Hakon, 'that the Danish King will not refuse
thee justice; but thou wilt know more concerning this matter if thou
speakest thereon to the King; methinks thou wilt not get the realm save
thou demandest it.' Shortly after this talk spake Gold Harald to King
Harald when they were in company with many mighty men, good friends unto
them both. Gold Harald then demanded that he should halve the kingdom
with him, in accordance with the rights which his birth and lineage gave
him there in Denmark.

At this demand waxed Harald very wroth, & sware that no man had ever
besought his father, Gorm, that he should become King of half of what
pertained unto Denmark, nor yet of his father Horda-Knut (Hardicanute),
nor again of Sigurd Snake-i'-the-eye, nor of Ragnar Lodbrok; & so great
was his fury that none dared parley with him.


  [Illustration]

|| Thence came it that his own position was now even less than before to
the liking of Gold Harald, for no kingdom had he any more than
aforetime; while to this was added the wrath of the King. So went he to
his friend Hakon and made wail of his plight unto him, and besought of
him good counsel, if he had such to give him, as to how he might become
possessed of the realm; and he said he was minded to seek his kingdom by
force of arms. Then Hakon bade him not breathe word of this to anyone
lest it should become known: 'It might cost thee thy life,' he said.

'Bethink thee diligently what thy strength is, for he who would risk so
great a venture must be high-hearted and dauntless, shirking neither the
good nor the evil, so that to which he hath set his hand may come to
pass. All unworthy is it to take up great issues and afterwards to lay
them down again with dishonour.' Then did Gold Harald answer: 'To such
purpose will I take up this claim, that I will not even spare these my
own hands from slaying the King himself if occasion serve, should he
refuse me this kingdom which is mine by right.' And therewith ended they
their commune. After this came King Harald to Hakon, and they fell to
talking together & the King told the Earl of Gold Harald's claim to the
kingdom, and with what answer he had rebuked him, declaring that he
would by no means diminish his own kingdom, 'but if Gold Harald hold
fast to this his claim; then see I nothing for it save that I should put
him to the death for in him have I but little faith if he will not
surrender this desire.' The Earl made answer: 'Methinks Harald hath set
out on this matter with such earnestness that he is not like to set it
aside; and that if it should come to a rising in the land, there would
be many that would flock unto his standard and the main of them because
of the love they had borne to his father. It would bring thee the
greatest ill-chance shouldst thou slay thy kinsman, for in such case all
men would deem him blameless. Nor will I counsel thee to become a lesser
king than was Gorm thy father; he also very much increased his realm,
but in no wise diminished it.' Then said the King: 'What then is thy
counsel, Hakon? Wouldst thou that I should divide my kingdom, and have
this unrest off my mind?' 'Our meeting will be again ere many suns set,'
answered Earl Hakon.

'I will first ponder over this difficult matter, and thereafter give
thee an answer.' Then did the King depart and with him all the men that
were of his company.


|| Thereafter came it to pass that Earl Hakon betook himself once more to
pondering and plotting, and permitted but few of his men to be in the
house with him. Some days later came Harald again to the Earl, and they
communed together, and the King asked of the Earl if he had thought
deeply upon that matter whereon they had discoursed when they were last
face to face. 'On that matter,' quoth the Earl, 'have I lain sleepless
both by night and day ever since, and I deem it the wisest counsel that
thou shouldst hold and rule the kingdom that thy father had and that
thou didst inherit after him, but that thou shouldst get for thy kinsman
Harald another kingdom wherein he may have all honour.' 'What kingdom is
that?' inquired the King, 'that I may lightly give to Harald, keeping
the Danish kingdom whole the while?' The Earl made answer, 'It is
Norway. The kings who rule there are hated by all the folk of their
land, & every man wishes them ill, as is but meet.' Then mused the King
aloud: 'Norway is a great land, and the folk are a hardy folk; it
beseems me to be a land ill chosen whereon to fall with a foreign host.
Thus did it happen to us when Hakon defended the land; many men were
slain to us but no victory did we achieve. Moreover Harald Eirikson is
my foster-son and hath sat on my knee.' Then saith the Earl: 'Long have
I known that thou hast given help to the sons of Gunnhild; yet with
naught but ill have they requited thee. We will take Norway more easily
than by fighting for her with all the hosts of Denmark. Send thou to thy
foster-son Harald, and bid him receive from thee the lands and fiefs
which they had aforetime here in Denmark.

Appoint a tryst with him; then can Gold Harald in a short while win
himself a kingdom in Norway from King Harald Grey-cloak.' Then answered
the King that it would be called of foul intent to betray his
foster-son. 'The Danes, I trow, will account it a better deed to slay a
Norwegian viking than one who is a brother's son and a Dane,' answereth
the Earl; & thereafter talked they on this matter until they were in
full accord.


|| Yet again came Gold Harald to speak with Hakon, and the Earl made
known to him that he had so championed his cause and to such good
purpose that there was hope that a kingdom might now be making ready for
him in Norway. 'Let us,' said he, 'hold fast by our compact. I shall be
able to afford thee great support in Norway. Get thou first that
kingdom. King Harald is now very old & hath but one son, a bastard, whom
he loveth but little.' To such measure did the Earl open up the matter
to Gold Harald that the younger man was in full accord with him thereon;
and thereafter did they all three take lengthy counsel, to wit, the
King, the Earl, and Gold Harald full oft. Then sent the Danish King his
men north into Norway even to Harald Grey-cloak, and they were right
well furnished for their journey, and were made welcome with much cheer
and in all courtesy were received by King Harald. They related the
tidings that Earl Hakon was in Denmark, and was lying sick unto death
and well-nigh witless; and the further tidings that Harald the Danish
King bade Harald Grey-cloak to him to take such fiefs as he and his
brothers had held aforetime in Denmark, and to that purpose bade he
Harald come to him in Jutland. Harald Grey-cloak laid the matter before
Gunnhild and other counsellors and their views were not all of one
accord, some fearing that this journey was not without peril by reason
of the men that were set over against them to be dealt with; but the
greater number were desirous that he should go by reason of the great
famine that was at this time in Norway whereby the kings could scarce
feed their men. And it was at this season that the fjord near-by which
the kings most oft abode gat its name of Harding.

In Denmark, as men had marked, the harvest had been at least of goodly
measure, so that men thought to get thence what they required should
King Harald have fief & dominion there. It was agreed therefore ere the
emissaries departed whence they had come, that when summer was at hand
Harald should hie to the Danish King, and pronounce his adhesion to the
conditions King Harald proffered.


|| So in due course when the summer sun shone in the long hours of night
fared forth Harald Grey-cloak towards Denmark in three longships, & one
of these was steered by Arinbiorn, the 'hersir'Sec. of the Fjords.Sec. King
Harald sailed from Vik over to Limfjord and took port at Hals, where it
was told him that the Danish King was expected in a brief space. Now
when King Harald heard of this, hastened he to make sail thither with
nine ships, the which had been whiles mustered and set in readiness to
take the sea. Earl Hakon had likewise armed his men & he also was about
to set forth after the manner of a viking; at his word twelve ships, and
they large ones, set their sails. When Gold Harald had fared forth, Earl
Hakon spake to the King, saying, 'Methinks we are like to row to war and
yet pay the war-fine[Sec.] to boot. Gold Harald will now slay Harald
Grey-cloak and thereafter take himself a kingdom in Norway.

Thinkest thou that he will be loyal to thee when thou givest him so much
power? Thus said he in my presence last winter that he would slay thee
could he but find occasion to do so. Now will I bring Norway under thy
sway and slay Gold Harald, if thou wilt promise easy absolution at thy
hands for the deed.

Then will I be thine earl, and bind myself by oath that with thy might
to be my aid I will bring Norway under subjection under thee, and
thereafter hold lands under thy dominion & pay thee tribute. Then wilt
thou be a greater king than thy father was, inasmuch as thou shalt hold
sway over two great peoples.'

Thus was this covenanted betwixt the King and the Earl; and Hakon set
out with his men to seek Gold Harald.


|| Gold Harald came to Hals in Limfjord, and forthwith offered battle to
Harald Grey-cloak; and Harald, albeit to him were fewer men, went
ashore, made him ready for battle & set his host in array. But or ever
the onset took place Harald Grey-cloak spoke cheering words to his men,
bade them draw their swords, and rushing first into the fray smote on
either side. Thus saith Glum Geirason in Grey-cloak's lay:

  'Brave words spake the swordsman,
  He that dared to dye the grass sward of battle
  With the blood of the foe;
  And when Harald bade his men ply the swords in the strife,
  His manly words did them mightily encourage.'


|| There fell Harald Grey-cloak. Thus saith Glum Geirason:

  'The bearer of the shield,
  He that clave longest to the ship,
  In death lay stretched
  On the broad marge of Limfjord;
  On the sands at Hals
  Fell the bounteous chieftain;
  It was his glib-tongued kinsman
  That wrought the deed.'


|| There fell with King Harald the greater number of his men; there,
likewise, fell Arinbiorn the 'hersir.' Fifteen winters had passed since
the fall of Hakon, he that was foster-son to Adalstein, and thirteen
since the fall of Sigurd the Earl of Ladir. The priest Ari Thorgilson
saith that Earl Hakon was for thirteen winters ruler of his heritage in
Throndhjem before the death of Harald Grey-cloak; & that during the last
six winters of Harald Grey-cloak's life, saith Ari, the sons of Gunnhild
and Hakon fought against one another, & in turn fled the country.


|| Earl Hakon and Gold Harald met not long after the fall of Harald
Grey-cloak, & straightway Earl Hakon joined battle with Gold Harald.
Therein Hakon gained the victory; moreover Harald was taken prisoner,
and Hakon had him hanged upon the gallows. Thereafter fared Hakon to the
Danish King, and easily made his peace with him for the slaying of his
kinsman Gold Harald. King Harald then called out a host from the whole
of his kingdom and sailed with six hundred ships, and there went with
him Earl Hakon and Harald the Grenlander, who was a son of King Gudrod,
and many other great men who had fled from their free lands in Norway
before the sons of Gunnhild.

The Danish King set his fleet in sail up from the south to Vik, and when
he was come to Tunsberg great numbers flocked to him.

And King Harald gave the whole of the host which had come to him in
Norway into the hands of Earl Hakon, making him ruler over Rogoland and
Hordaland, Sogn, the Fjords, South More, Raumsdal, and North More. These
seven counties gave he to Earl Hakon to rule over, with the same rights
as Harald Fair-hair had given to his sons; only with this difference,
that not only was Hakon there as well as in Throndhjem to have all the
King's manors and land-dues, but he was moreover to use the King's money
and estates according to his needs should there be war in the land. To
Harald the Grenlander gave King Harald Vingulmark, Vestfold, and Agdir
as far as Lidandisness (the Naze) with the title of King, and gave him
dominion thereof with all such rights as his kin had had aforetime, & as
Harald Fair-hair had given to his sons. Harald the Grenlander was in
these days eighteen winters old, & became thereafter a famous man. Then
did Harald the Danish King hie him home with all the might of his Danish
host.


|| Earl Hakon fared with his men northward along the coast, and when
Gunnhild and her sons heard these tidings gathered they together an
host, but found obstacles to enrolling men at arms. So they took the
same resolution as before, to wit to sail westward across the main with
such men as would go with them, and thus fared they to the Orkneys and
tarried there a while. Thorfinn Skull-cleaver's sons were now earls
there-- Hlodvir, Arnvid, Liot, and Skuli. Forthwith did Earl Hakon
subdue all the land and that winter abode he in Throndhjem. Of this
speaketh Einar Jingle-scale in the Vellekla:

  'The Earl that on his noble brow
  A silken fillet binds
  Counties seven hath he enthralled
  With their chattels, lands, and hinds.'

Now when Earl Hakon in the summer-time fared northward along the coast,
& the people there made their submission to him, issued he proclamation
that all temples and blood-offerings should be maintained throughout his
dominions; and it was done accordingly. Thus it is said in the Vellekla:

  'Seeing that he was wise
  The folk-leader commanded that be sacred kept
  The temple-lands of Thor and other Gods.
  Home to glory across the billows
  Did the shield-bearer steer the ship,
  It was the Gods that led him.
  'And the men-loving AEsirs gloat on the offerings
  Whereby the shield-bearer is made of more account.
    Bountifully doth the earth give forth her sustenance
    When its lord builds temples for the Gods.'
  All that is northward to Vik lies under the heel of the Earl;
  Wide is the sway that he holds, mightily waxed by victories.'


  [Illustration]

|| That self-same first winter wherein King Hakon ruled over Norway came
the herring up along the coast, and before that in the autumn had the
corn grown wheresoever it had been sown; in the spring men gat
themselves seed-corn and the greater number of the peasants sowed their
fields, and soon there was promise of a good harvest.


|| King Ragnfrod, son unto Gunnhild, and Gudrod, he that was another son
to her, these two were now the only sons of Eirik and Gunnhild who were
still alive.

Thus saith Glum Geirason in Grey-cloak's lay:

  'Half is my hope of wealth downfallen since the strife,
  The strife in which the life of the chief was lost,
  The death of Harald weigheth me down,
  Albeit his brethren twain have good things promised me,
  And to them all men look for their welfare.'


|| Now when Ragnfrod had abode one winter in the Orkneys made he him
ready in the spring and thence shaped a course eastward to Norway,
& with him were a chosen company in large ships.

And when he was come to Norway learned he tidings how Earl Hakon was in
Throndhjem, forthwith did he steer northward round Stad & laid waste
South More; and some folks submitted to him as oft befalleth when
warrior bands go through a country-- those that they meet with seek
help, each one wheresoever it seemeth likeliest to be gotten. When it
was told to Earl Hakon that there was war in the south within More,
caused he war-arrows to be sharpened and he equipped himself in haste &
set sail down the fjord. Moreover an easy matter was it for him to bring
folk around his standard. Earl Hakon and Ragnfrod sighted one another
off the northernmost part of South More, & straightway Hakon gave
battle, he that had most men but withal smaller ships. Hard was the
struggle & therein waxed Hakon luckless; men fought from the prows and
sterns, as the custom was in those times. Now there was a current in the
sound, and all the ships were driven into shore, so the Earl bade his
folk rest on their oars, and drift to land at such place where he should
deem it best to land; and when the ships grounded, the Earl and all his
host sallied forth and haled them up on the beach, so that their foemen
might not drag them forth again. Then did the Earl array his men on the
banks, and shouted defiance to Ragnfrod to land, but they that were with
Ragnfrod lay-to farther out, and though for a while they shot at one
another, would Ragnfrod in no wise come ashore, and thereafter they
parted. Ragnfrod sailed with his fleet southward to Stad, for he feared
him that the land hosts might assemble and flock to Earl Hakon. But that
earl waged war no more for unto his mind the difference betwixt the
ships was over-great. In the autumn fared he north to Throndhjem, &
there abode during the winter. King Ragnfrod therefore held all the land
south of Stad: the Fjords, Sogn, Hordaland, and Rogaland. Many men were
at his beck throughout that winter, and when the spring-tide came called
he a muster and gat him many more. Moreover sent he far & wide over all
these counties to gather together men and ships and what other stores
whereof he had need.


|| When spring was come Earl Hakon summoned men from out the very north
of the country; many gat he from Halogaland, & Naumdal, so that right
from Byrda to Stad came men to him from all the sea-boards. He reared a
host from all the districts of Throndhjem, and likewise from Raumsdal.
It was said that he had men from four counties; with him fared seven
earls, and in their train were an exceeding large company. Thus it is
said in the Vellekla:

  'Thereafter, full of lust for slaughter,
  Did the defender of the folk of More
  Bring from the north a tale of men to Sogn.
  From counties four called forth that warrior hosts,
  Seeing in them sure help for all his folk.
  To the war-gathering on the longships
  Swiftly, to meet their warrior chieftain,
  Hie lords of the land in number seven.
  All Norway trembled at the warrior host;
  Beyond the capes were borne unnumbered fallen.'


|| Then Earl Hakon set sail with the whole of this host southward past
Stad; and when it came to his ears that King Ragnfrod with his host had
entered into the Sognfjord thither led he his men and there encountered
him.

Thereafter having brought his ships to land chose he out a battle-field
whereon to fight King Ragnfrod. Thus saith the Vellekla:

  'Now did the chieftain meet in second battle
  The slayer of the Vandals, and fell slaughter followed.
  The prows were set to land,
  And the ships steered even to the marches of the shires
  At the bidding of the warrior.'


|| And it came to pass that both sides did dress their battle and fought
amazing fierce, but in men had Earl Hakon the super-abundance and the
issue was to him. This was at Thinganes, where Sogn and Hordaland meet.
King Ragnfrod fled from his ships, and of his folk there fell three
hundred men. Thus it is said in the Vellekla:

  'Fierce was the strife before three hundred were pressed
  Beneath the claws of the carrion bird
  By the host of the warrior chief:
  O'er the heads of the sea-dwellers,
  Thence could the conquering chief stride--
  Aye, and the deed was glorious.'


|| After this battle did King Ragnfrod hie him away from Norway and Earl
Hakon brought peace to the land; he gave licence that the great host
which had been with him in the summer should fare back northward, but he
himself abode hard by there where he gained the victory, not whiles only
that autumn but also throughout the winter that came after.


|| Earl Hakon took to wife a woman named Thora, who was exceeding fair.
The daughter was she of Skagi Skoptison, a man possessed of much wealth.

Their sons were Svein and Heming, & their daughter was Bergliot, who
thereafter was wedded to Einar Tamberskelfir. Earl Hakon was over much
given to women, and by them had many children. One of his daughters was
called Ragnhild, and he gave her in marriage to Skopti Skagason, the
brother of Thora. The Earl so loved Thora that her kinsmen became dearer
to him than all other men, and Skopti his son-in-law had more influence
with him than any other of his kindred. To him gave the Earl large fiefs
in More; & it was covenanted betwixt them that whensoever the fleet of
the Earl was at sea Skopti was to bring his ship alongside the Earl's,
and for none other was it to be lawful to lay his ship between their
ships.


|| Now it happened one summer when Earl Hakon was with his ships on the
main that Thorleif the Meek was master of one of them, & Eirik, the son
of the Earl, he being then some ten or eleven winters old, was aboard.
Of an evening when they were come into haven, Eirik would not have it
otherwise save that the ship whereon he was must be closest to the ship
pertaining to the person of the Earl.

Now when they made sail south to More there came likewise Skopti, he
that was son-in-law to the Earl, with his long-ship well manned. Skopti,
as his men were rowing towards the fleet, called out to Thorleif to
leave the haven and let him lie-to there, but Eirik sprang up & answered
back bidding Skopti hie him to another berth. Now Earl Hakon hearing
that his son deemed himself too mighty to make way for Skopti,
straightway called out to Thorleif bidding him leave the berth, or he
would make it the worse for them, to wit, that he would have them
beaten. So Thorleif when he heard this shouted to his men to slip their
cables, and this they did according to his word; then did Skopti lie-to
in the berth he was wont to have, nearest the Earl's ship. Now Skopti
was called Tidings Skopti, & this had come about seeing that it had been
agreed that when they were together he was to make known to the Earl all
the tidings, or if it so happened that the Earl had heard them first
then it was he that would tell the tidings to Skopti. Now in the winter
that was after all that hath been before but now related, was Eirik with
his foster-father Thorleif, but even so soon as the earlier spring-tide
was he given a company of men.

Thorleif moreover gave him a fifteen-benched ship with all the gear,
tilts, and victuals that were needful. Eirik thence sailed from the
fjord, and so south to More. Now it befell that Tidings Skopti was also
at sea between his homesteads, & he too in a fifteen-benched craft;
Eirik forthwith bore straight down on him and offered battle, and in the
issue thereof fell Skopti, but Eirik gave quarter to such of his men who
were not slain. Thus saith Eyolf Dadaskald, in the Banda lay:

  'Late in the day,
  On the ski of the sea-king,
  With combatants equal,
  Fared the youth 'gainst the "hersir,"
  Him the stout-hearted.
  There 'neath the hand
  That a bloody blade wielded
  Fell Tidings Skopti.
  (The feeder of wolves
  Was food for the ravens.)'


|| With that sailed Eirik south along the coast to Denmark, and
adventured to King Harald Gormson, abiding with him the winter; but the
spring thereafter the Danish King sent Eirik north, & bestowed on him
the title Earl & therewith VingulmarkSec. and Raumariki, to be beneath his
sway even under the self-same tenure as had tribute-paying kings
aforetime been in fief and tribute.


|| In the days that were to come after waxed Earl Eirik, and men knew him
as a mighty chieftain. All this while abode Olaf Tryggvason in Garda,
at the court of King Valdamar, where he had much honour & enjoyed the
faithful love of the Queen.

King Valdamar made him lord of the host which he sent out for the
defence of his country, and for him fought Olaf divers battles and
proved himself to be an able captain, and himself maintained a large
host of warriors on the fiefs allotted to him by the King. Of no
niggardly disposition, Olaf was ever openhanded to the men that were
with him and who for this self-same reason held him in affection; but as
oft times happens when men who are not of the country are exalted to
power, or are so greatly honoured that they take the lead of the men of
the land, many there were who envied him the love he had of the King,
& even so much the more that of the Queen.

Spake many men of that matter to the King, charging him to beware lest
he should make Olaf over great: 'For a man of the kind might be harmful
to thee, would he lend himself to such a deed as to make thee and thy
realms suffer, so crafty & beloved of men is he; nor wot we what he &
the Queen have thus oft whereon to commune one with the other.'


|| Now it was in those days generally the custom among great kings for
the queen to possess half the court and to maintain it at her own
charge, and for this purpose levied she her taxes and dues, in amount as
much as she stood in need therefor. In this wise was it also with King
Valdamar.

The Queen held no less splendid a court than pertained to the King, and
vied they one with the other as to which might procure men of prowess,
each having it at heart to possess such men for themselves. Now it
happened that the King gave heed unto words of this fashion, which men
spake unto him, & he waxed silent and with countenance aloof from Olaf.
And Olaf marking it well spake thereof to the Queen, and opened to her
likewise how that it was the desire of his heart to journey even unto
the north. His kin, said he, had held dominion there in days of yore,
& therefore he thought it likeliest that he would there obtain the more
advancement.

So the Queen bade him farewell, saying that wheresoever he might chance
to tarry there would all deem him a man of prowess.

Olaf thereafter made him ready for his journey, went aboard his ship,
and stood out into the Eystrasalt (the Baltic). Thence sailing west came
he to Borgundarholm (Bornholm) and made thereon a landing and harried
all in the isle. The men of the land came together and did battle with
him, but Olaf gat the victory and much booty.


|| Now while Olaf lay-to off Borgundarholm, there was rough weather with
a gale raging at sea, that their ships began to drag their anchors, for
which reason did they set sail south to the coast of Vindland
(Wendland)Sec. on which shore were good havens, whereon ships might ride at
peace.

There did they tarry for long whiles.

The King of Vindland was named Burizlaf,Sec. & the three daughters to him
were Geira, Gunnhild, and Astrid.

Now at the place where there came ashore Olaf and his men did Geira hold
rule & dominion, and under her he that exercised most authority was one
hight Dixin. When it became known that strange men had come to the
country who behaved themselves in seemly fashion & abode there in peace,
Dixin hied to them with a message from Queen Geira bidding them sojourn
in her land during the winter, seeing the summer was near spent, the
weather threatening ill, & the storms waxing great. And being come
thither Dixin saw on the instant that the captain of these men was one
notable both for descent and appearance.

Therefore recounted he to them that the Queen invited them to her with
messages of friendship, & Olaf nothing loath did her bidding and went to
Queen Geira as her guest. It came to pass that they twain thought both
so well one of another that Olaf made ado to woo Queen Geira, and so it
befell that winter that Olaf took Geira to wife, & gat he the rule of
the realm with her. Thereof spake Halfrod the Troublous-skald in the lay
he made about Olaf the King:

  'The chieftain at Holm let the sharp-edged swords be dyed blood-red
  Eastward too in Garda, nor can this be in any manner concealed.'


|| Now Hakon, he that ruled over Norway, paid no tribute, the reason
whereof being that the King of Denmark had made assignment to him of all
the taxes to which the King had a right in Norway, by reason of the
trouble & costs the Earl was put to in defending the land against the
sons of Gunnhild.


|| Now it befell in those days that the Emperor OttaSec. was in Saxland
(North Germany), & word sent he to Harald, King of Denmark, that he and
the people that were his must be baptized & accept the true Faith, or
else, swore the Emperor that he would march upon him with an host. So
the King of Denmark admonished those that defended the land that they
should be ready at his call, DanavirkiSec. caused he to be well maintained,
and his war ships were manned; thereafter sent the King to Earl Hakon
commanding him that he must come to him early in the spring-tide with
even as many men as he might muster. So at the first song of the birds
Earl Hakon levied an host from all parts of his dominions, and many men
were enrolled to him; this host bade he take ship to Denmark and with
them sailed he himself to meet the King of Denmark, and by him was
received in right seemly fashion. With the King were there at that hour
many another lord proffering help, so that all told gathered he together
an host waxing exceeding large.


|| Now, as hath already been set forth, Olaf sojourned that winter in
Vindland, & in the months thereof went he to those districts thereof
which had formerly obeyed the rule of Queen Geira, but had now ventured
to throw off allegiance & the payment of taxes. These did Olaf harry,
slaying many men, burning the homes of some, and taking much booty; then
having rendered these realms subject unto himself turned he him back
again to his stronghold. So soon as the spring-tide was come, did Olaf
make ready his ships and put out to sea, sailing across to Skani
(Scania) where he went ashore.

The people of those parts assembled and fought against him; but Olaf was
victorious and gat much plunder. Thence sailed he eastward to the island
of Gotland, and took a merchant craft owned by men from Jamtaland who
rendered a stout defence, but in such wise did the struggle end that
Olaf cleared the ship, slew many men, & took possession of all the goods
that were on board.

A third battle fought he in Gotland; there likewise the day was to his
strength and much spoil was to his hand. Thus saith Halfrod the
Troublous-skald:

  'The foeman of the shrines slew merchants of Jamtaland
  And men of Vindland in battle
  As in days of youth had been his wont.
  To those that lived in Scotland
  Was the lord of "hersirs" the bane.
  Is it not told that the giver of gold
  Loved to fight in Skani?'


|| Therefore gathered the Emperor Otta a mighty host; men he had from
Saxland (north Germany), Frankland (France), and Frisland, whiles out of
Vindland, likewise King BurizlafSec. contributed a large host. With the
array went the King himself and his son-in-law Olaf Tryggvason.

To the Emperor was a great body of horsemen, and so much the more a
greater body of foot-folk.

From Holtsetaland (Holstein) likewise came to him a large host. As it is
said in the Vellekla:

  'So it befell likewise that the steeds of the sea
  Southward ran 'neath the deft riders to Denmark,
  And the Lord of the Hordmen, becoifed with the helmet,
  Chief of the Dofrar folk, sought the lords of the Dane-realm.
  And the bountiful King of the dark forest lands
  Would in winter-tide test the warrior come from the north,
  What time that doughty fighter gat from his chief a message
  Bidding him defend the wall against the foes of Denmark.
  Little gladsome was it to go against their hosts;
  Albeit the shield-bearer did cause great destruction,
  And the sea-hero incited to battle
  When the warriors came from Frisland with Franks and Vandals.'


|| Now Earl Hakon set companies above all the gates of the fortification,
but the greater part of his host sent he along the walls to defend the
places where the onslaught was hottest, and many fell of the Emperor's
host, but nothing did they win of the wall.

So then the Emperor turned him away, and no longer made trial there.
Thus it is said in the Vellekla:

  'Spear-points were broken when in that war game
  Shield clashed against shield and the foe gave not way;
  The steerer of the sea-steeds turned Saxons fleeing thence,
  And the chief 'fended the rampart 'gainst the foe.'


|| After this battle went back Earl Hakon even unto his ships and would
have homeward sailed unto Norway, but that he could get no wind, so
accordingly he lay out in Limfjord.


|| Now turned the Emperor Otta his host so that they faced around & hied
them to the gulf of Sle (Sleswick), whereat gathered he together a large
host and took his men across to Jutland.

When the intelligence thereof came to the ears of the King of Denmark
fared he forth against the Emperor with his host, and a great battle was
fought betwixt them.

The issue was to the Emperor, and thereon the King of Denmark fled away
to Limfjord & took ship out to Marsey.

Then did emissaries journey betwixt him and the Emperor, and a truce was
covenanted, also that they twain should commune face to face. In Marsey,
then, did the Emperor Otta and the Danish King confront one the other,
& there a saintly bishop,Sec. Poppo by name, preached the faith before
Harald, and to show the truth thereof bare he glowing iron in his hand,
and Harald testified that the hand of the holy man was unscarred by the
heated iron. Thereafter was Harald himself baptized with the whole of
the Danish host that were with him.

Ere this had Harald the King, albeit that he abode the nonce in Marsey,
summoned Earl Hakon to his aid, and the Earl had just come to the island
when the King let himself be christened. So the King sent a message to
the Earl to come to him, and when the Earl was come thither compelled
him also that he should be baptized. After this manner was the Earl made
a Christian, and all his men with him.

Thereafter did the King appoint him priests and other learned men,Sec. and
commanded him to cause all the people of Norway to be baptized into the
faith and with this they parted. Thereafter Earl Hakon put out to sea to
await a favourable wind, and when a breeze sprang up, lo! without more
ado set he all the learned men to wade even unto the shore and upon that
wind himself stood out to sea. The wind was from the west, and the Earl
sailed eastward through Eyrasund (Oeresund) pillaging whatsoever lands he
sighted, & thereafter came east unto the Skani side, plundering and
harrying wherever he put ashore. Now as he was sailing his course off
the skerries of east Gautland put he ashore and offered up a great
sacrifice, and whiles this was solemnized came two ravens flying up,
loudly croaking, & for this reason deemed the Earl that Odin had
accepted his sacrifice, and that good fortune would favour him in his
battles. Even so burned he all his ships and came ashore with every man
of all his host, and carried war throughout the land. Against him was
arrayed Earl Ottar, he that held rule over Gautland, and they fought a
great battle wherein was Earl Hakon victorious, & he slew Earl Ottar
together with a great number of his host.

Earl Hakon then marched hither & thither carrying war through both the
Gautlands, until he was come unto Norway, & then took he the road right
to the north, to Throndhjem. It is of this that the Vellekla speaketh:

  'The foeman of those who fled consulted the gods on the plain, and
  Gat answer Fret[Sec.] from that the day was propitious to battle;
  There the war-leader saw how mighty were the corse-ribs;
  The gods of the temple would thin lives in Gautland.
  A Sword-Thing held the Earl there where no man afore him
  With shield on arm had durst to harry;
  No one ere this so far inland had borne
  That shield of gold; all Gautland had he o'errun.
  With heaps of the fallen the warriors piled the plain
  The kith of the AEsirs conquered, Odin took the slain;
  Can there be doubt that the gods govern the fall of kings?
  Ye strong powers, I pray, make great the sway of Hakon.'


  [Illustration]

|| After that he had parted in all goodly friendship from the Danish
King, fared Emperor Otta back to his realm of Saxland; men say that he
held Svein the son of Harald at the font, & that the child bore the name
of Otta Svein. Harald, the Danish King, held by the Christian faith even
to the day of his death. King Burizlaf, after these things, betook
himself back to Wendland, & together with him in his company went his
son-in-law King Olaf Tryggvason. Of the battle aforesaid telleth
Hallfrod the Troublous-skald in Olaf's lay:

  'The ruler of war ships hewed and smote asunder warriors
  Even in Denmark to the south of Hedeby.'


|| It was the space of three winters that Olaf Tryggvason abode in
Wendland, even until Geira his wife fell ill of a sickness, whereof she
died, and so great a sorrow was this to Olaf that he no longer had
pleasure in living in Wendland.

Therefore getting him ships of war once more went he forth plundering
and harrying, first in Saxland, then in Frisland, and he even fared as
far as Flanders. Thus saith Hallfrod the Troublous-skald:

  'Oft did the son of Tryggvi smite to the death the Saxon
  And left maimed corses food for the wolves,
  And for their drink did that lord, beloved of his host,
  Give the brown blood of many a Frisian.
  Mighty sea-kings hewed
  In Flanders corses asunder,
  The prince to the ravens gave
  The flesh of Walloons as supper.'


|| Thereafter did Olaf Tryggvason sail for England, and ravaged apace &
afar in that country; right north did he sail to Nordimbraland
(Northumberland) and there harried; thence fared he farther to the
northward even to Scotland where he plundered and pillaged far and wide.

From thence sailed he again to the Hebrides, the where he fought more
than once, and afterwards sailed a course south to Man & fought there.
Far and wide did he plunder in Ireland and then sailed he to Bretland
(Wales) and pillaged there, & in Kumraland (Cumberland) did he likewise.
Then he sailed to Frankland (France) where he harried the people, & from
thence came back again, being minded to return to England, but came to
those Islands which are called Scilly in the western part of the English
main. Thus saith Hallfrod the Troublous-skald:

  'The unsparing young King plundered the Englishmen,
  The feeder of spear-showers made murder in Northumbria,
  The war-loving feeder of wolves laid waste to Scotia,
  The giver of gold fared with up-lifted sword in Man.
  The bearer of the elm-bow brought death to the hosts
  Of the Isle of Erin, for fame yearned the lord;
  Four winters did the King smite the dwellers in Wales,
  And Northumbrians hewed he
      ere the greed of the chough was appeased.'


|| Four winters did Olaf Tryggvason fare on viking cruises from the time
of his leaving Wendland even until his coming to the Isles of Scilly.


|| Now when Olaf Tryggvason was lying off the Isles of Scilly he heard
tell that there was a soothsayer thereon, and that he foretold the
future and spake of things not yet come to pass, and many folk believed
that things ofttimes happened according as this man had spoken. Now Olaf
being minded to make assay of his cunning sent to him the finest and
fairest of his men, in apparel as brave as might be, bidding him say
that he was the King, for Olaf had become famous in all lands in that he
was comelier and bolder and stronger than all other men. Since he had
left Garda, howsoever, he had used no more of his name than to call
himself Oli, and had told people that he was of the realm of Garda. Now
when the messenger came to the soothsayer and said he was the King, gat
he for answer: 'King art thou not, but my counsel to thee is that thou
be loyal to thy King,' & never a word more deigned the seer to utter.
Then went the messenger back and told Olaf this thing, and the King had
no longer any doubt that this man was verily a soothsayer, and his wish
to meet with him, now that he had heard such an answer, waxed greater
than heretofore. So Olaf went to him & communed with him, & asked him to
prophesy about his future, whether or not he would win himself a kingdom
or other good fortune. Then answered the prophet with saintly prophecy:
'Thou wilt be a glorious King, & do glorious deeds, to faith &
christening wilt thou bring many men, and thou wilt help thereby both
thyself & many others. But to the end that thou shalt not doubt about
this mine answer take this for a token: Hard by thy ships shalt thou
meet with guile & with foemen, & thou shalt do battle; and of thy men
some shall fall and thou thyself shalt be wounded. From that wound wilt
thou be nigh unto death and be borne on a shield to thy ship; yet of thy
hurt shalt thou be whole within a sennight and shall shortly thereafter
accept Christianity.' Then Olaf went down to the ships, & verily did
meet with the warlike men who would slay him & his followers, & their
combat ended even as the hermit had foretold, to wit, in such manner
that Olaf was indeed borne out to his ship on a shield & likewise was
whole again after a sennight. Then Olaf felt assured in his mind that it
was the truth that this seer had told him, and that of a truth was he a
wise soothsayer, whencesoever might he have his gift of prophecy.
So Olaf a second time went unto him and held much talk with him, and
questioned him closely as to whence he gat the wisdom to foretell what
was to come. And the hermit saith that the God of the men that were
baptized Himself causeth him to know all that He wisheth. Then recounted
he to Olaf the mighty works of God, & after these persuasions Olaf
assented unto Christianity, & it befell that he was there baptized, &
all the men that were with him. In that place abode he a long time and
learned the true Faith, and in his train bore away with him priests &
other learned men.


|| From the Isles of Scilly Olaf hied in the autumn to England, and there
lay he in a certain haven & lived in peace, for England was a Christian
land & now was he likewise a Christian man.


  [Illustration]

|| Now there went throughout the land a summons to a certain Thing, that
all men should come to the Thing, & when there was assemblage thither
came to it a queen whose name was Gyda.[Sec.]

She was the sister of Olav Kvaran who was King of Dublin, which is in
Ireland, and she had been married to a powerful earl in England who was
now dead, but after him she yet ruled his dominion.

Now there was a man in her dominions whose name was Alwin, a mighty
champion & 'holmgangsman.'Sec.

Alwin had wooed Gyda, but she had made answer that she herself would
make choice whom she would have among the men of her dominion, and
forasmuch as she would choose herself a husband was this Thing convened.
Thereto likewise came Alwin decked out in his best raiment, and many
others were there apparelled also in their best. Now Olaf too was come
thither, & he was clad in his bad-weather raiment, wearing a cloak
exceeding rough; and he stood with his followers somewhat aloof from the
others. Gyda walked hither & thither among the men, gazing at each one
favoured in her eyes; but when she was come to where Olaf held his
ground looked she searchingly up into his face and asked of what manner
of man was he. Then did he make answer that he was Oli, and said: 'I am
not of the country born nor bred.' Saith Gyda: 'Wilt thou have me? Even
upon that then will I choose thee.' 'I will not say nay to it,' quoth
he, and asked her name and lineage. 'I am,' said she, 'a King's daughter
of Ireland, but I was wedded into this country, to an earl who held
dominion here. Since the time that he died have I ruled the land; divers
men have wooed me, but none that I would wed, & my name is Gyda.'

Youthful was she and fair, and Olaf and she communed over this matter
even until they became of one accord, and thereafter was Olaf betrothed
to Gyda. This was but sour in the mouth of Alwin, but there was a custom
in England that when two contended about a matter they should meet in
single combat, and Alwin therefore bade Olaf Tryggvason fight with him
on this matter.

The time and place were appointed, & on either side were there chosen
twelve men. Then when they were met said Olaf unto his men that they
were to do even as he did, and a great axe had he in his hand. Now as
Alwin was minded to drive his sword into him Olaf struck it out of his
hand, & at the second stroke Alwin himself so that he fell to the
ground. Then did Olaf bind him fast, & in this manner also was treatment
meted out to the men that were with Alwin, to wit, to be beaten and
bound, and thereafter were taken home to Olaf's lodging. Then did he bid
Alwin depart from out the land & nevermore therein set foot again, and
thereafter Olaf took possession of all his lands.


  [Illustration]

|| So it came to pass that Olaf wedded Gyda & abode for the most part in
England, but sometimes in Ireland. Once when Olaf was out on a foray, it
fell that it was needful that they should foray ashore for provisions,
and accordingly went his men to land and drove down a number of cattle
to the shore. Then came a peasant after them & prayed Olaf give him back
his cows, & Olaf bade him take his cows could he find them; 'but let him
not delay our journey.' The peasant had with him a big cattle-dog. This
dog sent he into the herd of neat whereof were being driven many
hundreds, and the animal hither and thither ran among the drove,
singling out as many cows as the peasant said he owned, and all of them
were marked in the same manner.

Now knowing that the dog had chosen rightly it seemed to them that this
was passing clever, and so Olaf asked of the peasant whether he would
give him the dog. 'Willingly,' answered he, and Olaf in exchange
therefor gave him a gold ring, and the promise of his friendship.

That dog was named Vigi, and it was the best of all dogs; Olaf had
pleasure in him for a long time thereafter.


|| Now it came to the ears of the King of Denmark, even to him hight
Harald Gormson, that Earl Hakon had cast aside Christianity & had
pillaged in the country pertaining to the King of Denmark who thereon
gathered together an host, & thereafter fared to Norway.

And when he was come to the realm over which Earl Hakon had rule harried
he there, laying bare all the land. Then led he his host to the islets
which are called Solunder. Five homesteads alone stood unburned in
Lardal, in Sogn, and all the folk of the valley were fled to the
mountains and forests, taking with them such of their chattels as they
might carry. Thereafter the Danish King was minded to take his hosts to
Iceland to avenge the mockery of the Icelanders, for it happened that
they had made malicious verses about him.

Now a law had been made in Iceland to the end that for every soul in the
country one lampoon should be made on the Danish King, and the reason
therefor was to this wise, to wit, that a ship pertaining to men of
Iceland had stranded on the coast of Denmark & the Danes had taken all
the cargo thereon, calling it flotsam.

The man who had had the chief concern in this matter was one Birger, the
King's steward. Jests were made both on him and on the King, and this is
one of them:

  'When the fight-wonted Harald rode the sea-steed from the south
  In the shape of Faxe,
  The slayer of Vandals as wax became altogether as impotent.
  Birger by guardian sprites outcast in mare's shape met him
  As all men did behold.'


|| Now King Harald bade a warlock betake him to Iceland in one or other
guise, that he might bring him back tidings of the country.

And the warlock set forth in the shape of a whale, and when he was come
thither to Iceland he went along the north side of the coast, and he saw
that all the mountains and hills were full of guardian spirits, some
large & others small. When he was arrived at Vapnafjord there went he up
and was like to have gone ashore when, lo! a great dragon came down from
the valley, & in its company many serpents, toads, and vipers, and these
beasts belched venom at him. So swam he away westward all alongside the
land even the whole way until he was come to the mouth of the Eyjafjord,
& after he had turned up this fjord towards him there came a bird so
large that its wings reached the hills on either side, and with it were
a number of other birds, both large and tiny.

So away fared he thence, & westward along by the land to Breidafjord,
and there went he up the fjord, but a great bull came towards him
bellowing after a fashion that was most horrible, & in its company were
a swarm of kindred spirits.

Then went he away from there and swam past Reykjanes and was about to go
up on Vikarseid, but a hill giant came towards him with a staff in his
hand, and this giant carried his head higher than the hills, and with
him were many other giants.

Then swam he eastward all the way along the coast: 'There is nothing,'
quoth he, 'save sand and wilderness and great breakers outside; and so
broad is the sea betwixt the lands,' said he, 'that it is all unmeet for
long-ships.'


|| Now in those days Brod-Helgi dwelt in Vapnafjord, Eyolf Valgerdson in
Eyjafjord, Thord Gelli in Breidafjord and Thorod the Priest in Olfus.


|| Then put the King of Denmark his fleet about, standing south along the
coast, and thereafter sailed back to Denmark. Hakon the Earl caused all
the habitations that had been devastated to be builded up again, &
nevermore thereafter paid he any tribute to the King of Denmark.


|| Now it came to pass that Svein-- he who was afterwards called
Two-beard-- demanded a kingdom of his father King Harald, & as before so
again it befell that King Harald would not part Denmark in twain, nor
let any other man, no matter of what blood he was, have dominion
therein.

So Svein assembled a fleet of war & gave out that he was about to go on
a viking cruise, and when the whole of his fleet was come together, &
Palnatoki of the Jomsborg vikings was also come to his aid, Svein made
for Zealand, and went into Isafjord. There King Harald his father was
lying, likewise, with his ships, for he was preparing to sail to war,
& Svein fell upon him, & a great battle ensued; but many men flocked to
King Harald and Svein had to give way before great odds and flee. There
nevertheless did Harald receive such hurt that he died, and thereafter
Svein was hailed as King of Denmark. In those days Jomsborg in Wendland
was ruled by Earl Sigvaldi; he was the son of Strut-Harald who had ruled
Skani, and Sigvaldi's brothers were Heming and Thorkel the Tall. At that
time Bui the Burly of Borgundarholm & his brother Sigurd were likewise
chiefs among the Jomsborg vikings, and with them, too, was Vagn, who was
the son of Aki and Thorgunna and the sister's son of Bui and Sigurd.

Now Sigvaldi the Earl had made King Svein prisoner and had taken him to
Jomsborg in Wendland, and had constrained him to make peace with the
Wendish King Burizlaf.

It was to Earl Sigvaldi to settle the conditions of agreement between
them-- Sigvaldi had then to wife Astrid the daughter of King Burizlaf--
and if peace were not made, said the Earl, he would deliver King Svein
into the hands of the Wends.

Then the King knowing full well that they would torture him even to the
death was content that the Earl should be peacemaker, & the Earl
adjudged matters in such fashion that King Svein was to have the
daughter of King Burizlaf to wife, and King Burizlaf the sister of King
Svein, Tyra, that was daughter to Harald.

Moreover it was covenanted that the two Kings were to have each his own
dominion, and there was to be lasting peace between the countries.

Then did King Svein journey home to Denmark with his wife Gunnhild;
their sons were Harald and Knut the Great (Canute).

And in those days made the Danes great boast that they would sail with a
host to Norway even against Earl Hakon.


|| Now because King Svein was going to take his succession after his
father Harald, made he a great funeral feast, to which were bidden all
the chiefs of his kingdom.

Not long before this Strut-Harald of Skani had died, and also Veseti of
Borgundarholm, who was the father of Bui & Sigurd. The King therefore
sent word to the Jomsborg vikings bidding Earl Sigvaldi and Bui, and
their brothers, to come thither and seal their inheritance by drinking
grave-ale in memory of their fathers at the feast which the King himself
was about to give. And to this feast accordingly went the Jomsborg
vikings with all the stoutest of their folk; forty ships had they from
Wendland & twenty from Skani, & a great number of people were assembled
together. On the first day of the feast, before King Svein stepped into
his father's high seat, he drank the cup of memory to him, vowing
therewith that before three months were over he would go to England with
his hosts & slay King Ethelred, or drive him from the country. Now all
those who were at the feast were obliged to drink that cup of memory,
and for the chiefs of the Jomsborg vikings the largest horns were
filled, and withal with the strongest ale. When this cup of memory had
been drunk to the dregs then were all men to drink to the memory of
Christ; and ever to the Jomsborg vikings were brought the fullest horns
& the strongest drink. The third cup was to St. Michael, and this was
drunk by all; and thereafter Sigvaldi drank to his father's memory, &
made a vow that before three winters were passed he would go to Norway
and slay Eirik, or drive him from the land. Then did his brother Thorkel
the Tall swear that he would fare with Sigvaldi, and never shun battle
as long as Sigvaldi was fighting there; and Bui the Burly said that he
too would go with them to Norway, and not flee before Earl Hakon in
battle. Then did Vagn Eirikson swear that he also would accompany him,
& not return before he had slain Thorkel Leira and lain abed with his
daughter Ingibiorg.

Many other lords made vows anent sundry matters, & all men drank the
heirship ale. When the morrow was come and the Jomsborg vikings had
slept as long as they were minded, they deemed that they had spoken big
words enough & met together to take counsel as to how and when they
should proceed with their cruise, and then they covenanted to array
their ships and men as speedily as might be. Now this matter was
rumoured of far and wide in the lands.


|| Earl Eirik, the son of Earl Hakon, was at that season in Raumariki, &
hearing of these tidings straightway mustered the folk and set forth to
the Uplands, and then made his way northwards across the mountains to
Throndhjem, to his father Earl Hakon. Of this speaketh Thord Kolbeinson
in Eirik's lay:

  'In good sooth from the south came fearsome tales of war,
  Peasants even fear to fight;
  And the captain of the ship learned that the long-ships of the Danes
  Along their rollers were run out seawards.'


|| Earl Hakon and Earl Eirik caused war-arrows to be sent throughout the
whole of the district around Throndhjem, and sent messengers to
South-More, North-More, and Raumsdal; likewise sent they northward to
Naumdal and Halogaland, and when this was accomplished had they called
out their full muster of men and ships. Thus saith Eirik's lay:

  'Many a long-ship and bark and great keel
  (How the skald's praise grows apace)
  The shield-bearer caused to be run into the sea
  (Off-shore was the muster goodly)
  So that the warrior could defend the lands of his fathers.'


|| Earl Hakon went forthwith south to More, to reconnoitre and collect
men, while Earl Eirik assembled his host & took it southwards.


|| The Jomsborg vikings brought their hosts to Limfjord and thence sailed
out to sea; sixty ships had they, and they took them across to Agdir
whence without tarrying shaped they a course northward to the dominion
of Earl Hakon. They sailed off the coast, plundering & burning
wheresoever they went. Now there was a certain man named Geirmund who
was sailing in a light boat & had but few men with him, & he came to
More where he found Earl Hakon, & going in before the Earl as he sate at
meat told him that there was an host to the southward which was come
from Denmark. The Earl asked if he knew this in good sooth, and
Geirmund, holding up one of his arms from which the hand had been
severed, said that that was the token that a host was in the land.

Then did the Earl question him closely concerning this host, & Geirmund
said that it was the Jomsborg vikings, & that they had slain many men
and plundered far & wide: 'Nevertheless they are travelling speedily and
hard.

Methinks it will not be long before they are here.'

So then the Earl rowed up all the fjords, inwards along one shore and
outwards along the other faring night and day, and he sent scouts on to
the upper way across the isthmus,Sec. & south in the Fjords, & likewise
north where Eirik was now with his host.

It is of this that Eirik's lay telleth:

  'War-wise was the Earl who had long-ships on the main
  Heading with lofty prows against Sigvaldi,
  Mayhap many an oar shook,
  But the seamen who rent the sea with strong oar-blades
  Feared not death.'


|| Earl Hakon took his host southwards as speedily as ever he was able.


|| Sailing northwards with his fleet Earl Sigvaldi rounded Stad, and
first put in over against Hereya. Here, although the vikings fell in
with the folk of the country, never could they get from them the truth
as to the whereabouts of the Earl. Whithersoever they went the vikings
pillaged, & in the island of Hod they ran up ashore & plundered the
people, taking back with them to their ships both folk and cattle,
though all men capable of bearing arms they slew.

Now as they were going down again to their ships an old man approached
them-- for he was walking nigh to the men of Bui-- and unto them said
he, 'Not as warriors go ye here, driving neat and calves down to the
shore; better prey would it be for ye to take the bear since ye have
come so nigh his lair.'

'What saith the carle?' they cry, 'Can ye tell us aught of Earl Hakon?'
The peasant made answer: 'Yesterday he sailed to Hiorundarfjord having
with him one or two ships, or three at most, & at that time he had not
heard aught of ye.' Forthwith ran Bui & his men to their ships, leaving
all their booty behind, & Bui called out saying: 'Let us make the most
of having got this news, so that we may be the ones nighest to the
victory.'

And when they had mounted up into their ships straightway rowed they out
north of the isle of Hod, and then rounding that island into the fjord.


|| Earl Hakon and his son Earl Eirik were lying in Hallsvik, with their
hosts and one hundred and fifty ships.

Now they had heard by this time that the Jomsborg vikings were lying-to
off Hod, and the Earls accordingly rowed northward to seek them, and
when they were come to the place which is called Hiorungavag met they
one with another.

Both sides then set themselves in array for battle. In the midst of his
host was the banner of Earl Sigvaldi and over against this Earl Hakon
took up his position; Earl Sigvaldi had twenty ships, and Earl Hakon
sixty.

In Earl Hakon's following were the chiefs Thorir Hart of Halogaland, and
Styrkar of Gimsar. As for the battle array, one wing consisted of the
twenty ships belonging to Bui the Burly and his brother Sigurd. Against
these Earl Eirik Hakonson placed sixty ships, with him being the chiefs
Gudbrand the White from the Uplands & Thorkel Leira from Vik.

In the other wing of the array was Vagn Akason with twenty ships, and
against him with sixty ships was Svein Hakonson with Skeggi of Uphaug in
Yriar, and Rognvald from Ervik in Stad. In Eirik's lay it is told of
thus:

  'And the sea-ships to battle sped towards the Danish ships,
  The sea-host sailed the coast along:
  From before the vikings cleared the Earl away many at More
  The ships drifted amid war-slain heaps.'

And thus saith Eyvind in the Halogaland tale:

  'Hardly was it a tryst of joy in that day's dawning
  For the foemen of Yngvi Frey,
  When the land-rulers guided the long-ships across the waste,
  And the sword-elf from the south-land
  Thrust the sea-steeds against their hosts.'


|| Then the fleets were brought together and there ensued the grimmest of
battles, and many were slain on both sides, albeit the host of Hakon was
it which fared the worst, for the Jomsborg vikings fought stoutly both
with boldness & dexterity, shooting clean through the shields. So great
in number were the missiles which struck Earl Hakon that his shirt of
mail became all rent and useless so that he threw it from him.

Of this speaketh Tind Halkelson:

  'The kirtle which gold bedecked women wrought for the Earl
  (The sparks from the sword wax brighter)
  Could no longer be borne;
  Then the mailed hero from off him cast the King's shirt
  (Ready were the steeds of the sea).
  Asunder, on the sand, blown from the Earl by the wind
  Was the ring-weaved shirt of Sorli
  (Thereof bore he the marks).'


|| Now the ships of the Jomsborg vikings were both larger, and higher in
the gunwale, than were those of Earl Hakon, but nevertheless were they
boldly beset from both sides. Vagn Akason pressed the ships of Svein
Hakonson so hard that Svein let his men backwater & came nigh to
fleeing, whereupon Earl Eirik came up into his place & thrust himself
into the battle against Vagn, and Vagn backed his ship, and the craft
lay again as they had lain at first.

Then Eirik returned to his own battle, where his men were now going
astern, and Bui having cut himself free from his lashings was about to
follow the fugitives.

Eirik then laid his ship alongside the ship of Bui, & a sharp hand to
hand struggle took place, and two or three of the ships of Eirik set on
the one ship whereon was Bui.

Then a storm came on, and there fell hailstones so heavy that one stone
alone weighed an ounce. Then did Sigvaldi cut his ship adrift & went
about, with the intention of fleeing; Vagn Akason cried out to him
bidding him stay, but never a moment would Sigvaldi heed give to what he
said, so Vagn sent a javelin after him, and smote the man who held the
tiller. Earl Sigvaldi rowed out of the battle with thirty-five ships and
left twenty-five behind him.

Then did Earl Hakon bring his ship round to the other side of that of
Bui, and short respite then had the men of Bui between the blows. Now
there was an anvil with a sharp end standing on the forecastle of the
ship that pertained to Bui, and the reason thereof was that some man had
made use thereof when welding the hilt of his sword, and Vigfus the son
of Vigaglums, who was a man of great strength, took up the anvil &
throwing it with both hands, drave it into the head of Aslak Holmskalli,
so that the snout thereof entered his brain. No weapon hitherto had
scathed Aslak, though he had been laying about him on either side.

He was the foster-son of Bui, and his forecastle man. Yet another of the
men to Bui was Havard the Hewer; even stronger was he, and a man of
great valour. During this struggle the men of Eirik went up aboard Bui's
ship, & made aft to the poop, towards Bui, and Thorstein Midlang struck
him full across the nose, cleaving asunder the nose-piece of his helmet,
and leaving a great wound.

Bui then smote Thorstein in the side in such a manner that he cut the
man right athwart his middle, and then seizing two chests of gold he
shouted: 'Overboard all the men of Bui,' and plunged into the sea with
the chests, and many of his men likewise sprang overboard, though others
fell on the ship, for little avail was it to ask for quarter. The ship
was now cleared from stem to stern, and the other craft were likewise
cleared one after the other.


|| After this Earl Eirik brought his ships alongside that of Vagn, and
from the latter met with right stout resistance; in the end however the
ship was cleared, and Vagn and thirty men taken prisoners. Bound were
they & taken on land, and Thorkel Leira went up to them and spoke thus:
'Vagn, thou didst vow to slay me, but me seemeth it is I who am more
like to slay thee.'

Now it happened that Vagn and his men were all sitting on the felled
trunks of a mighty tree, and Thorkel had a big axe, & with it he struck
at the man who was sitting farthest off on the trunk.

Vagn and his men were so bound that a rope was passed round their feet,
but their hands were free. Then said one of them, 'I have in my hand a
cloak-clasp, and into the earth will I thrust it if I wot anything after
my head is off'-- and his head was struck off, and down fell the clasp
from his hand.

Hard by sat a fair man with goodly hair and he swept his hair forward
over his face, saying as he stretched forth his neck: 'Make not my hair
bloody.' A certain man took the hair in his hand and held it fast, and
Thorkel swang the axe so as to strike, but the viking drew back his head
suddenly & he who was holding his hair moved forward with him, and lo,
the axe came down on both his hands and took them off, thereafter
cleaving the earth. Then Earl Eirik came up and asked: 'Who is that fine
man?' 'Sigurd the lads call me,' said he, 'and I am thought to be a son
to Bui: not yet are all the vikings of Jomsborg dead.' 'Thou must of a
surety be a true son to Bui; wilt thou have quarter?' 'That dependeth
upon who is the bidder thereof,' said Sigurd. 'He offereth it who hath
power to give it, to wit Earl Eirik.' 'Then will I take it,' and loosed
was he from the rope. Then said Thorkel Leira: 'Though thou grantest
quarter, Earl, to all these men, yet never shall Vagn Akason depart
hence alive,' & so saying he ran forward with uplifted axe. Just then
the viking Skadi tripped in the rope, and dropped before Thorkel's feet,
and Thorkel fell flat over him, and Vagn seizing the axe dealt Thorkel
his death-blow. Then said the Earl: 'Wilt thou have quarter?' 'Yea
will I,' said he, 'if we all are given quarter.' 'Loose them from the
rope,' said the Earl, and so it was done accordingly.

Eighteen of these men were slain, but to twelve was quarter granted.


|| Now Earl Hakon & many of his men with him were sitting on a log.

Suddenly there twanged a bowstring from Bui's ship, but the arrow struck
Gizur of Valders, a feudatory who was sitting by the Earl & was clad in
brave apparel, & forthwith went sundry of Hakon's men out to the ship
and found on it Havard the Hewer kneeling by the bulwarks, for his feet
had been smitten off him. A bow had he in his hand and when they were
come out to the ship, as aforesaid, Havard asked: 'Who fell off the
tree-trunk?' 'One named Gizur,' they say. 'Then was my luck lesser than
I wished.' 'Ill-luck enough,' say they, 'and more hurt shalt thou not
do,' & therewith they slew him. After these things the dead were
searched, and the booty brought together for division; five and twenty
ships belonging to the Jomsborg vikings were thus cleared of booty. Tind
saith as follows:

  'He, feeder of ravens,
  (Their swords did smite their thighs)
  Against the friends of the Wends long did struggle,
  Until he who shields destroyed had
  Five and twenty ships laid waste.'


|| Thereafter were the hosts dispersed.

Earl Hakon betook him to Throndhjem, taking it full ill that Eirik had
given Vagn Akason quarter.

Men say that during this battle Earl Hakon made sacrifice of his son
Erling in order to gain the victory, and afterwards the hailstorm came,
and that then the slaughtering changed over out of the hands of the
Jomsborgers. After the battle Earl Eirik went to the Uplands, and from
there east to his dominions, and with him went Vagn Akason. Thereafter
Eirik gave the daughter of Thorkel Leira-- Ingibiorg was her name-- in
marriage to Vagn, & a goodly long-ship to boot, well furnished in all
things appertaining thereto, & a crew did he get him for the ship, and
they parted in all friendship. Vagn thence fared southward home to
Denmark, and became thereafter a famous man.

Many men of might are descended from him.


|| Now it hath been heretofore related how Harald the Grenlander was King
of Vestfold, and how Asta, the daughter of Gudbrand Kula had he taken to
wife. One summer when he was out laying waste the countries to the
eastward, came he to Sweden where Olaf the Swede was King in those days.
Olaf was the son of Eirik the Victorious and of Sigrid the daughter of
Skogla-Tosti.

Sigrid was now a widow and to her pertained many great manors in Sweden.
When she heard that her foster-brother Harald the Grenlander had come
ashore not far from where at that time she was abiding, sent she
messengers to him, bidding him to a feast which she was making ready to
give. Thereat was Harald glad, and fared to Astrid with a great
following of men. And a goodly feast was it withal: the King and the
Queen sat in the high-seat and in the evening drank both together, and
among the men flowed the ale freely.

At night when the King went to his rest his bed had on it a costly
coverlet, and was hung with precious cloths; in that house there were
but few men. And the King having unclad him, & gotten into bed, the
Queen came hither to him and poured out a cup, and pressed him hard to
drink; right kind was she to him withal. Now the King was exceeding
drunken, and the Queen likewise.

Then fell the King asleep, and Sigrid went away to her bed. Now the
Queen was a very wise woman, and far seeing in many things. The next
morning flowed the drink ever apace, but as ofttimes cometh to pass when
men have drunk heavily, even so the more wary of drink are most of them
on the morrow. Yet was the Queen merry, and she and Harald spake much
together, and as their talk ran on, the Queen said that she deemed her
lands & kingdom in Sweden to be of no less worth than his in Norway. Now
at this manner of talking the King waxed moody, and found but little
pleasure in anything thereafter, and heavy at heart he made him ready
to go; yet was the Queen exceeding merry, gave him great gifts, &
accompanied him on his way.


|| So back to Norway fared he that autumn, & abode at home during that
winter, but little enough pleasure gat he the while. The summer
thereafter went he eastward with his host, and shaped his course for
Sweden. Word sent he to Sigrid that he desired to meet her, & she rode
down to him, & they talked together; then without more ado he asked her
whether she would have him for mate, to which Sigrid made answer that to
do such a thing would indeed be foolish, seeing that he is well married
already, and better for him might not be. Harald confessed Asta to be a
good wife and brave, 'but of such noble blood as mine is she not
withal.' Then answered Sigrid. 'Maybe thou art of higher lineage than
she, yet nevertheless it beseemeth to me that with her is the happiness
of ye both.' And after that few were the words spoken between them
before the Queen rode away.


|| Then was King Harald sick at heart, & he made him ready to ride inland
to see Queen Sigrid yet once more. Many of his men counselled him
therefrom, but none the less went he with a great following to the house
of which Sigrid was lady. That same evening there came thither from the
east, from Gardariki (western Russia), another king-- VissavaldSec. was his
name, & he likewise came to woo Sigrid the Queen. The kings & all their
retinue were given seats in a large & ancient chamber; & ancient also
were the furnishings of this room, but drink more than enough went round
that evening, so strong indeed that all became drunken, and both the
head-guard, and the outer-guard fell asleep. Then, during the night--
and all this was caused by Queen Sigrid-- were they fallen upon with
fire and sword; both the chamber & the men who were therein were burned,
& of those who came out from it not one was allowed to go alive.

Quoth Sigrid on this matter, that she would teach small kings from other
lands to woo her; & thereafter she was called Sigrid the Scheming.


|| It was the winter before these things befell that the battle with the
Jomsborg vikings was fought in Hiorungavag. Now while Harald was gone
inland, one Hrani was left in charge of the ships and men; but when the
news came that Harald had been done to death, fared they thence
forthwith, & going back to Norway recounted the tidings.

And to Asta went Hrani & told her all things concerning their voyage, &
likewise the errand that had urged King Harald to Queen Sigrid. When she
heard these tidings Asta went straightway to the Uplands to her father,
and right welcome was she made, but exceeding wrathful were they both at
the base design which had been toward in Sweden, & with Harald that he
had been minded to leave her in loneliness. Asta, the daughter of
Gudbrand, brought forth a son even there in the summer; this boy was
called Olaf at his baptism, & Hrani poured the water over him. At the
outset was the child reared by Gudbrand & Asta his mother.


|| Earl Hakon ruled the whole coast of Norway; sixteen counties had he
under his sway, and forasmuch as Harald Fairhair had prescribed that an
earl should be over every county, and that prescription had endured for
long, there were under him sixteen earls. Thus it is said in the
Vellekla:

  'Where else know we the government
  (On this the hosts may ponder)
  Of one land-ruler over the lands of sixteen earls?
  Unto the four corners of heaven rises the rumour
  Of the doughty deeds of the belauded chieftain.'


|| During the rule of Earl Hakon the increase was good in the land, &
peace was there within it among the peasantry. Well-beloved, too, was
the Earl among them for the greater part of his life, but as his years
waxed old it happened that his intercourse with women became unseemly,
and to such a pass came this that the Earl would cause the daughters of
powerful men to be brought unto him, when he would lie with them for a
week or twain, and then send them back to their homes. This manner of
acting brought him to great enmity with the kinsmen of these women, and
the peasantry fell to murmuring, as is the wont of the folk of
Throndhjem when things are not to their liking.


|| Now there came to the ears of Earl Hakon the fame of a man overseas
westward who called himself Oli, & whom men held for a King; and he
misdoubted from the talk of certain folk that this man must be of the
lineage of the Norwegian Kings. He was told, indeed, that Oli called
himself Gerdish (i.e., of Garda) by race, but the Earl had heard that
Tryggvi Olafson had had a son who had been taken eastward to Garda
(western Russia), and had been brought up there at the Court of King
Valdamar, and that his name was Olaf.

Often had the Earl sought information about this man, and he misdoubted
that he it was who had now come to the western countries. Now to Hakon
the Earl was a great friend, one Thorir Klakka, who was known far and
wide, for he had sailed long whiles as a viking, and at others as a
merchant.

So west across the sea Earl Hakon now despatched this man, bidding him
fare to Dublin as a merchant, as many were wont to fare in those days.
It was laid on Thorir that he should ascertain of what manner of man was
this Oli, and should he hear of a truth he was Olaf Tryggvason, or of
the lineage of the Kings of Norway, then was Thorir, if it might be,
to ensnare him into the power of the Earl.


|| So Thorir gat him west to Dublin, and enquiring there for tidings of
Oli learned that he was with his brother-in-law King Olaf Kvaran.Sec.
Thereafter Thorir brought it to pass that he gat speech of Oli, and when
they had talked often and long (for Thorir was a very smooth-tongued
man) fell Oli to asking about the Upland kings: which of them were still
alive and what dominions pertained to them.

Likewise asked he concerning the Earl, and if he were much beloved in
the country. Thorir answered: 'The Earl is so mighty a man that no one
durst speak but as he wills, nevertheless the reason of this is that we
have none other to look to. Verily know I the minds of many mighty men,
& of the people likewise, & that they would be eager & ready were a king
of the lineage of Harald Fair-hair to come to the realm.

Of this, however, is there no likelihood inasmuch as it has been well
proven how little it availeth to contend against Earl Hakon.'

And when they had talked much together on this matter, revealed Olaf
unto Thorir his name & lineage, & craved counsel of him whether the
peasantry would have him for their King should he fare over to Norway.
With eagerness sought Thorir to urge him on to make this journey,
praising him and his prowess most exceedingly. Then did Olaf conceive a
great desire to be gone to the realm of his kin; and sailed he
thereafter from the west with five ships, going first to the Hebrides; &
together with him went Thorir. Later sailed he to the Orkneys where Earl
Sigurd, the son of Hlodvir, was lying in Asmundarvag (Osmundwall) in
Rognvaldzey (South Ronaldsey) in a long-ship for he was about to sail
over to Katanes (Caithness). Then did King Olaf sail his folk from the
west & put into haven in the island because Pettlanzfjord (Pentland
Firth) was not navigable.

When the King heard that the Earl was lying there summoned he him to
talk with him, and Earl Sigurd having come to the King not long did they
talk ere the King Olaf said that the Earl and all the folk of the land
must let themselves be baptized or they would straightway be put to
death; and the King said he would carry fire & sword through the isles,
and lay waste the land if the folk thereof did not allow themselves to
be christened.

So the Earl being thus beset chose to accept baptism, and was baptized
there and then with all his men. Thereafter swore the Earl an oath that
he would become the King's man, & give him his son for a hostage-- his
name was Whelp or Hound-- and Olaf took him home with him to Norway.


|| Olaf then sailed eastward out to sea, and when he left the main, went
in to the Isle of Most, where he went on land in Norway for the first
time.

He caused a Mass to be said in his tent, & on the self-same spot was a
church afterward builded. Now Thorir Klakka told the King that their
wisest course was to keep secret his identity, and to let not the
slightest rumour about him get abroad, and to travel as speedily as
might be so as to fall upon the Earl while he was still unawares.

Even so did King Olaf, faring northward day and night according to the
set of the wind, & he let not the people know of his journey, nor who
it was that was sailing. When he was come north to Agdanes gat he
tidings that Earl Hakon was within the fjord, & moreover that he was at
variance with the peasantry. Now when Thorir heard tell of this quite
otherwise was it from what he had expected, for after the battle of the
Jomsborg vikings all men in Norway were full friendly with Earl Hakon by
reason of the victory he had won, & which had saved the land from war;
but now so ill had things befallen that here was the Earl at strife with
the peasantry, & that with a great chief come into the land.


|| At this time Hakon the Earl was a guest at Medalhus in Gaulardal, his
ships lying off Vigg the while.

Now there was a certain Orm Lyrgia, a wealthy yeoman who lived at Bynes,
and he had to wife Gudrun the daughter of Bergthor of Lundar, & so fair
a woman was this Gudrun that she was called the 'sun of Lundar.'

And on such an errand as this, namely to bring unto him Orm's wife, did
Earl Hakon send his thralls.

The men coming thither to Bynes made known their errand, but Orm bade
them first go out & sup, & before they had well eaten there had come to
him many men whom he had sent for from the neighbouring homesteads. Then
said Orm that he would in nowise suffer Gudrun to go with the thralls;
and Gudrun herself bade the thralls go tell the Earl that never would
she go to him save he sent Thora of Rimul,Sec. a wealthy lady and one of
the Earl's sweethearts, to fetch her. Then the thralls said that they
would come once again in such a manner that both master and mistress
would repent them of this business, & uttering grievous threats they gat
them gone. Now in all four directions of the countryside did Orm send
out war-arrows, and with them word that all men should rise against
Hakon the Earl to slay him. Moreover he let Haldor of Skerdingsted be
told, and forthwith Haldor also made despatch of the war-arrow.

Not long before this had the Earl taken the wife of a man named
Bryniolf, and from that piece of work had arisen a great pother, and
something nigh the assembling together of an host.

So after receiving the message aforesaid all the people hastened
together and made their way to Medalhus, but to the Earl coming news of
their motions thereon left he the house together with his men and went
to a deep valley which is now called Jarlsdal (the Earl's valley), and
therein they hid themselves. The day thereafter kept the Earl watch on
the peasant host. The peasants had encompassed all the footways, though
they were mostly of a mind that the Earl had made off to his ships.
These were now commanded by his son Erling, a young man of singular
promise.

When night fell sent the Earl his men away from him, bidding them take
to the forest tracks out to Orkadal, 'No one will harm ye if I am
nowhere nigh,' he said. 'Send also word to Erling to go out of the fjord
so that we may meet in More. I shall find a means to hide me from the
peasants.' Then the Earl departed and a thrall of his named Kark bore
him company.

Ice was there on the Gaul river, but the Earl set his horse at it & they
came through, with the loss of his cloak, to a cave which has since been
called Jarlshellir (the Earl's cave), and therein slept they soundly.
When Kark awakened recounted he unto the Earl a dream he had dreamt: how
a man black & ill to behold had come nigh the cave, and he was afeared
would enter it, and this man had told him that 'Ulli' was dead.

Then said the Earl, 'Erling must have been slain.' For the second time
Thormod Kark slept and he cried out in his sleep, and when he awoke told
his dream, namely that he had seen the self-same man coming down again,
& he had bidden Kark tell the Earl that now all the sounds were closed.

And Kark telling Earl Hakon his dream said he thought it might betoken a
short life for him. Thereafter they arose and went to the homestead of
Rimul, whence sent the Earl Kark to Thora bidding her come privily to
him. This did she in haste, and made the Earl right welcome, and he
craved of her hiding were it but for a few nights even until dispersed
should be the peasants. 'Here is it that thou wilt be sought by them,'
said she, 'and search will they make both within and without, throughout
the whole of this my homestead, for many there are that wot over well
how that I would fain help thee all that I might.

Howbeit one place is there wherein would I never seek for such a man as
thou, and that is in the swine-sty.' So thither hied they and said the
Earl: 'Here then will we hide us, for it behoves us that first of all
must we give heed to our own lives.' Thereupon dug the thrall a large
ditch in the sty & carried away the earth, and afterwards placed wood
across it.

And Thora brought unto the Earl tidings that Olaf Tryggvason was come up
the fjord, and that he had slain the Earl's son Erling.

Right so went the Earl into the trench, & Kark with him, and Thora
dragged wood athwart it, and swept earth and muck over it, and drave the
swine thereon. Now the swine-sty was under a certain big rock.


  [Illustration]

|| With five long-ships shaped Olaf Tryggvason his course into the fjord,
& Erling, the son of Earl Hakon with his three ships rowed him out to
meet him. Or ever the ships drew nigh one to another Erling and his men
knew that this was war, and then in lieu of coming to a meeting with
Olaf did they make head for the land. Now Olaf when he had seen the
long-ships rowing down the fjord towards him thought to himself that
this would be Earl Hakon, and thereon gave the word of command to row
ahead as hard as might be.

The men of Erling even so soon as they were come nigh unto the shore
leapt they in haste overboard & made for land. Thither after them were
come the ships of Olaf and he himself saw swimming a man exceeding fair
to look upon, and thereon seized he the tiller and threw it even unto
this man, and the tiller smote the head of Erling, he that was son of
the Earl, so that his skull was cloven, yea even to the brain.

Thus came it to pass that Erling lost his life.

There slew the men of Olaf many, but even so did a few make good their
escape; others again made they prisoners, & giving them quarter gat
tidings from them.

Thus learnt Olaf that the peasants had driven away Earl Hakon, that he
was fleeing before them, and that all the folk that were his were
scattered.

Thereafter did the peasants come unto Olaf, and as all liked one another
passing well forthwith entered they into fellowship.

The peasants hailed him for their King, and they covenanted together to
seek Earl Hakon, & to make search up into Gaulardal where if
peradventure he was to be found in any of the houses there, deemed they
it likeliest would he be at Rimul since all men knew for why.

Thora was the dearest friend to him in that valley. So thither went
they, and sought the Earl both without and within but of him could they
find no trace; and Olaf summoned the people together out in the yard,
and standing on the rock which was beside the swine-sty spake unto them,
and the words that he uttered were that he would reward with riches and
honour the man who would work mischief to Earl Hakon.

This speech was heard both by the Earl and Kark. Now by them in the sty
had they a light there with them, and the Earl said: 'Why art thou so
pale, yet withal as black as earth? Is it in thy heart, Kark, that thou
shouldst betray me?' 'Nay,' said Kark, 'we two were born on the
self-same night, and long space will there not be twixt the hour of our
deaths.' Towards evening went King Olaf away, & when it was night Kark
slept, and the Earl kept watch, but Kark was troubled in his sleep. Then
the Earl awakened him & asked him whereof he dreamt, and he said: 'I was
now even at Ladir, and Olaf Tryggvason placed a gold ornament about my
neck.'

The Earl answered: 'A blood-red ring will it be that Olaf Tryggvason
will lay about thy neck, shouldst thou meet with him. Beware now, and
betray me not, & thou shalt be treated well by me as heretofore.' Then
stay they both sleepless each watching the other, as it might be, but
nigh daybreak fell the Earl asleep and was troubled at once, so troubled
that he drew his heels up under him & his head likewise under him, and
made as though he would rise up, calling aloud and in a fearsome way.
Then grew Kark afeard & filled with horror, so it came to pass that he
drew a large knife from his belt and plunged it into the throat of the
Earl cutting him from ear to ear. Thus was encompassed the death of Earl
Hakon.

Then cut Kark off the head of the Earl and hasted him away with it, and
the day following came he with it to Ladir unto King Olaf, and there
told he him all that had befallen them on their flight, as hath already
been set forth. Afterwards King Olaf let Kark be taken away thence, &
his head be sundered from his trunk.


|| Thereafter to Nidarholm went King Olaf and likewise went many of the
peasantry, and with them bare they the heads of Earl Hakon and Kark. In
those days it was the custom to use this island as a place whereon might
be slain thieves & criminals, and on it stood a gallows. And the King
caused that on this gallows should be exposed the heads of Earl Hakon
and Kark. Then went thither the whole of the host, and shouted up at
them and cast stones, and said that they went to hell each in goodly
company, ever one rascal with another. Thereafter did they send men up
to Gaulardal, & after they had dragged thence the body of Earl Hakon did
they burn it.

So great strength was there now in the enmity that was borne against
Earl Hakon by the folk that were of Throndhjem that no one durst breathe
his name save as the 'bad Earl,' and for long afterwards was he called
after this fashion.

Nevertheless it is but justice to bear testimony of Earl Hakon that he
was well worthy to be a chief, firstly by the lineage whereof he was
descended, then for his wisdom and the insight with which he used the
power that pertained to him, his boldness in battle, and withal his
goodhap in gaining victories and slaying his foemen. Thus saith Thorleif
Raudfelldarson:

  'Hakon! no Earl more glorious 'neath the moon's highway:
  In strife and battle hath the warrior honour won,
  Chieftains mine to Odin hast thou sent,
  (Food for ravens were their corses)
  Therefore wide be thy rule!'


|| The most generous of men was Earl Hakon, yet even to such a chief
befell so great mishap on his dying-day. And this was brought about by
the coming of the time when blood-offerings & the men of blood-offerings
were doomed, & in their stead were found the true Faith and righteous
worship.


|| In general Thing at Throndhjem was Olaf Tryggvason chosen to be King
of the land, even as Harald Fair-hair had been King. Indeed the folk
rose up, & the crowds would hear of nought else but that Olaf Tryggvason
should be King; and Olaf went throughout the country conquering it,
& all men in Norway vowed allegiance to him.

Even the lords of the Uplands and Vik who had before held their lands
from the Danish King now became men unto Olaf and held their lands from
him. Then in the first winter & the summer thereafter fared he through
the country.

Earl Eirik Hakonson, and Svein his brother, & others of their kith and
friendship fled from the land, & going eastward to Sweden, even unto
King Olaf the Swede, were by him well received. Thus saith Thord
Kolbeinson:

  'Foemen of robbers! swiftly can fate cause change,
  Brief space 'fore the treason of men did Hakon to death,
  And to the land erewhile taken by the fighter in battle
  Came now the son of Tryggvi, faring from the west.
  More in his mind had Eirik against his lord and King
  Than can now be spoken of, as might be thought of him.
  In wrath sought the Earl counsel of the King of the Swedes
  (Stubborn are the folk of Throndhjem, ne'er one will flee).'


|| Now the name of a certain man from Vik was Lodin, and he possessed
much wealth and was come of a goodly lineage. Often fared he as a
merchant, but upon occasion as a viking. Now it befell one summer that
Lodin, to whom appertained the ship, wherein was a fair cargo, did set
sail eastward with merchandise that was his, and after making Estland
spent he the summer there in the places where the fairs were held. Now
the while a fair happeneth are many kinds of goods thither brought to it
for sale, & likewise come many thralls, and among them as it befell in
this wise one day saw Lodin a woman, who when he looked on her perceived
he her to be Astrid, the daughter of Eirik whom King Tryggvi had had to
wife. Now indeed was she unlike what she had been when he had aforetime
seen her, for pale was she, and wasted, and poorly clad; but went he up
to her & asked her about herself, and she answered: 'Sad is it to relate
that have I been sold for a slave, & yet again am I brought hither for
sale.' Thereafter did they recognize one another, & Astrid knew well all
about him and she besought him to buy her & take her back to her kin.
'I will make a bargain with thee on this matter,' said he, 'I will bear
thee home with me to Norway if thou wilt wed me.'

So Astrid being in such dire straits and knowing him full well to be a
man that was brave & had many possessions, yea and moreover goodly
lineage, plighted she him her troth so that she might be set free. Thus
it came to pass that Lodin bought Astrid, and bare her away home even
unto Norway, and wedded her there with the goodwill of her kinsfolk. The
children she bare to him were Thorkel Nefia, Ingirid, and Ingigerd;
while the daughters of Astrid by King Tryggvi were Ingibiorg and Astrid.

The sons of Eirik Biodaskalli were Sigurd Carles-head, Jostein, and
Thorkel Dydril; all these were noble & wealthy, and to them pertained
manors in the east of the country.

Two brothers that dwelt in Vik, Thorgeir & Hyrning as they were named,
took to wife the daughters of Astrid and Lodin.


  [Illustration]

|| After the Danish King, Harald Gormson, had embraced the faith of
Christ made he proclamation throughout his dominions that all men must
allow themselves to be baptized, and must turn to the true Faith.
He himself followed hard on the bidding, making use of force and
chastisement when naught else could prevail.

He sent to Norway with a great host two Earls that were called
Urgutherjot and Brimiskiar;Sec. the mission to them was that they should
proclaim Christianity throughout the land & the same also in Vik which
had done direct homage unto Harald himself.

Folk made they submissive readily enough, and many country folk were
thereon baptized. Howsoever it came to pass that after the death of
Harald speedily went his son Svein Two-beard to war in Saxland,
Frisland, and at last also in England, and then those of Norway who had
received Christianity returned to sacrifices, as in the old times
aforesaid in the north country.

But Olaf Tryggvason after that he was King in Norway dwelt he for long
in the summer at Vik, where he was made welcome with great show of
affection; and to that place came also many of his kindred, & others who
were allied to him, and many that had been good friends with his father.
Then did Olaf summon to him his uncle, & his step-father Lodin, & his
step-brothers Thorgeirr and Hyrning, and laying the matter before them
besought them most earnestly to undertake with him, and thereafter with
all their might support the spreading of the message of Christianity,
for this message it was his wish to carry throughout the whole of his
dominions.

And, said he, that he would have it his way or die, 'I will make all of
ye great and powerful men, for it is upon ye that chiefly do I rely
inasmuch as ye are to me kith & brethren.' So all were agreed to do what
he bade them and support him in that which he desired, and to have
fellowship with all those that were of a mind to follow their counsel.

Then did King Olaf proclaim that he would invite all men in his realm to
become Christians, and those who had agreed this aforetime straightway
did his bidding, & as they were the most powerful of those present, all
the others did according to their example. Thereafter were all folk
baptized in the eastern part of Vik, & then went the King to the
northern parts thereof and invited all men to receive Christianity; and
those who said nay chastised he severely, slaying some, and maiming
some, and driving away others from the land. So it came to pass that the
people of the whole of that kingdom whereover his father King Tryggvi
had ruled aforetime, and likewise that which his kinsman Harald the
Grenlander had possessed, received Christianity according to the bidding
of King Olaf. Wherefore in that summer and in the winter thereafter were
the people of the whole of Vik made Christian.


|| Early in the spring-time was King Olaf astir, and leaving Vik went he
north-west to Agdir and whithersoever he went summoned he the peasants
to a Thing, and bade all men let themselves be baptized. And forasmuch
as none of the peasantry durst rise up against the King, the people were
baptized withersoever he went, and the men embraced Christianity.


|| Bold men and many were there in Hordaland who were come of the kin of
Horda Kari. To him had been born four sons: firstly, Thorleif the Wise,
secondly, Ogmund who was the father of Thorolf Skialg, the father of
Erling of Soli; thirdly, Thord the father of Klyp the 'hersir' (he that
slew Sigurd Sleva Gunnhildson) and fourthly, Olmod the father of Aksel
who was the father of Aslak Fitiar-skalli. This stock was greatest and
bravest in Hordaland.


|| Now when these kinsmen heard the disquieting tidings that the King was
coming from the east along the coast, and with him a large host who
forced all men that they should break the old laws of the old gods, and
imposed penalties with sore chastisements on all those who spake not to
his liking, agreed they to meet together to take counsel upon their
plans for well knew they the King would soon be upon them; it was
therefore agreed among them that they would one & all be present at the
Gula-Thing, and there should they meet Olaf Tryggvason.


|| Even so soon as he was come to Rogaland did Olaf summon a Thing,
& thereto came the peasantry in great numbers and fully armed.

And being come together made they speeches and held consultations among
themselves, & chose three men who were the most eloquent among them to
answer back the King at the Thing. Moreover were they to speak against
him and make it known that they would not suffer their laws to be broken
even were it the King who ordained the same. Now when the peasants were
assembled at the Thing & the Thing was opened, rose up King Olaf and
spake, talking at the outset smooth and fair albeit it was manifest in
his talking that it was his will that they should accept Christianity.

And after he had done with fair words he fell to vowing that those who
spoke against him and would not do his bidding would bring upon
themselves his wrath & chastisement and hard entreatment howsoever he
might bring it about.

Now when the King had made an end to speaking there stood up one of the
yeomen who was the most eloquent & who had been chosen as the first to
make answer to King Olaf.

But when he was about to speak was he taken with such a coughing &
choking that he could not get forth a word, and down sat he again.
Sorely as it had gone with the first yet nevertheless rose another man
to his feet to take up the answer, but when he began to talk so greatly
did he stammer that never a word could he get forth. Then all who were
present fell to laughing, so that the yeoman sat himself down again.
Then stood the third man up with intent to speak against King Olaf, but
so hoarse was he and husky that no man could hear what he said, so down
he sat likewise. There being now none of the chosen yeomen left to speak
against the King, and no one else would answer him, the resistance that
had been projected came to naught.

In the end therefore were all agreed to do the King's bidding, and all
the Thing folk were christened there and then or ever the King departed
from them.


|| King Olaf proceeded to the Gula-Thing accompanied by his men, for the
peasants had sent unto the King saying that there they would answer him
on this matter. But when both parties were come to the Thing the King
made known that it was his wish first to have speech with the chiefs of
the land, so when all were assembled there he set forth his purpose in
being present, which was to impose baptism upon them.

Then spake Olmod the Old and said: 'We kinsmen have taken counsel
together on this matter, and of one consent are we thereon. If thou,
King, thinkest to force us kinsmen to such a thing as the breaking of
our laws, and wilt bend us to thy will, then will we defy thee by all
means in our power, & fate must decide whoso shall get the mastery.

But if thou, O King, wilt advance us kinsfolk somewhat then thou mayst
bring it so well about that we shall turn to thee in hearty obedience.'
Quoth the King, 'What is that which ye demand that shall bring about
good peace betwixt us?' Then said Olmod, 'Firstly is it thou shalt give
thy sister, Astrid, in marriage to our kinsman Erling Skialgson, whom we
now account the likeliest young man of Norway.'

The King said that to his mind this was a fair request and that it would
be a good marriage seeing that Erling was of a great family, and withal
goodly to look upon, but nevertheless said he, must Astrid herself have
a word in the matter. Thereafter did the King speak with his sister on
the subject, and she answered and said, 'little it availeth me that I am
a King's daughter and a King's sister if I am to wed a man without a
princely name, rather will I tarry a few winters for another suitor,'
and therewith ended their talking for the time being.


|| Now after these things King Olaf caused the feathers to be plucked
from off a hawk appertaining to Astrid his sister, and thereafter he
sent the bird to her. Then said Astrid, 'Wrathful is my brother now,'
& going to her brother, who bade her welcome, she spake unto him that
he the King should give her in marriage as it seemeth best to him.
'Methought,' said Olaf, 'that I had power enough in this land to make
whatsoever man I would a man of title and dignity.'

So then the King summoned Olmod and Erling and all their kinsmen to him
to talk with them anent this matter, and in such wise did their talking
end that Astrid was betrothed to Erling. Thereafter the King called
together a Thing, & offered the peasants Christianity, and though all
their kinsfolk were with them in this matter yet were Olmod & Erling the
most zealous of all men in forwarding the King's cause.

No one had any longer the courage to raise his voice against the wish of
the King, and thereupon were the people all baptized and became
Christian. Now the marriage of Erling Skialgson took place in the summer
and many folks came together to be witness of it; thither likewise came
King Olaf. On this occasion did the King offer to give Erling an
earldom, but Erling spake & said: '"Hersirs" have my kinsmen been and no
higher title will I have than they; but this will I take from thy hands,
King, namely that thou makest me to be the greatest in the land of that
name.' So in accord with this did the King give him his promise, and
when they parted bestowed on his brother-in-law Erling that land which
is north of the Sogn-sea and lies eastward as far as Lidandisnes,Sec. on
the same pact as Harald Fair-hair had given land to his sons, of which
an account has been afore writ in fair scrip.


|| Then in the autumn after these things had come to pass, the King
called together a Thing of four counties, & the meeting took place in
the north, at Stad on Dragseid.

Thither came folk from Sogn, the Firths, South-More and Raumsdal. King
Olaf himself fared to it with a mighty following of men that he took
with him from the east of the country, and likewise men who had come to
him from Rogaland and Hordaland. Then when he was come to the Thing
offered he to those that were gathered together Christianity even as he
had done at other places, and forasmuch as he had with him a very great
host men were afeared of him.

Then did he give them for choice one of two things, either to accept
Christianity and let themselves be baptized, or to be prepared to do
battle with him. So the peasants foreseeing no chance of fighting
against the King save with ill-hap, accepted the first choice he had
offered them & embraced Christianity. Then fared Olaf with his men to
North-More, and that country likewise made he Christian; thereafter
sailed he in to Ladir & caused the temple there to be pulled down & took
all the adornments & property from the temple and from the god.

A great gold ring which Earl Hakon had caused to be wrought took he
moreover from the door thereof, & then after he had done these things
caused he the temple to be burned.


|| Now when the peasants came to hear of what the King had done sent they
war-arrows throughout the countryside, calling out an host & were about
to rise against the King, but meantime sailed he out of the fjord with
his men, and thereafter headed northward off-shore. Now it was the
intent of Olaf to fare north to Halogaland in order thither to bring
Christianity; but when he was come as far north as to Biarney gat he
news from Halogaland that they had an host under arms, and were minded
to defend their land against the King. The chiefs of this host were
Harek of Tiotta, Thorir Hart of Vogar, and Eyvind Rent-cheek. So Olaf
learning this, even as aforesaid, turned his ships about & sailed
southward off the coast. When he was come as far south as to Stad fared
he more slowly, but nevertheless at the beginning of winter had he
covered all the distance eastward to Vik.


|| Now the Queen of Sweden, whom men called the Haughty, was at that time
living at one or other of her manors, and betwixt King Olaf and her
fared there that winter emissaries who sought her hand in the name of
the King.

Queen Sigrid received the offer in a friendly spirit, and in due time
was their troth plighted.

King Olaf sent Queen Sigrid the great ring of gold which he had taken
from off the door of the temple at Ladir, and it was deemed a most noble
gift.

Now touching the matter of this marriage a meeting was to take place the
following spring by the Gota river, on the marches of the country.

While this ring which King Olaf had sent to Queen Sigrid was being
praised so exceedingly were the Queen's smiths, brothers, with her; & it
befell that they took the ring, and weighed it in their hands, & then
spake a word together privily. At this the Queen summoned them to her,
and asked of them why made they such mock of the ring, but they denied
that they were doing such a thing.

Then said she that she insisted upon knowing what it was they had
discovered; & thereupon they told her that there was falsehood in the
ring. Then did the Queen let the ring be broken asunder, and copper was
found to be inside it.

Thereon was the Queen wroth, and said that Olaf might play her false in
more things than this one.


|| That same winter went King Olaf up into Ringariki and introduced
Christianity there. Now it had befallen that Asta, the daughter of
Gudbrand, was speedily wedded after the death of Harald the Grenlander
to a man named Sigurd Sow,Sec. who was King of Ringariki. Sigurd was the
son of Sigurd o' the Copse who again was son to Harald Fair-hair.
Dwelling with Asta at that time was Olaf her son by Harald the
Grenlander, for he was being reared at the house of his step-father
Sigurd Sow. When King Olaf Tryggvason went to Ringariki to introduce
Christianity, Sigurd let himself be christened together with Asta his
wife, & Olaf her son,Sec. & for the latter stood Olaf Tryggvason sponsor;
the babe was at that time three winters old.

King Olaf then fared southward again to Vik, and abode there the winter,
& this was the third winter that he was King of Norway.


|| Early in the spring fared King Olaf eastward to Konungahella (the
King's rock) to the tryst with Queen Sigrid, and when they were met,
talked they one with the other over the matter which had been set afoot
in the winter, to wit, that they should wed one another.

Right hopeful did the matter seem to them, until King Olaf spake & said
that Sigrid must accept christening and the true Faith.

Then did the Queen make answer: 'Depart from the faith that I have held
aforetime, and which my kindred held before me will I never: yet will I
not account it against thee shouldst thou believe on whatsoever god may
seem best to thy mind.' Then Olaf waxed exceedingly wroth and made
answer hastily: 'Heathen as a dog art thou-- why should I wed thee?' and
smote her in the face with the glove he was holding in his hand.

Then stood he up on his feet & she arose likewise, and Sigrid said,
'This might be thy undoing.' Thereafter were they parted, the King going
northward to Vik, and the Queen east to Sweden.


  [Illustration]

|| Thence King Olaf fared to Tunsberg & having come thither held he a
Thing and gave out thereat that all men who were known and proven to be
dealers in witchcraft and spellwork, or were wizards, should depart out
of the land. Thereafter did the King cause the countryside thereabouts
be searched for such men, & commanded them to be brought unto him. And
when they were come to him a man there was among them called Eyvind
Well-spring, who was the grandson of Rognovald Straight-legs, the son of
King Harald Fair-hair.

Now Eyvind was a wizard & well versed in witchcraft. King Olaf caused
all these men to be assembled in a certain hall, which had been made
ready for them in goodly wise, and therein feasted he them & gave them
much strong drink, and when they were all drunken caused he the chamber
to be set on fire. Thus it came about that all the folk who were therein
were burned except Eyvind Well-spring who saved himself by climbing
through the smoke-hole.

Eyvind having made off and sped far on his way, fell in with men who
were going to the King, and he bade these men tell Olaf that he, Eyvind,
had gotten away from out of the fire, and never again would he come into
the King's hands; and that moreover would he pursue his arts even as he
had done before.

When these men were come to King Olaf they told of Eyvind according as
he had bidden them, and ill-pleased enough was the King that Eyvind was
not dead.


|| When spring was come King Olaf left Vik and went the round of his
manors, and sent he word throughout Vik that come the summer would he
call out an host and with it fare northward in the land.

Thereafter went he north (west) to Agdir, and when Lent was drawing to
an end sailed northward to Rogoland, and arrived on Easter EveSec. at
Ogvaldsnes in the isle of Kormt, where an Easter festival had been made
ready for him.

Nigh upon three hundred men had he with him. That same night Eyvind
Well-spring came unto the isle in a long-ship fully manned, and the crew
aboard her were all wizards and other folk versed in magic. Eyvind and
his band went up ashore from their ship and set to work on their
wizardry. Such thick fog & darkness did Eyvind bring about that deemed
he it would be impossible for the King and his folk to see them; but no
sooner were they come nigh to the house at Ogvaldsnes than lo! it there
became broad daylight. Mightily different was this from the desire that
Eyvind had conceived, for the darkness which he had wrought by magic
enveloped him and his folk so that never a bit more could they see with
their eyes than with the napes of their necks, and even round and round
went they in a ring.

Now the King's watchmen saw the wizards as they were moving about, and
not knowing what kind of men they might be had the King aroused, and the
King & his men got up and clad themselves. When King Olaf saw Eyvind &
his folk, bade he his men take their arms and go out to discover what
manner of men might these be. Now the King's folk recognizing Eyvind
laid hands on him and the whole band, and brought them into the presence
of the King.

Then did Eyvind relate all that had befallen him on his journey.

The King thereafter had them all taken out to a rock which was covered
by the sea at high-tide and there let them be bound. Thus Eyvind & the
others came by their end. Afterwards was that rock called Skrattasker.


|| Now it is told that while the King was on this visit at Ogvaldsnes
that there came thither one evening an old man; he was one-eyed and wore
a slouch hat, but very wise was he in his speech and of all lands could
he tell.

This man managed to have speech of the King, & the King found much
entertainment in his conversation and questioned him closely on many
subjects, & the guest made ready answer to all that he asked him,
wherefore sat the King till late in the night conversing with him.

The King asked if he wotted who Ogvald was, whom the ness & homesteads
were named after, & the guest answered that Ogvald was a king and a
great warrior who made sacrifice above all to a cow, and took the cow
with him whithersoever he went, for wholesome did he deem it to drink
ever of her milk. King Ogvald fought with that King who is hight Varin,
& fell in the combat. He was buried in a barrow not far from the house,
and a stone was set up which is still standing. In a place not far from
thence was the cow buried, likewise in a barrow. Such things as this
told he of kings; and other ancient tidings withal. Now after they had
sat thus till late in the night, the bishop reminded the King that it
was time for them to rest, & the King did according as the bishop had
said. But when the King was unclad and had laid him in his bed, the
guest sat himself on the step thereof, and again talked for long with
the King; and ever when he had told of one matter did the King long for
more. Then spake the bishop to the King saying that it was time for
sleep, and the King settled himself for sleep according as the bishop
had said & the guest gat him gone, but soon thereafter the King
awakened, and asked after his guest, & bade him be called unto him, but
nowhere was the guest to be found. On the morrow early the King summoned
his cook to him and he who had charge of the drink withal, and asked
them if any unknown man had come in to them; & they answered that as
they were making ready the food a man had come to them & said that they
were boiling but scurvy meat for the King's table, & therewith he gave
them two mighty fat sides of neat & these they boiled with the other
flesh. Then commanded the King that all that food should be destroyed,
saying that this had not been any man but rather Odin himself, whom
heathen men had long believed on, but, said he, never should Odin
beguile them.[Sec.]


|| Now when summer was come called King Olaf together a large host from
the east of the country and with it sailed he northward to Throndhjem,
going in first to Nidaros. Thereafter sent he round the whole of the
fjord bidding men assemble at a Thing, and there gathered at Frosta a
Thing of eight counties.

Now the peasants, be it said, had turned this Thing summons into a
war-arrow,[Sec.] and to the assembly came men from the whole of the
district of Throndhjem, so that when the King arrived at the Thing,
thither likewise was come the peasant host fully armed.

The Thing being established, the King addressed the people and bade them
accept Christianity, but when he had been speaking but a little while
the peasants called out to him, & bade him be silent or otherwise, said
they, would they rise against him and drive him away. 'Thus did we,'
said they, 'with Hakon Adalstein's foster-son when he commanded a thing
of the kind, and hold we thee in no more respect than held we him.'

Then did King Olaf seeing the ire of the peasants, and moreover knowing
full well that they had so large an host, change his manner of address
and made as if he were agreed with them and spake to them thus: 'It is
my wish that we should be friends again, in such good accord as we were
aforetime.

Thither will I go wheresoever ye hold your greatest blood-offering, &
witness your worship; then will we all take counsel together as to what
manner of worship we will have, and be then all of one mind thereon.'
Now when the King spake thus mildly to the peasants, grew they softened
in temper, and all the converse went peaceably and in seemly fashion,
and at the end was it determined that there should be a midsummer
sacrifice at Maerin, and that thither all the chiefs and wealthy
peasants should go as the custom was, and that thither likewise King
Olaf was to go.


|| Now there was a certain wealthy yeoman whose name was Skeggi (Iron
Beard, called they him) who dwelt at Uphaug in Yriar, and he it was who
first spake up against the King at the Thing, and the cause thereof was
because he was the spokesman of the peasantry against Christianity. But
in the manner aforesaid was the Thing brought to an end, and the
peasants went to their homes, and the King across to Ladir.


|| At this time was King Olaf lying with his ships in the Nid (thirty
ships had he, and his folk were of great prowess) but the King himself
was ofttimes at Ladir, being kept company by his body-guard.

Now when the time appointed for the blood-offering at Maerin was drawing
nigh held King Olaf a mighty feast at Ladir; thither there came to it
chieftains and other wealthy peasants from Strind & from places up in
Gauldal, in accordance with the bidding of King Olaf. When all things
were ready and the guests come, there was held on the first evening a
large banquet, and the cups thereat were often charged & men became
drunk; that night slept all men there in peace. On the morrow early,
after the King was clad, ordered he Mass to be said, and when the Mass
was ended his men sounded their horns for a house-Thing, and the Thing
being established rose the King to his feet and spake, saying: 'A Thing
held we at Frosta, and thereat I bade the peasantry let themselves be
christened; but they in their turn bade me attend a blood-offering with
them, even as the foster-son to King Hakon Adalstein had attended one.
And there was accord betwixt us inasmuch as it was determined that we
should meet at Maerin & make a great blood-offering.

But if I am to turn to sacrificing with you, then will I cause to be
made the greatest sacrifice that can be, namely, the sacrifice of men.
Nor will I choose as gifts for the gods thralls and evil-doers, but the
noblest men, and by this token name I Orm Lygra of Medalhus, Styrkar of
Gimsar, Kar of Gryting, Asbiorn Thorbergson of Varnes, Orm of Lyxa, and
Haldor of Skerdingsted.' Added to these named he five other men who were
of the noblest there; all these, said he, should be sacrificed for peace
and a good year, & he commanded that they should be seized forthwith.

Then the peasants seeing that they were not numerous enough to withstand
the King begged for grace and gave the whole matter into his hands,
whereupon it was agreed that all those who were come thither should let
themselves be baptized, & swear an oath unto the King to hold fast the
true Faith, and have naught further to do with sacrificing.

All these men kept the King at his feast until they gave their sons or
brothers or other near kin to be hostages.


|| Then fared King Olaf with all his men in to Throndhjem; and when he
was come to Maerin found he there assembled all the chiefs that were of
Throndhjem; those who were most zealous to withstand the Christian
faith. With them were all the wealthy yeomen who had hitherto upheld
blood-offerings in this place, a right goodly gathering of men, even as
it had been aforetime at the Frosta-Thing.

The King having required that the Thing should meet, both sides betook
themselves to it, and they were fully armed. Then when the Thing was
established the King spake and offered the men Christianity, &
Iron-Beard answered on behalf of the peasants and said that now even as
before would they not suffer the King to break their laws: 'We desire,
King, that thou makest sacrifice, even as other kings in the land have
done before thee.' Greatly was this speaking applauded by the peasants,
& they shouted that everything must be according unto the words of
Skeggi. Then made the King answer that he would go to the temple and
witness their worship when they were sacrificing, and at this were the
peasants well pleased, and both sides betook themselves thither
accordingly.


|| Now with King Olaf when he entered into the temple were a certain few
of his men & a certain few of the peasants. When the King was come unto
the place of the gods where sat Thor, all adorned with gold and silver,
then did King Olaf lift up a gold-wrought pike which he had in his hand
and smote Thor so that he fell from off his altar, & thereupon the
King's men ran up & cast down all the other gods from their altars.
While they were within the temple was Iron-Beard slain before the
entrance-door thereof, and this deed was done by the men of the King.
Then when the King came forth again to his folk, bade he the peasants
choose one of two conditions: and these twain conditions were either
that they should accept the Faith of Christ, or in default thereof do
battle with him. Now Iron-Beard having been slain was there no man to
raise the banner against the King, so then was that condition accepted
which meant going over unto the King & doing that which he had
commanded.

Then caused King Olaf all the folk who were present to be baptized, and
from them took hostages that they would cleave to the new faith that was
given them.

Thereafter sent the King his men round to all the different parts of
Throndhjem, and durst no man utter a word against the faith of Christ.


|| Then went King Olaf with his men to Nidaros, and on the banks of the
river Nid caused houses to be built, and appointed that on the spot
should arise a merchant-town. He gave men sites on which to build them
houses, & his own King's-House built he above Scipa-Krok.Sec.

In the autumn caused he to be brought thither such goods as were
necessary for a sojourn there during the wintertide; and with him were a
great company of men.


|| After the death of Iron-Beard was his body borne out to Yriar; and he
lies in the Skeggi barrow at Austratt.Sec.

King Olaf summoned a meeting of the kith of Iron-Beard and forasmuch as
his folk had slain this man offered he to pay atonement for the deed,
but there were many brave men to make answer on behalf of Iron-Beard.

Now Iron-Beard had a daughter whose name was Gudrun, and in the end was
it agreed betwixt those concerned that the King should wed this Gudrun.
When the marriage time was come went they both of them into one bed,
King Olaf and Gudrun, and the first night as they were lying together no
sooner had the King fallen asleep than Gudrun drew forth a knife, and
was about to thrust it into the King, when he awoke and wresting the
knife from her cried out to his men to tell them what had befallen.
Gudrun & all the men who had accompanied her then took their apparel and
gat them gone in haste; & never afterwards did Gudrun lie in the same
bed with King Olaf.


|| That same autumn King Olaf caused a great long-ship to be built on the
sands at the mouth of the Nid; a cutter was she, and at work on the
building thereof were many smiths.

At the beginning of winter she was completed, and there were in her
thirty holds, & the prow and stern were lofty withal, yet was she not
broad of beam. That ship called he the 'Crane.'


  [Illustration]

|| Now when King Olaf had been two winters in Norway there came to dwell
with him a Saxon priest whose name was Thangbrand; violent was he &
murderous, but a goodly clerk withal and an active man. So headstrong
was he, howsoever, that the King would not keep him with him, but sent
him to Iceland to make that country Christian.

Thangbrand was given a merchant ship, & of his voyage it may be related
that he fared to Iceland, and reached the eastern fjords in southern
Alptafjord, & the winter thereafter abode with Hall at Sida. Thangbrand
preached Christianity in the islands and Hall and his folk and many
other chiefs let themselves be baptized according to his word; but there
were many others who spake against the new faith. Thorvald and Vetrlidi
the skald made lampoons about Thangbrand, but he slew them both.
Thangbrand abode three winters in Iceland, and was the slayer of three
men or ever he departed thence.


|| A certain man was there named Sigurd & another who was called Hawk;
they were Halogalanders, and oft-times made voyages for the conveyance
of merchandise.

One summer fared they to England. When they were returned to Norway
sailed they northward along the coast, & in North More fell in with the
fleet of King Olaf.

Now when the King was told that some heathen men, skippers, from
Halogaland were there, summoned he them to him & asked them if they
would allow themselves to be baptized, and thereto answered they nay.
Thereafter did the King talk to them after diverse fashions, but it
availed nothing; then he vowed that death or maiming should be their
lot, but they obeyed him none the more for that. Then did he cause them
to be put in irons, and kept them in durance for a while, and in fetters
were they, and the King talked often with them, but naught prevailed.

Then one night made they off, and no one knew anything about them, or in
what manner they had gotten away; but in the autumn were they arrived
north, at Harek of Tiotta's, and right welcome were they made.

There dwelt they throughout the winter & were well entertained in all
fairness & hospitality.


|| One fair day in spring it befell that Harek was at home on his farm
and with him were but few men. Now the time hung heavy on his hands, and
Sigurd spake to him & asked if they should not row out a little way, and
so pass the time, and this liked Harek well. So betook they themselves
to the shore, and did hale down a six-oared boat, & Sigurd from the
boat-house fetched him a sail and the gear appertaining to the boat, and
moreover shipped he the rudder. Sigurd and his brother were fully armed,
as was their wont to be when they were at home with the goodman, and the
twain were strong men.

Now or ever they gat them into the boat did they throw into it some
boxes of butter and a basket of bread, and between them bare they a
large cask of ale down to the craft. This done did they all row from
land, & having come away from the island hoist the sail, & Harek did
steer, & away bore they speedily from the island.

Then did the brothers go astern to where Harek was sitting. Saith Sigurd
to Harek the yeoman: 'Choose thou now betwixt several things: one of
them is to let us brothers have the upper hand on this cruise, & another
is to let us bind thee, & the third is that we can slay thee.' Then
Harek seeing in what a plight he was, inasmuch as he could not measure
strength with more than one of the brothers even were he and they
matched as to arms, chose what seemed to him the best of a poor business
which was to let them do as pleased the twain.

So swore he to them an oath and on that gave them a promise, and after
that Sigurd was possessed of the tiller and did steer south along the
coast on a fair breeze, and withal of a mighty care were the brothers
not to fall in with other craft. They paused not on their cruise ere
they came to Throndhjem and to Nidaros, and at that last place found
they King Olaf. Then did the King summon Harek to talk with him, and
thereupon offered him that he should embrace the good faith of Christ,
but Harek would have naught of it. On this matter spake for many days
the King and Harek, sometimes in the presence of many men, sometimes
alone; but never were they come of one mind.

So at the last said the King to Harek: 'Home shalt thou go, and on these
counts no harm will I do thee at present: firstly seeing that there is
kinship betwixt us, and again lest thou mightest say that I had gotten
thee by guile, but know ye of a truth that I be minded to come north in
the summertime, & visit distress on ye Halogalanders, and then shall ye
wot if I can chastise those which accept not the faith which is of
Christ.'

Right pleased was Harek that he could get away from thence so speedily;
to him gave King Olaf a good ship rowing ten or twelve oars a side, and
caused it to be well found with all things needful & of the best; thirty
men did he send forth with Harek, stout fellows & all equipped of the
best.


|| Thus Harek of Tiotta sped from the town with all the haste that might
be, whereas Hawk and Sigurd remained with the King, and the twain were
both baptized.

Harek continued on his way until he was come home to Tiotta, & from
thence sent he word to his friend Eyvind Rent-cheek that Harek of Tiotta
had spoken with King Olaf, but had not let himself be cowed into
accepting the new God; & moreover Harek caused Eyvind to be told that
King Olaf was minded to bring an host against them come summer-tide &
that they must act warily, and Harek bade Eyvind come to him as soon as
ever might be. When this message was brought to Eyvind, quoth he that it
behoved them greatly to take such steps as would prevent the King from
getting the upper hand of them, and he hied him away with all speed in a
light skiff with but few men aboard it.

When he was arrived at Tiotta Harek bade him welcome, and straightway
went they, Harek and Eyvind, to talk together on the other side of the
house-yard, but hardly had they speech of one another than they were
fallen on by men of King Olaf, for so it was that these men had followed
Harek northward. Eyvind was taken captive and led to their ship, and
thereafter fared they away with him, and no pause did they make in their
voyage or ever they were come to Throndhjem to find King Olaf in
Nidaros. Eyvind was then haled before the King who offered him baptism
in like manner as he had offered other men baptism, but to this Eyvind
answered, 'Nay.'

Then with fair words the King bade him be baptized and gave him many
good reasons therefor, & the Bishop spake after the same fashion as the
King, none the less would Eyvind in no wise suffer himself to be
persuaded. Then did the King offer him gifts, and the dues and rights of
broad lands, but Eyvind put all these away from him. Then did the King
threaten him with torture even unto death, but never did Eyvind weaken
his resistance. Thereafter caused the King to be brought in a bowl
filled with glowing coals, and had it set on the belly of Eyvind, and
not long was it ere his belly burst asunder.

Then spake Eyvind: 'Take away the bowl from off me for I would fain
speak some words before I die,' and accordingly it was done.

Then the King asked: 'Wilt thou now, Eyvind, believe on Christ?' 'No,'
answered he. 'I am not such as can be baptized, I am a spirit quickened
in the human body by the magic of the Lapps for before that had my
father and mother never a child.' Then died Eyvind who was the most
skilled of wizards.


  [Illustration]

|| In the spring which followed on these happenings did King Olaf cause
his ships and men to be made ready for war, taking for his own ship the
'Crane,' and there was mustered a large and goodly host.

All things being now ready shaped he a course from out the fjord, and
bringing his fleet north past Byrda fared northward to Halogaland.
Wheresoever he landed, summoned he a Thing, & at it offered the people
baptism in the true Faith. Now against this had no man the boldness to
speak, therefore came it to pass that whithersoever he fared were all
that were of those lands baptized. King Olaf visited Tiotta and was the
guest of Harek, who was baptized at that hour together with all the folk
that were about him.

When the King departed thence Harek bestowed on him great gifts and
became his man, and from the King received the dignity of bailiff with
the dues and rights appertaining unto a lord of the land.


|| Raud the Strong was the name of a peasant who abode at Godey in that
fjord which is named Salpti (Salten).

Raud was a man of much wealth and at his beck were many house-carles;
a powerful man was he withal, for a large company of Lapps were ready to
follow him to war whensoever he needed them.

Raud was zealous as a maker of blood-offerings, and skilled also in
witchcraft; even so was he furthermore a warm friend to that man about
whom it has been writ before, to wit, Thorir Hart, & even like unto him
was he also a mighty chief.

Now when it came to the ears of these men that Olaf was abroad with an
host northward even in Halogaland, they too their men mustered,
launching out ships, and assembling an host. To Raud appertained a great
dragon-ship with golden heads thereto, a ship of thirty benches, and
broad was she of beam for her length, and had likewise Thorir Hart also
a ship of good size.

Southward sailed they their fleet purposing to meet King Olaf, and when
they were fallen in with him gave they battle, and fierce was the fight
thereof. Soon men began to fall plenteously, but so much the more was
this the case among the host of the Halogalanders; their ships were
cleared and thereupon came fear & terror over them, & Raud rowed his
dragon out to sea and hoisted the sail thereof. A breeze had he wherever
he was minded to go, and this came of his powers of magic; but to cut
short the tale of the cruise of Raud is briefly to relate that home
sailed he even unto Godey. For land made Thorir Hart in all haste and
his folk fled their ships, but King Olaf pursued after them & put them
to the sword. Moreover then as ever when such doings were afoot was the
King himself foremost among his men.

He saw whither Thorir ran (and Thorir was exceeding fleet of foot) and
thither went the King after him, followed by his dog Vigi. And the King
called out: 'Vigi, catch the hart,' and Vigi sprang ahead after Thorir
and straightway leapt up at him.

Then Thorir had perforce to stop and the King threw a javelin after him,
but Thorir struck the dog with his sword & wounded it sore, and at the
same moment the King's javelin flew under Thorir's hand and went through
him & out at the other side, and thus ended Thorir his life; but Vigi
was borne wounded to the ships.

To all those who asked it and were willing to accept baptism gave King
Olaf quarter.


|| Thence sailed King Olaf with his host northward along the coast,
baptizing all folk withersoever he went, & being come north to Salpti
was he minded to go up the fjord & seek Raud. Foul weather howsoever set
in with a gale blowing fiercely down the fjord, and though the King lay
there nigh upon a week the same wind blew ever the while from the land,
though without the fjord was there a fresh and favourable breeze for to
sail north along the coast.

Therefore it came to pass that the King set sail and fared all the way
northward to Amd, and there the folk became Christians.

After that went he about, and when he was come south again to Salpti he
found a gale blowing down the fjord and driving spray into his
countenance.

There lay the King even a few more nights, but the weather waxing no
better inquired he then of Bishop Sigurd whether or not he wotted of
some remedy against the fiendcraft.


|| So thereupon took Bishop Sigurd all the appurtenances that belonged
unto the Holy Mass, and walked he forward therewith even to the prow of
the King's ship. There was a candle lit & was incense carried forward &
thereafter was ye Holy Rood set at the prow.

The gospel was read and also many prayers, and the Bishop sprinkled holy
water over the whole of the ship. Thereafter bade he the crew unship the
tilts and row up the fjord, and the King commanded that the other ships
should row after them.

No sooner had the crew of the 'Crane' fallen to their oars, & she the
ship was set well up to the fjord, than felt they that there was no more
wind against them, & in her wake was free sea and calm; but on both
sides of her flew the spray & it drave so that no man could perceive the
mountains on either side of the fjord. So it fared that one ship rowed
after the other in the calm, and thus pursued they one another the whole
livelong day, & throughout the night thereafter; and a little before
dawn came they to Godey, and brought-to off the house of Raud, and there
found his great dragon lying off-shore.

Forthwith went King Olaf to the house with his men and made for the
upper chamber wherein Raud was sleeping, and his folk burst open the
door and ran in.

Then was Raud taken and bound, but of the other men who were therein
some were killed & others taken prisoners. Thereafter the King's men
went to the room wherein slept the house-carles of Raud, and some of
them were then slain and some bound & some beaten. Then caused the King
Raud to be led before him & offered him baptism. 'Take from thee thy
possessions I then will not,' quoth the King, 'but will the rather be
thy friend, an thou wilt show thyself worthy of my friendship.' Against
this did Raud loudly raise his voice, saying that never would he believe
on Christ, and blaspheming God.

Then did the King wax wroth, and swore that Raud should suffer the worst
of deaths, and the King commanded that he be taken and bound with his
back to a pole and that a bit of wood be placed betwixt his teeth so
that his mouth might be open, and caused an adder to be taken and set in
his mouth, but the adder would in no wise enter therein but writhed away
when Raud blew upon it. Then did the King cause the adder to be taken &
put in a hollow stick of angelica and set in the mouth of Raud (albeit
some say that the King let his horn be taken & put into the mouth of
Raud, and that the adder was placed in this and pushed down with a
red-hot rod of iron), and then the adder slid into the mouth of Raud,
and thereafter down his throat, and cut its way out through his side.
After this manner ended the life of Raud. Then did the King take thence
very great wealth in gold & silver and other chattels, weapons, & divers
kinds of valuable things. The King caused all the fellows that had been
with Raud to be baptized save those who, not suffering this, were slain
or tortured. Then King Olaf took the dragon that had pertained unto Raud
and himself was her steersman, and a much larger and finer ship was she
than the 'Crane': forward she was fashioned with a dragon's head and aft
with a crookSec. ending in like manner as the tail of a dragon, & both the
prow & the whole of the stern were overlaid with gold. Now the King
called this ship the 'Serpent,' for when the sail was hoisted aloft was
it like unto the wings of a dragon, and this was the fairest ship in all
Norway.

The islands whereon Raud had lived were called Gilling and Haering, but
together were they styled Godey, & the Godey current (Godoestroem) lies
over to the north, betwixt them and the mainland. All that lived around
this fjord did King Olaf convert unto Christianity, and then went he
southward along the coast, and there happened much on that cruise which
is set forth in many legends about a giant and evil spirits which
attacked his men & sometimes himself, but rather will we write of facts
even such as the conversion of Norway & of those other lands whither he
bore Christianity. That same autumn did the King lead his host to
Throndhjem, bringing-to at Nidaros, and there making ready for a winter
sojourn.


|| And now will I next write what there is to tell of the men of Iceland.


|| That same autumn there came to Nidaros from Iceland Kiartan, the son
of Olaf Hoskuldson and the grandson, on his mother's side, of Eigil
Skallagrimson, who hath been called the likeliest man of those born in
Iceland.

There was also Halldor the son of Gudmund of Modruvellir, and Kolbein
the son of Thord Frey's-priest, the brother of Burning-Flosi, and
fourthly Sverting the son of Runolf the Priest.

These were all heathen, as were many others: some powerful, and others
not so powerful.

There came also from Iceland noble men who had accepted the true Faith
from Thangbrand, and one that was of these was Gizur the White, the son
of Teit Ketilbiarnson, whose mother was Alof, the daughter of Bodvar
Viking-Karason the 'hersir.' Bodvar's brother was Sigurd the father of
Eirik Biodaskalli, the father of Astrid, who was the mother of King
Olaf. Another Icelander was named Hialti Skeggiason, and he had to wife
Vilborg the daughter of Gizur the White; Hialti was a Christian, and
King Olaf received with pleasure Gizur and his son-in-law Hialti, and
with the King did they abide. Those of the Icelanders, however, who were
captains of the ships and were heathens to boot, sought to sail away
even so soon as the King was come to town, for it was told them that the
King constrained all men to embrace the faith of Christ. It so befell
natheless that the wind was set against them, & drave them back off
Nidarholm. The captains of the ships were hight Thorarin Nefiolfson,
Hallfrod the Skald, the son of Ottar, Brand the Bountiful and Thorleik
Brandson. Now it being told to King Olaf that some of the Icelanders,
and they heathens, were hard by with their ships and were about to flee
the town, he sent to them and forbade them to sail, but commanded them
instead to come and lie off the town, and this they did but unloaded not
their ships.


|| Then came the holy season of Michaelmas,Sec. and the King caused the
feast to be well kept and a solemn Mass was said. Thereat were the
Icelanders witnesses and hearkened to the fair singing and the ringing
of bells.

When they were come back to their ships each of them said what he had
thought of the Christian men's ways & Kiartan praised them, but most of
the others mocked at them, & it befell that the King heard of this, for
as the saying goes, 'many are the King's ears.' Then forthwith that
self-same day sent he an emissary to Kiartan, and bade him come unto
him, & Kiartan went unto him with but few men, and the King bade him
welcome. Now Kiartan was one of the biggest and fairest of men, with a
great gift of speech. When they had parleyed a while did the King make
proffer to Kiartan that he should embrace the true Faith, and Kiartan
made answer unto him that he would not say nay to this if he might thus
gain the friendship of the King, whereupon swore the King to him &
pledged him his hearty friendship, & after this fashion was a compact
struck between them. On the morrow was Kiartan baptized, and with him
Bolli Thorleikson his kinsman, and all their fellows.

Kiartan and Bolli were the guests of the King as long as they went in
white weeds,Sec. and the King was of kindly countenance toward them.


|| It befell one day that King Olaf was walking in the street when some
men came toward him, and he who was walking foremost greeted the King.

The King asked of the man his name, and the latter said he was hight
Hallfrod.

Then said the King, 'Art thou a skald?' 'I can make verses,' said he.
Then the King answered: 'Thou wilt accept baptism as I trow and
thereafter be my man?'

Quoth Hallfrod: 'There must be a bargain on that matter if I am to
suffer myself to be baptized, to wit, that thou, King, holdest me
thyself at the font, for from no man else will I take it.' 'So be it,'
said the King, & so Hallfrod was baptized and the King held him himself
at the font. Thereafter the King asked Hallfrod: 'Wilt thou be my man?'
& Hallfrod made answer: 'I was of Earl Hakon's body-guard; and now will
I not be the liege-man of thee or of any other chief unless thou givest
me thy word that such a thing shall never befall as that thou shouldst
drive me away from thee.'

'From all that is told me of thee, Hallfrod,' said the King, 'thou art
neither so wise nor so meek but that thou mightest not do a thing which
I could in no wise suffer.'

'Slay me then,' said Hallfrod. The King said, 'Thou art a troublesome
skald, but my man shalt thou be all the same.' Hallfrod answered: 'What
wilt thou give me, King, as a name-gift if I am to be called
"Troublous-Skald"?' Then did the King give him a sword, but it had no
scabbard; and the King said, 'Make now a stave about the sword, & let
"sword" be in every line.' Hallfrod sang:

  'One sword alone of all swords
  Hath made me now sword-wealthy;
  For the swinger of swords
  Will there now be swords in plenty.
  No lack of swords will there be,
  --Worthy of three swords am I--
  Lord of the land were but
  The sheath of that sword to be mine.'

'There is not sword in every line,' quoth the King. Then answered
Hallfrod: 'But there are three in one line.' 'So be it,' said the King.
Then did the King give him the scabbard. Now from that which is told in
the lays of Hallfrod have we much knowledge & testimony concerning King
Olaf Tryggvason.


|| That same autumn came back Thangbrand the priest from Iceland to King
Olaf and related to him how that his journey had borne no fruit, 'for,'
said he, 'the Icelanders made lampoons about me and some wished to slay
me, and to my mind it cannot be expected that that country will ever be
made Christian.'

At these words King Olaf waxed so hasty and wrathful that he summoned to
him forthwith all the Icelanders in the town, and commanded that
self-same hour that they should all be slain; but Kiartan and Gissur and
Hialti and those that were of them who had made profession of the faith
of Christ entered into his presence & said: 'We trow, O King, that thou
wilt not go from thy word, for thou hast said that no man may make thee
so wrathful but shall he have thy forgiveness an he will be baptized and
abjure heathendom. Now will all the Icelanders who are here suffer
themselves to be baptized, & we can well devise a means whereby
Christianity may gain an entrance into Iceland. The sons of many mighty
men of Iceland are here present, & their fathers will, we trow, lend
their aid in this matter. But Thangbrand there, as here, ever went about
masterful and manslaying, and the people there would not endure it of
him.' Now the King lent an ear to these speeches, and all the men of
Iceland who were there were baptized.


|| Of all men of Norway of whom record hath come down to us was King Olaf
in every wise the one most skilful in manly exercises; stronger was he &
more active than any other man, and many are the tales that have been
written on this matter. One of these recounts how that he climbed the
Smalshorn, and made fast his shield on the topmost peak; and another is
of how he brought succour to one of his own body-guard who had climbed
aforehand up the mountain and was come into such a plight that he could
neither get up nor down, so that the King helped him by going unto him &
bearing him down under his arm to the level land. King Olaf would walk
from oar to oar, on the outer side of the ship while his men were rowing
the 'Serpent', and with such ease could he play with three daggers that
one was ever in the air and always caught he it by the hilt; with either
hand could he strike equally well, and two javelins could he throw at
one time. Of all men was King Olaf the lightest-hearted & of a very
merry disposition; kindly was he withal & lowly-hearted; very eager in
all enterprises, great in his bounty, & the foremost among those who
surrounded him. Above all others was he brave in battle, but very grim
when he was angered, and on his foes laid he heavy penalties; some he
with fire burned, some maimed he & caused to be cast down from high
rocks. For these things was he beloved by his friends, but dreaded by
his foes; his furtherance was manifold for the reason that some did his
will from love and friendship, and others again from fear.


|| Leif, the son of Eirik the Red, he that was the first to settle in
Greenland, came even that summer over from that land unto Norway; and
King Olaf sought he and from him accepted Christianity, & abode even
with King Olaf the winter thereafter.


|| Now it came to pass that Gudrod, he that was the son of Eirik
Blood-axe and Gunnhild, had over in the lands to the west done
whatsoever he listed and broken the laws of God and of man ever since
that time when fled he from his own country before the face of Earl
Hakon. But in this summer, of the which somewhat has already been writ,
even at the time when Olaf Tryggvason had held sway for four winters
over Norway, came Gudrod to Norway with many ships of war, thither
having sailed from England. When he deemed himself to be nigh to Norway,
turned he his course southward along the coast where he bethought him
that he might least chance to fall in with King Olaf and thus sailed he
to Vik.

Hardly was he come ashore than began he to plunder the people and bring
them into subjection under himself, and of them demanded that they
should take him as their King. And when the country-folk saw that a
warlike host was come upon them craved they ever for grace and peace, &
said to the King that they would send the summons for a Thing throughout
the district, and were willing to submit to him rather than suffer at
the hands of this his host, & it was agreed that there should be a truce
even for so long a space as sat the Thing. Then did the King demand of
them that they should provide provender for his men so long as they were
waiting for the meeting of the Thing; but the yeomen chose rather that
the King and his followers should be their guests for all the time he
might need to be so, & the King agreed even to this, that should he
travel that country through with some of the men that were with him and
they the guests of the yeomen, ever the while others kept guard over his
ships. But when the brothers-in-law of King Olaf, even the brothers
Hyrning & Thorgeir learned of these happenings furnished they folk &
gathered to themselves ships and sailed northward (west) in Vik, and by
night were come to the place where lodged King Gudrod, & there fell they
upon him and upon his men with fire and sword. So fell King Gudrod and
the greater number of his men; while of those that abode on the ships
were some slain but others escaped and fled far and wide. And this
Gudrod was the last of all the sons of Eirik and Gunnhild; all were now
dead.


|| The winter after that King Olaf was come from Halogaland, caused he to
be built under the cliffs at Ladir a great ship: a ship far mightier
than any other ship of that land, and the stocks whereon she was built
are still to be seen.

Of this ship was Thorberg the master-smith, but with him were many
others at work, some felling trees, some shaping them, some hammering
nails, & some carrying timber. All the material was of the choicest, and
the ship was both long and broad, built with great beams, and the
bulwarks thereof were high. Now when the outer sheathing was being put
on, some errand of necessity carried Thorberg thence unto his homestead,
and there he tarried a great while.

When he came back the ship was fully sheathed, and the King went in the
evening, and Thorberg with him, even to see how all things had been
done; and men said never before had been seen a long-ship so big or so
fine.

Then went the King back even unto his town, but early on the morrow came
he once more to his ship and Thorberg accompanied him, and they found
that the smiths were gone forward, standing there, all of them, without
working. The King asked wherefore were they doing nothing, & they made
answer that the ship had been spoiled; that a man must have gone from
stem to stern hacking her with an axe even the whole length of the
gunwale.

Then went the King and witnessed with his own eyes the truth thereof,
and straightway said he, & sware thereon, that die should that man once
the King wot whosoever he was who from envy had spoiled the ship, 'but
he who can tell me this thing shall have great reward.' Then said
Thorberg, 'I can tell thee, King, who it is that hath wrought this.'
'I cannot indeed expect of another that he should so well as thee get to
wot of this matter & tell me thereof.' 'I will tell thee, King,' quoth
he, 'who hath done it: I did it.'

Then answered the King, 'thou shalt make it good, so that all shall be
as well as it was before; and thy life shall be on it.'

Thereafter went Thorberg to the ship and chopped the gunwale in such
wise that all the notches were pared away, and the King said then, and
all the others likewise, that now the ship was even so goodlier by far
on that side on which Thorberg had cut the notches. So then the King
bade him fashion both sides alike, & gave him land even for so doing,
and thus was Thorberg master-smith on the ship, even until she was
finished. A dragon-ship was she & wrought after the same fashion as the
'Serpent' which the King had brought with him from Halogaland; but was
the new ship much larger in all respects, built with the greater care,
& called he her the 'Long Serpent,' and the other the 'Short Serpent.'
On the 'Long Serpent' were there four-and-thirty benches of oars. Dight
were her head and the crook all over with gold, and the bulwarks thereof
were as high as on sea-faring ships. This was the ship which was ye best
equipped, and the cost thereof was the most money of any ship that ever
hath been built in Norway.


|| Now after the death of Earl Hakon, did Earl Eirik Hakonson and his
brothers, & many others of their kinsmen depart out of the country.

Earl Eirik went east to Sweden, and he and his men were well received by
King Olaf, the King of the Swedes, who bestowed sanctuary on the Earl
and great grants withal, so that in the land could he well maintain
himself and his men. Of this speaketh Thord Kolbeinson:

  'Foeman of robbers! Swiftly can fate effect change
  Brief space ere the treason of men did Hakon to death,
  And to the land that erewhile in fight had that warrior conquered
  Came now the son of Tryggvi when fared he from the west.'


|| From Norway passed many men over unto Earl Eirik, to wit, all those
that King Olaf had caused to flee the land; and as the outcome thereof
did Eirik think good to procure himself ships & to go plundering so that
he might get wealth for himself and for his men. First sailed Eirik to
Gotland, and lay off that island a long time in summer-tide & waylaid he
viking craft or merchant-ships even as they were sailing to land, and
when he listed went he ashore and harried far and wide in the parts
bordering on the sea. Thus in the Banda lay it is said:

  'In spear-storms many was the Earl thereafter victor:
  And did we not learn aforetime
  That Eirik won the land?
  In those days when the chiefs on Gotland's shores went warring,
  Doughty, and peace-making by their might.
  More in his mind had Eirik against lord and King
  Than spoken word revealed,
  As from him might be looked for.
  Wrathfully sought the Earl counsel of the Swedish King,
  Stubborn were the men of Throndhjem,
  Ne'er a one would flee.'


|| Later sailed Earl Eirik southward to Wendland, and there chanced he to
fall in with some viking ships off Staur, and so joined he battle with
them; to him was the victory and there were the vikings slain. Thus
saith the Banda lay:

  'The steerer of the prow-steed
  Let lie at Staur the heads of fallen warriors,
  Thereafter joy of battle inflamed the Earl.
  At the corses of the viking the ravens tore
  After that dire meeting of swords
  Nigh the sands of the shore.'


|| Sailed thence Earl Eirik back to Sweden in the autumn and abode there
a second winter; but in the spring made he ready his host and thereafter
sailed eastward; & when he was come to the realm of King Valdamar fell
he to plundering & slaying folk, burning whithersoever he went, and
laying bare the land. Then coming to AldeigiaborgSec. laid he siege unto it
even until he had taken it, and then put he there many folk to the sword
and utterly destroyed the town, and thereafter spread he war far and
wide in Garda. Thus saith the Banda lay:

  'The chieftain fared forth to devastate with fire,
  Yea and with sword (so waxed the sword-storm),
  The lands of Valdamar.
  Aldeigia brok'st thou, lord, when east thou cam'st to Garda
  Well wot we how grim was the fight twixt the hosts.'


|| For five summers together waged Earl Eirik this warfare, and when he
left the realm of Garda he went fighting over the whole of Adalsysla &
Eysysla;Sec. there took he four viking boats from Danish men and slew all
that were on the ships. It is thus spoken of in the Banda lay:

  'I heard where the swinger of the sword did battle
  Once more in the isle-sound.
  Eirik wins the land;
  The bounteous lord four viking boats from Dane-folk took
  Doughty and peacemaking.
  There where warriors hied to town,
      hadst thou, war-hero! strife with Goths.
  Joy of battle filled the Earl thereafter.
  The battle-shield he bore aloft to all the lands,
  And gently fared he not, over the country he rules.'


|| Then Eirik the Earl fared to Denmark when he had abode one winter in
Sweden, and coming unto the Danish King Svein Two-beard, wooed he his
daughter Gyda and this marriage was agreed upon. Accordingly Eirik took
Gyda to wife and one winter later a son was born to them whom they
called Hakon.

Mainly abode Eirik the winters through in Denmark, but whiles also in
Sweden, but in the summers sailed he the seas over even as became a
viking.


|| Svein Two-beard, the Danish King, had Gunnhild, the daughter of the
Wendish King Burizlaf, to wife; and in the days whereof now is the
record writ happed it that Queen Gunnhild fell sick and died;Sec. and a
while thereafter wedded King Svein, Sigrid the Haughty, she that was
daughter to Skogul-Tosti and mother to Oscar the Swede.

And from the marriage arose a friendship betwixt the brothers-in-law,
and betwixt them and Earl Eirik Hakonson.


  [Illustration]

|| Now the Wendish King Burizlaf did make complaint to his son-in-law,
Earl Sigvaldi, because the pact had been broken which Sigvaldi had made
between King Burizlaf and King Svein: to wit, that King Burizlaf should
have Tyri Haraldsdottir, King Svein's sister, to wife; for this marriage
had never come about, inasmuch as Tyri had said shortly 'Nay' to wedding
a heathen and an old man to boot. King Burizlaf now sent word unto the
Earl that he would demand the fulfilment of the pact, & bade the Earl go
to Denmark & bring Queen Tyri to him.

Then did Earl Sigvaldi hie him on his journey, and laid he the matter
before the Danish King; and by his fair words came he even so far that
into his hands gave King Svein his sister Tyri. With her went certain
women to bear her company & do her service, & her foster-father, whose
name was Ozur Agason, a wealthy man; & sundry other men withal. It was
agreed between the King & the Earl that Tyri should have the estates in
Wendland which had belonged to Queen Gunnhild, and that she should be
given other great lands in dowry.

Tyri wept sorely and departed very much against her will; but natheless
when she and the Earl were come to Wendland was she wedded, & so King
Burizlaf had Queen Tyri to wife.

But ever so long as she was among heathens would she take neither meat
nor drink from them, and in this wise was it for a sennight. Then right
so one night fled away Queen Tyri and Ozur in the darkness unto the
forests; and of this their journey it is briefest to recount that they
attained Denmark, but there durst Tyri by no means remain inasmuch as
her brother King Svein would, an he knew where she lay, have sent her
back again to Wendland.

So faring ever by stealth went they to Norway, and Tyri made no stay
until she was come to King Olaf, who made her welcome, and gave them
high entertainment. To the King Tyri told of her troubles, and begged
counsel of him and sanctuary in his kingdom. Now Tyri had a smooth
tongue in her head, and the King liked her converse well; moreover he
saw that she was passing fair, & it entered into his mind that this
would be a good marriage, and he turned the talking thereunto and asked
her whether she would not have him to husband. But with her fortunes at
the pass at which they now lay seemed it a hard thing to her to judge;
yet on the other hand plainly perceived she how good a marriage it would
be to wed with so famous a King, and therefore entreated she him that he
should make decision on the matter for her. Thereafter, when this thing
had been duly discussed, took King Olaf Queen Tyri in wedlock; and they
were abed in the autumn when King Olaf was come north from Halogaland.

That winter abode King Olaf and Queen Tyri in Nidaros.

Now in the spring-time thereafter oft-times did Tyri make plaint to King
Olaf, and cried bitterly thereover, because albeit had she such great
possessions in Wendland yet had she none in this country, and that she
should have such deemed she but seemly for a Queen; & thinking that by
fair words would she get her own prayed she him on this matter, and said
that so great was the friendship between King Burizlaf & Olaf that even
so soon as they should meet would the King give Olaf all he asked for.
But when the friends to King Olaf came to know after what fashion was
the manner of talking of Tyri with one consent gave they all counsel to
him to refrain from such a course. One day early in the spring, so it is
said, as the King was walking in the street came a man towards him from
the market-place bearing many sticks of angelica, which same were
wondrous big, seeing that it was early in the spring-tide. And the King
took a large stick of angelica in his hand & went home therewith to the
lodging of Queen Tyri. Now Tyri sat a-weeping in her hall even as the
King came in, but he said to her: 'Here is a great stalk of angelica for
thee.' Aside thrust Tyri it with her hand, and said: 'Greater gifts gave
Harald Gormson to me, but lesser feared he than thou dost to leave his
land and seek his own, and the token thereof is that fared he hither to
Norway and laid waste the greater part of this land and took to himself
all taxes and dues; but durst thou not fare through the Danish realm for
fear of my brother King Svein.' Then up sprang King Olaf at these words,
& called out loudly, and swore withal: 'Never will I go in fear of thy
brother King Svein, and whensoever we meet shall he be the one to give
way.'


  [Illustration]

|| Not long after these things summoned King Olaf a Thing in the town,
and made known to all the people that in the summer would he send an
host out of the country, and that it was his will to levy ships & men
from each county, & therewith did he make it known how many ships he
should require from the fjord there.

Then sent he messengers inland both northwards and southwards, and along
the coast on the outside of the islands and inside them along the land,
and called men to arms.

Thereafter did King Olaf launch the 'Long Serpent' & all his other ships
great & small; and the 'Long Serpent' he himself steered, and when men
were taken for a crew, with so much care was choice made that on the
'Long Serpent' was there no man older than sixty nor younger than
twenty. All were chosen with the utmost care for their strength and
courage, & the first taken were King Olaf's body-guard, for composed it
was of the stoutest & boldest men both from home and abroad.


|| Wolf the Red was the name of the man who bore the banner of King Olaf,
and his place was in the prow of the 'Serpent'; there likewise were
Kolbiorn the Marshal, Thorstein Ox-foot and Vikar of Tiundaland, the
brother of Arnliot Gellini. Of the forecastle in the prow were Vak
Raumason of the River, Bersi the Strong, On the Archer of Jamtaland,
Thrond the Stout from Thelemark and Othyrmi his brother; and the
Halogalanders Thrond Squint-eye, Ogmund Sande, Lodvir the Long, from
Saltvik, and Harek the Keen.

From Inner Throndhjem were there Ketil the Tall, Thorfin Eisli, and
Havard and his brothers from Orkadal. Those manning the forehold were
Biorn of Studla, Thorgrim Tiodolfson of Hvin, Asbiorn & Orm, Thord of
Niardalang, Thorstein the White of Oprostad, Anor of More, Hallstein and
Hawk from the Fjords, Eyvind Snak, Bergthor Bestil, Hallkel of Fialir,
Olaf the Boy, Arnfin of Sogn, Sigurd Bild, Einar the Hordalander and
Fin, Ketil the Rogalander, and Griotgard the Quick. In the main-hold
were Einar Tamberskelfir, deemed by the others less able than they for
then was he but eighteen winters old, Hallstein Hlifarson, Thorolf, Ivar
Smetta, and Orm Skoganef.

Many other men of valour were there on the 'Serpent' though we cannot
name them; eight were there to a half-berth, and chosen man by man. It
was a common saying that the crew of the 'Serpent' was for goodliness,
strength, and boldness, as much above other men as the 'Serpent' herself
was above other ships.

Thorkel Nefia, own brother to the King, steered the 'Short Serpent,' and
Thorkel Dydril and Jostein, they that were uncles to him on the side of
his mother, commanded the 'Crane'; right well manned were these twain
ships. Moreover had King Olaf eleven great ships from Throndhjem, ships
of twenty benches, two smaller ships and victuallers.


|| When King Olaf had completed the equipping of his fleet at Nidaros,
appointed he men throughout the whole of the district of Throndhjem to
be stewards collecting revenue, and annalists. He then sent to Iceland
Gizur the White & Hialti Skeggison to convert that country to
Christianity, and sent he with them that priest whose name is Thormod
and other consecrated men, but kept back with him as hostages the four
men of Iceland they that he deemed to be of greatest mark, to wit,
Kiartan Olafson, Halldor Gudmundson, Kolbein Thordson and Sverting
Runolfson; and it is said of the journey of Gizur & Hialti that they
were come unto Iceland or ever the meeting of the Althing & were present
at the Thing, and thereat was baptism legalized in Iceland and that
summer all folk were brought into the true fold.


|| The same spring likewise sent King Olaf Leif Eirikson to Greenland to
convert the people, and fared he thither that summer. On the main found
he the crew of a ship who were lying helpless on a wreck, and thereafter
he discovered Vineland the Good,Sec. yet came he the same summer to
Greenland; and with him had he a priest and teachers, and he took up his
abode at Brattalid with his father Eirik. Thereafter did men call him
Leif the Lucky; but Eirik, his father, said that the one thing was a
set-off to the other: on the one hand was the saving of the ship's crew
by Leif & on the other the bringing to Greenland of that 'juggler,' to
wit, the priest.


|| Then took King Olaf his host southward following the coast, and many
of his friends flocked to him, mighty men, who were bravely furnished
for an expedition with the King. The first man of these was own
brother-in-law to himself, Erling Skialgson with his large 'skeid'Sec.
wherein were thirty benches, and right well manned was she withal. There
came also to him his brothers-in-law Hyrning and Thorgeir, each steering
a large ship. Many other mighty men accompanied him, so that when he
left the country had he thirty long-ships. King Olaf sailed south
through Eyrasund, off the coasts of Denmark, and in due course came he
to Wendland.

There appointed he a tryst with King Burizlaf, and the Kings met and
spake together of the possessions claimed of King Olaf, and all the talk
between them went in kindly wise and the claims whereof King Olaf deemed
himself to have rights there were fully ordered.

Abode he there a long while during the summer, and saw many of his
friends.


|| As hath been related ere this, King Svein Two-beard had wedded Sigrid
the Haughty, & Sigrid was King Olaf's greatest foe, the reason therefor
being how King Olaf had broken his troth with her, as has been afore set
in fair script, and how he had smote her on the face.

Sigrid incited King Svein to do battle with King Olaf Tryggvason, saying
pretext enough was it that he had wedded the own sister to Svein, she
Tyri, without his leave: 'And never would thy forefathers have suffered
such a thing.' Such words as these had Queen Sigrid ever on her lips,
and so far went she with her persuasions that King Svein was full
willing to do battle with Olaf. So early in spring-tide sent King Svein
men east to Sweden, to Olaf the Swedish King, he that was his step-son,
& to Earl Eirik, to tell them that Olaf King of Norway had his fleet
abroad, and thought of faring to Wendland come summer; another message
took they likewise, namely that the Swedish King and the Earl should
call out their hosts and go to meet King Svein, and that then altogether
they should get their battle over against King Olaf. Now the King of
Sweden and Eirik the Earl were ready and eager for this venture, so
mustered they a large fleet in Sweden, and with the ships thereof went
south to Denmark and came thither at the time when King Olaf had already
sailed east. Of this speaketh Halldor in the song he made about Earl
Eirik:

  'Crusher of Kings who battles loved,
  From out of Sweden called,
  To southern battle fared he forth,
  Even with great hosts of men,
  The wound-bird on the sea gat food while waiting,
  Each and every warrior was fain to follow Eirik.'


|| So the King of the Swedes and Earl Eirik shaped a course to meet the
Danish King, and when all the fleets were come together was there a host
greater than one man could number.


|| When King Svein sent for that fleet, sent he moreover Earl Sigvaldi to
Wendland to spy on the expedition of King Olaf, and to lay such a lure
that King Svein and the others might assuredly fall in with King Olaf.

So Earl Sigvaldi set forth and went to Wendland and Jomsborg, and met
King Olaf Tryggvason. Now had they much friendly conversation one with
the other, and the Earl came greatly to love the King, mainly on account
of their former kinship, for Astrid, she that was wife unto the Earl,
even the daughter of King Burizlaf, was very friendly with King Olaf,
for the reason that the latter had had her sister Geira to wife.

Now Sigvaldi was a wise man, & one ready at expedients, & when he and
King Olaf took counsel together, found he many and divers pretexts for
delaying the journey of the King to the westward; but the men of King
Olaf murmured thereat and were loudly displeased, and longed much to get
them hence home, for, said they, 'clear are we to sail & fair is the
wind.' Learned Sigvaldi now privily from Denmark that the King of the
Danes and the King of the Swedes & Eirik the Earl were met together, and
were even about to set sail to the eastward off the coast of Wendland;
likewise that it had been convened betwixt them that they in wait for
King Olaf should lie off that isle which is called Svold;Sec. & that
moreover he, the Earl, was after some fashion to contrive that King Olaf
be found of them.


|| And now went about a rumour in Wendland that Svein, the King of the
Danes, also had an host abroad, & soon tongues wagged to the tune that
well would it like Svein, the King of the Danes, to meet with King Olaf;
but said Earl Sigvaldi unto the King: 'No plan is it of King Svein to
attack thee with the Danish host alone, seeing how great an host of
thine own thou hast; but if ye suspect that war may be at hand then will
I and my men go with thee, and aforetime was it deemed good help when
the Jomsborg vikings bore a chief company: I will go with thee even with
eleven ships well-found.'

To this did the King answer yea, and because at that time was there
blowing a gentle breeze but favourable, commanded he that the fleet
should get under way, & that the horns be blown for their departing.
Then the men hoisted sail; and the small ships were those that made the
better way, & out to sea sailed they. Now kept the Earl close by the
King's ship, shouting to those on board, and bidding the King follow
him: 'Well wot I,' he said, 'which sounds are deepest betwixt the isles,
& this be fraught with care seeing how big are thy ships.' So sailed the
Earl first with his ships, eleven ships had he, & sailed the King after
him with his large ships, eleven likewise had he, but sailed all the
rest of the fleet ahead and out to sea. Now it came to pass as Earl
Sigvaldi was making Vold came rowing off a skiff, and those therein told
unto the Earl how that the fleet of the King of the Danes lay in the
haven even right over ahead of their way.

So the Earl ordered sails to be lowered, and rowed they in under that
island. Thus saith Halldor the Unchristened:

  'With ships one more than seventy
  Came the lord of Eynafylki from the south;
  His sword he dyed in warfare
  When the Earl the ships of Skani called out to battle.
  Quickly then the peace was broken 'twixt the men.'


|| Now it will be marked that, according unto the bard, were the ships of
King Olaf & Earl Sigvaldi seventy-one in number what time sailed they
from the south.


|| Now lying there were Svein, the King of the Danes, Olaf the King of
the Swedes, and Earl Eirik, with all the might of their fleet, and fair
weather was with them with bright sunshine. Went up to the islet all the
chieftains with a large company of men, and spied they thence that a
many ships were sailing together out at sea.

And they beheld a large ship and brave sailing, and said both the Kings:
'There goes a great ship, passing fair, none other can this be save only
the "Long Serpent."'

Then made Earl Eirik answer, saying: 'That is not the "Long Serpent."'

And it was as he opined, for this ship belonged to Eindrid of Gimsar.
A while later saw they yet another ship sailing, much greater than the
first, and then spake King Svein: 'Afeard is Olaf Tryggvason, for he
dareth not sail with the head upon his ship.' Then said Earl Eirik:
'That is not the King's ship; that ship and the sail thereof know I, for
the sail is a striped one; Erling Skialgson it is who hath command
thereof.

Let them sail on! Better is it for us that this ship should be lacking
from Olaf's fleet, so well appointed is it.' A while later saw they and
recognized the ships of Sigvaldi the Earl, and one of them also was
great.

Then spake King Svein and bade them go to their ships; for, said he,
there sails the 'Long Serpent'; but Earl Eirik called out, 'Many more
ships and fine ones have they besides the 'Long Serpent,' let us bide a
while.'

Then many of the men fell to talking, & they said: 'Eirik the Earl will
not fight to avenge his father. Shame, shame is it, & throughout all the
land will it be heard, if we lie here with so great a fleet & let King
Olaf sail out to sea on our very flank.' But after they had been talking
thus a while saw they that four more ships came sailing by, and one of
these was a dragon, large indeed, and bedecked with gold. Then rose up
King Svein and said: 'High shall the "Serpent" carry me this eve; and I
will steer her.' Many of the men called out that the 'Serpent' was a
mighty great ship and beautiful to look upon, and a glorious work had it
been to build such a craft.

Then Earl Eirik said so loud that sundry heard him: 'E'en had King Olaf
no larger ship than this, King Svein would with the Danish host alone
never wrest it from him.' Then went the men to their ships and took the
tilts from off them; whilst the chiefs were talking among themselves of
that which is writ above saw they sailing along three very large ships,
and a fourth ship last of all, and that was the 'Long Serpent.' Now of
those large ships which had sailed past before, and had been deemed by
the men to be the 'Long Serpent,' the first was the 'Crane' and the last
the 'Short Serpent.' But when they beheld the 'Long Serpent,' and none
gainsaid this, then wotted all that now indeed was Olaf Tryggvason
sailing by. Then went they to their ships, and made ready to row to the
onset. Now a compact had been struck between the chiefs, King Svein,
King Olaf, and Earl Eirik, that to each one of them should be given a
third part of Norway if it befell that King Olaf was slain; moreover he
who first boarded the 'Long Serpent' was for his own to have all the
booty taken therefrom, and each of them was to have what ships he
himself cleared.

Earl Eirik had a very large long-ship which he was wont to use on his
viking cruises; a beard was there on the higher part of both prow and
stern, and thick plates of iron going from thence all the breadth of the
beard right down to the water-line.


|| Now when Earl Sigvaldi & his men headed in towards the islet, observed
closely Thorkel Dydril of the 'Crane' and the captains of the other
ships sailing with him, what he was doing, and they too lowered sail,
and rowing after him, called out to him to know why thus he was faring.

The Earl answered that he was going to bide the coming of King Olaf, for
most like did it seem that war was at hand.

So then they likewise let their ships lie-to until such time as Thorkel
Leira with the 'Short Serpent' was come up and with him too the three
other ships which were following him, and the same tidings were told
unto them; then they also lowered sail, laid-to and bided the coming of
King Olaf.

But when the King sailed out towards the isle, then rowed out into the
sound the whole of the hostile fleet even for to meet him; and his men
witnessing this same prayed the King sail his way, and not engage in
battle with so large an host.

But King Olaf stood up on the poop, and shouted with a loud voice: 'Let
no men of mine lower sail or think of fleeing; never have I fled in
battle. May God look to my life, for never will I turn to flight.' And
it was done even as the King said. Thus saith Hallfrod:

  'Fain would I name those words,
  Which Olaf's warriors tell us
  The lord deed-mighty spake there,
  To his men before the battle.
  The warlike King forbade
  His champions to think of flight,
  And how they live, the words the loved one of the people spoke.'


|| So were sounded the horns for the assembling of the ships; and the
King's ship was in the midst of the fleet, with the 'Short Serpent' on
one side and the 'Crane' on the other. Now when they were about to lash
together the prow of the 'Long Serpent' and stern of the 'Short
Serpent,' the King observed what was being done, and he cried out
bidding them lay the big ship more forward, & not let her be astern of
all the ships in the fleet. Thereon answered Ulf the Red: 'If we are to
lay the "Serpent" as much longer ahead as she is longer than other ships
hard will the day's work be behind the gunwales.' Said the King: 'I knew
not that I had a forecastle man who was both red and afraid,' Ulf made
answer back, 'Turn not thou thy back there on the poop more than I turn
mine when I guard the prow.'

Now the King had a bow in his hand, and placing an arrow on the string
thereof he turned him towards Ulf; then cried Ulf, 'Shoot another way,
King, thither where it is needed more greatly; what I do, I do for
thee.'


|| King Olaf towered high on the poop of the 'Serpent,' and easy was it
to know him from other men.

A golden shield had he, and a gold-wrought helmet, & a short red kirtle
over his shirt of mail.

Now when King Olaf saw that the fleets were dividing and banners were
being set up before the chiefs, asked he: 'Who is the captain of that
host which is right over against us?' It was told him that it was King
Svein Two-beard with the host of the Danes. Then answered he: 'Afraid
are we not of those blenchers, no heart is there in the Danes. But what
chief is behind those banners yonder on our right?' It was told him that
there was King Olaf, with the Swedish host. 'Better were it for the
Swedes to stay at home and lick the blood from their bowls than to board
the "Serpent" under thy weapons.' 'But whose are the ships lying out
yonder on the larboard of the Danes?' 'They pertain,' came the answer,
'to Eirik Hakonson.' Then answered King Olaf, 'Good reason, methinketh,
hath he to meet us, and from that fleet may we await the fiercest of
fights, seeing that they too are of Norway even as we ourselves.'


|| Thereafter separated the Kings one from another for the onset. King
Svein laid his ship against the 'Long Serpent'; and King Olaf the Swede
lay-to farther out & grappled from the prow the outermost ship of King
Olaf Tryggvason; and over against the other side lay Earl Eirik. And
even so there ensued a dire and strenuous conflict. Albeit did Sigvaldi,
the Earl, let his ships fall astern and took he no part in the battle.
Thus saith Skuli Thorsteinnson, he that himself was with Earl Eirik that
day:

  'The Frisian wolf I followed
  (And in my youth gat honour)
  With Sigvaldi, there where the spears whistled
  (Now wax I old);
  When bloody swords we bore
  There off the mouth of the Svold
  In the south, in the battle-storm,
  And met the hero of wars.'

And Hallfrod too saith of these tidings:

  'Methinks full much was missed
  (Many to flight did turn them),
  That chief who spurred the fight
  Was among the men of Throndhjem.
  The valiant King alone
  'Gainst the two Kings did fight,
  (Glorious to tell it now)
  And for a third too the Earl.'


|| The battle to them all waxed very fierce & bloody; the forecastle men
of the 'Long Serpent' & the 'Short Serpent' and the 'Crane' threw
anchors and grapplers on to the ships of King Svein, and thus could they
attack them from above so that they cleared every ship unto which they
could cling and thereto hold fast. King Svein and those of his company
who could escape made what way they could to other of his ships and
thereon drew thence out of bow-shot, and so it came to pass that it
fared with this fleet even as King Olaf Tryggvason had foretold.

Then Olaf, he that was King of the Swedes, brought his ships up into the
self-same places left by those of Svein, but natheless hardly was he
come nigh to the big ships than it went with him the same as with the
others; even so that lost he many men and some of his ships, and
thereafter he too drew back. But Earl Eirik laid his bearded ship
alongside the outermost ship of King Olaf & with fierceness cleared it,
and straightway cut it adrift from its lashings; then went he alongside
the one that was next, and with it fought until that too was cleared.
Then fell the crews to escaping from the lesser ships on to those that
were larger; but cut the Earl every ship from its lashings even as soon
as it was cleared, & thereon came up once more from all sides Danes and
Swedes into the battle over against the ships of King Olaf. Eirik the
Earl lay ever alongside one or other ship fighting thus in hand to hand
fight, and as the men fell on his ship, Danes and Swedes, other true men
took their place. Thus saith Halldor:

  'Of sharp swords the brunt
  O'er the "Long Serpent" went;
  There golden spears did clash
  And the men fought long,
  In battle of foemen
  Went forth to the south
  Men of Sweden against him,
  And Danish swordsmen doughty.'


|| Then waxed the battle very fierce, and men fell thick and fast, and so
at the end befell it that all the ships that pertained unto King Olaf
were cleared save and except the 'Long Serpent,' & by that time all
those of his folk who were still able to bear arms were come aboard of
her.

Then did Earl Eirik bring his bearded ship alongside the 'Serpent' and
thereon ensued a fight with man at sword's length from man.

Thus saith Halldor:

  'Into so hard a trap fell now the "Long Serpent"
  (The shields were cut asunder, together clashed the swords),
  And when the axe-bearer laid his bearded ship
      high bulwarked beside the "Serpent,"
  The Earl did victory win at Holm.'


|| Earl Eirik took his stand in the forehold of his ship encompassed by a
wall of shields, & his men fought both with trenchant arms, and by the
thrusting of spears, and by the throwing of everything that could be
used as a weapon, though some shot with the bow or threw javelins with
the hand. From all sides had the war-ships been brought up around the
'Serpent,' and so great was the shower of weapons which fell on her, and
so thickly flew the arrows and javelins from all sides, that men could
but hardly ward off the missiles with their shields. The men that were
with King Olaf had ere now waxed so furious that they had climbed up on
to the bulwarks to the end that they might reach their foemen with their
swords and slay them; but many of their foes would not come so nigh
alongside the 'Serpent' that they could be beguiled into close combat,
whereas a many of the folk of Olaf being unmindful that they were not
fighting on a level field themselves fell overboard and so sank down
together with their weapons. Thus saith Hallfrod:

  'From the "Serpent" sank they down, wounded in the fight;
  Give way or flee they would not, resisting to the last.
  Though glorious the King may be who steers the "Serpent"
  Such men as these will long be lacking where'er she strideth.'


|| It happened that in the narrow-hold of the "Serpent," shooting with
his bow and arrow more fiercely than any other man that was on the ship,
stood Einar Tambarskelfir. Now it was against Earl Eirik that Einar had
his direct venture, and struck he the top of the tiller-head, over above
the head of the Earl, sending in his arrow with such force that it
penetrated to the very binding of the shaft.

The Earl looked at it, and asked if it was known who was shooting thus;
then on the instant Einar shot another arrow which went so nigh unto the
Earl that it passed betwixt his side and his arm, and so far through the
staying-board that the barb stood out on the other side thereof.

Then spake the Earl to that man whose name some say was Fin, but as
others have it was of FinnishSec. kith and kin.

Exceeding apt was he as an archer, so spake Eirik unto him saying:
'Shoot thou yonder big man in the narrow-hold,' & even as he said the
words did the arrow of Fin strike the bow of Einar just as he was
drawing it for the third time. Then was the bow broken in twain, & Olaf
said, 'What brake there so loudly?' & Einar made answer: 'Norway from
thy hand, O King.' 'So great a breaking asunder hath not happened yet,
I trow,' quoth the King; 'take my bow and shoot therewith,' and saying
so threw he him his own bow, and Einar taking it strained it even beyond
the arrow-head. 'Too weak,' said he, 'too weak is the prince's bow,' and
throwing it back again to the King took he his shield and sword, and
fell to hand-fighting.


|| King Olaf being himself on the poop of the 'Serpent,' full oft that
day shot with his bow, but upon occasion made he use of javelins, and
ever threw two at once. Then as time wore on saw he, as his glance sped
along the ship, that albeit his men swung ever their swords and smote
full fast, yet nevertheless their swords were cutting but ill, and he
cried out loudly to them: 'Are ye wielding your swords carelessly since,
as I see, they do not cut?' One of the men made answer: 'Our swords are
blunt and very much notched.' Then went the King down into the
fore-hold, and setting up the lid of the high-seat took from out of the
chest beneath many sharp swords and gave them out to his men, and when
he thrust down his right arm into the chest it was seen that blood was
running from under his mail-shirt, and no man at that hour wot in what
part he had been wounded.


|| Even the stoutest defence on the 'Long Serpent,' and that the most
deadly, was put up by those stout men that were in the fore-hold and in
the prow and stern, for truly were they picked men, and the bulwarks in
those places were higher than in other parts of the ship. Even so soon
as ever the men amidships began to fall, and only a few of those about
the mast were left standing on their feet, made Eirik an attempt to
board the 'Serpent,' and up came he on to her, himself the fifteenth
man.

Then was it that Hyrning, he that was own brother-in-law of Olaf, set
over against Eirik with a band of followers and the mightiest fight of
all waged they then, and the end thereof was of such a fashion that had
the Earl himself to draw back even unto his own ship; and of the men
that adventured with him on to the 'Serpent' were some wounded and most
others slain.


|| And thereafter was there yet again a hard struggle, & many men fell on
board the 'Serpent'; & as the crew who held the defence of her began to
thin tried Earl Eirik to board her for the second time, but again met he
with valiant opposition. When the fore-castle men on the 'Serpent' saw
this went they aft and safeguarded the ship over against the Earl, &
made a stubborn defence. But so many were the men who were fallen on the
'Serpent' that were the bulwarks perforce in many places empty, and the
men of the Earl now came aboard her on every side; then were those men
who were still standing to arms and having the guardianship of the ship
forced to fall back aft, even unto the place where the King was
standing. Thus saith Halldor the Unchristened, telling how Earl Eirik
cheered on his men:

  'Astern across the thwarts shrank the men of Olaf
  Valiant the lord cheers on his hot-headed followers,
  When the warriors had closed all issue to the doughty King
  The clash of weapons turned towards the Wend-slayer.'


|| Now it came to pass that Kolbiorn the Marshal went up on to the poop
even to the King, and greatly did they resemble one another in apparel
and weapons; and Kolbiorn was also a right big and comely man.

Yet once again ensued there a fight full fierce in the fore-hold, but
because that there were now come up on to the 'Serpent' even as many men
of the Earl as the ship would hold, and seeing that his ships were lying
on all sides around the 'Serpent,' & moreover few folk left on her for
defence against so strong a host, fell the main of the men of Olaf very
shortly thereafter, albeit were they men both strong and stout of heart.
Then did King Olaf himself, and Kolbiorn, leap over-board each on his
own side. Now the men of the Earl had put out small boats & were busy
slaying those that took to the sea, and when the King leapt overboard
would they have taken him captive and brought him before Earl Eirik, had
not King Olaf held up his shield above him and dived headlong into the
deep. Kolbiorn, on the other part, thrust his shield under him and thus
protected himself against the javelins which were being thrown up from
the boats beneath, but he fell into the sea in such wise that his shield
was beneath him & therefore could he in no wise dive so swiftly, & so
was he taken & haled up into a boat. Then the foe deeming him to be the
King brought him before the Earl, but when the Earl discovered that it
was not King Olaf but Kolbiorn, gave he the latter quarter. At this
moment did all they of the King's folk who were still alive leap
overboard from the 'Serpent'; and Hallfrod saith that Thorkel Nefia,
he that was brother to the King, leapt last of all overboard:

  'Stroke-doughty Thorkel saw the "Crane,"
  Yea, and the "Serpents" twain floating deserted;
  Boldly had he fought e'er the wearer of the arm-rings,
  Stout-hearted in combat, into the sea plunged,
  And by swimming saved his life.'


|| Now hath it been afore fair written that Earl Sigvaldi joined forces
with King Olaf in Wendland; ten ships had the Earl and withal an
eleventh whereon Astrid, she that was daughter to the King and wife to
Sigvaldi, had her men.

When King Olaf leapt overboard all the hosts shouted cries of victory,
and then did the Earl and his men unship their oars & row to the fight.
Of this speaketh Halldor the Unchristened:

  'From far and near the Wendmen's craft
  To battle hastened;
  The lean sword-clashers
  Clanged with iron mouths;
  Din of swords at sea was there
  (Wolves' fare the eagle tore),
  The lads' dear leader strove
  Ere many from him fled.'


|| Now rowed away the Wendland cutter, whereon were Astrid's men, back to
Wendland, and straightway did many men say that King Olaf must have
drawn off his shirt of mail in the water, dived down away from the
long-ship, and thereafter swum even to the Wendland cutter and so been
brought to shore by the folk of Astrid.

And many are the tales which have been told by certain men of the
journeyings of King Olaf; nevertheless in this wise speaketh Hallfrod:

  'I wot not whether he who stilled the raven's hunger
  Should of me be praised as of the living or the dead,
  Since of a truth his men tell either tale
  (Bootless of himself to question) though wounded was he surely.'

But howsoever this may have been, never more returned King Olaf
Tryggvason to his realm of Norway; yet in this wise speaketh Hallfrod
the Troublous-skald:

  'He who the tidings told that the lord was living
  Had long for Tryggvi's trusted son a fighter been.
  'Tis said the King from out the steel-storm came;
  Alas, 'tis worse than this, methinks,
      for of truth all facts are lacking.'

And this again:

  'When the land-host with men in numbers towards the Holder's
  War-wont King did fare, it scarce could be (so heard I)
  That the King beloved could with life escape
  (Folk seemed not truth to tell) from out the battle.
  Some men e'en tell this skald that wounded is the King,
  Though from the spear-storm saved and eastwards gone.
  But tidings from the south now tell the slaying of the King
  In the great fight (endure no more can I the wavering talk of men).'


|| With the victory that he encompassed did Earl Eirik Hakonson gain even
the 'Long Serpent' and much booty, and steered he the 'Serpent' far out
of the battle. Thus said Halldor:

  'Thither the "Serpent" had borne him,
  The helmeted chieftain, to the great sword-play,
  (Then were the ships dight).
  But south, in the din of the battle,
      gladly the Earl took the "Serpent"
  (Heming's high-born brother in blood did dye the swords).'


|| Now Svein the son of Earl Hakon even at this time was betrothed to
Holmfrid the daughter of Olaf King of Sweden. When Olaf the Swedish
King, Svein the Danish King and Earl Eirik divided the realm of Norway
between them, then had Olaf the Swedish King four counties, to wit,
Throndhjem, the two Mores & Raumsdal; and eastward to him pertained
Raumariki from the Gaut (Goeta) river to Svinasund.

This dominion did King Olaf make over to Earl Svein on the self-same
conditions as the tribute paying kings or earls had held their lands
aforetime from superior kings. Earl Eirik gat five counties in
Throndhjem, also Halogaland and Naumdalen, the Fjords & Fialir, Sogn and
Hardaland & Rogaland, and Agdir from the north right to Lidandesnes (the
Naze).

Thus saith Thord Kolbeinson:

  'I wist that save for Erling (bounteous chief whom I praise)
  Erewhile the "hersirs" mostly were friends unto the earls;
  The battle ended the land all southward from Agdir
  To Veiga, or farther north, was subject made to Eirik.
  Under the lord the land prospered; & this 'twas good should be.
  His duty he thought it to hold o'er the northmen his hand.
  Now hath died Svein the king south of us, so the tale goes
  (The strength of most doth fail,
      and waste are his manors for grief).'


|| Svein the King of the Danes was now once more the possessor of Vik,
which had been his aforetime; to Earl Eirik he gave Raumariki and
Hedemark, to be held as a fief. Svein Hakonson, he that was the finest
man that men have ever looked on, received earldom from Olaf the Swede.
Eirik and Earl Svein were alike baptized into and made profession of the
true Faith, but even so long as they ruled over Norway gave they licence
to every man that he should please himself about what creed he would
cleave to, & moreover maintained they the old laws honourably and
likewise all the customs of the land; therefore were they justly men who
were well-beloved and good rulers. Now in all matters having concern in
the ruling of the realm of the twain brothers was Earl Eirik ever the
more prominent.




THE SAGA OF HARALD THE TYRANT, MXXX-MLXVI




It befell in the days of the fall of King Olaf that Harald, the son of
Sigurd Sow, the stepbrother of King Olaf the Saint, bore his share in
the great battle of Stiklastad.

Even there it befell Harald that he was smote down, but he gained the
life of his body by flight with others that bore him company. Thus saith
Thiodolf:

  'Nigh the hill, a battle-storm
  I heard drive toward the King,
  But the burner of the BulgarsSec.
  His brother well supported.
  Unwillingly from fallen Olaf
  Was the prince sundered,
  And his head he hid;
  Then was he twelve winters
  With added three thereto in age.'


|| It was Rognvald Brusason who bare Harald out of the battle, and
brought him to a certain peasant who lived in the forest, and that in a
glade far from the haunts of man; and here was Harald leeched until he
was whole of his wound.

Thereafter fared forth the son of that peasant eastward with him across
the Kjol (Kiolen), & as far as they were able to do so followed they
forest tracks in lieu of the common way.

Now in no wise wist the son of the peasant with what manner of man he
was faring, & as they were riding through the wastes of the forest sang
Harald thus wise:

  'From forest now to forest
  Wend I my way with honour scant;
  Who wists but in the future
  Wide fame may not be mine?'


|| And thus fared he eastward through Jamtaland & Helsingland, and in due
course was he come even to Sweden; there did he link his fortune with
that of Rognvald Brusason and many others of the men of King Olaf that
were yet alive after the mighty battle.


|| Now in the spring thereafter gat they ships for themselves and in the
summer fared eastward to Garda, where abode they the winter through with
King Jarizleif.

Thus saith Bolverk:

  'The sword's blade, King, thou dried'st
  When thou fared'st from the strife.
  To the raven gav'st thou to eat;
  The wolf howled on the wooded heights.
  But the year thereafter and thou wert
  East in Gard, O doughty fighter,
  Ne'er have I heard of a leader of hosts
  More famed than thou wert.'

King Jarizleif made Harald & his men welcome right kindly, and even so
became Harald captain of the land defence of the King & with him was
joined Eilif, the son of Earl Rognvald. Thus saith Thiodolf:

  'Where Eilif was,
  Alike they acted,
  Those chieftains twain
  In wedge-like phalanx.
  Chased were the East Wends
  Into a corner narrow,
  Not easy for the LaesirsSec.
  Was the law of the host.'


|| Some winters abode Harald in the realm of Garda, & fared forth for the
most part eastward; then went he a journey to Greece, and in his company
was a mighty following, and at that time likewise went he to Miklagard
(Constantinople). Saith Bolverk:

  'The chilly shower drave forward
  The ship's swart prows;
  And barks all bravely armoured
  Their sails bore by the coast-side.
  The metal towers of Miklagard
  The prince saw from the prows;
  Fair-bosomed ships were borne
  To the walls of the city.'

At that time there ruled over Greece Queen Zoe the Wealthy and with her
Michael Katalaktus.

When Harald was come even unto Miklagard in the hardiness that was of
his blood enterprised he service of the Queen, and even so did the men
that were with him.

Forthwith that same autumn took he ship on certain galleys with warriors
who were adventuring on to the Greek sea.

In those days was one named GyrgirSec. chief of the hosts, and he was also
a kinsman to the Queen. Now it came to pass that Harald had not abode
longtime with the host ere the VaeringsSec. became much drawn to him, so
that he and they adventured all together in a body whensoever there was
fighting, and the end thereof was that Harald was chosen captain of all
the Vaerings. Gyrgir and his hosts coasted in all directions among the
Greek islands, and greatly plundered the corsairs.


|| Once it befell when they were faring overland, and were of a mind to
pass the night in the woods, that the Vaerings were the first to come to
the place where it was intended they should lie, and chose they for
their tents even such position as was best and lay highest, for the
country thereabout was boggy, and no sooner came the rain than was it
ill living there over against where the land was low. Then came Gyrgir,
& when he saw where the Vaerings had pitched their tents bade he them
begone and pitch them in another place, since saith he, that he himself
would have his tent even there. But thus spake Harald: 'When ye are the
first to come to the place for the camp then shall ye make choice of
your place for the night, and it will behove us to pitch our tents
elsewhere, even in whatever spot is open to us. So do ye now likewise;
pitch ye your tents where ye will in any other spot that pertaineth.
Methought was it the right of the Vaerings here in Greece to be masters
of their own matter & free in all things before all men, and that was it
to the King and Queen only they owed obedience.'

On this bandied they words with so great heat that both sides fell to
arming themselves, & right nigh came they to fighting, but ere that were
the wisest men came up and they parted them.

They said it was more in reason that these men should be of one mind on
the matter, and a just decision made thereon betwixt them, so that never
more might strife arise out of this cause.

So then was agreed a meeting between them, & the best and wisest men
were present thereat; and at that meeting was it counselled in such
manner that all were of one mind, to wit, that lots should be borne in a
cloth and cast between Greek and Vaering as to who should be the first
to ride or row, or berth them in haven, or choose a spot for their
tents; both of them henceforth to rest content with whatever the lot
decreed. Thereafter was this done, and the lots were marked; then said
Harald to Gyrgir; 'Let me now see how thou markest thy lot, to the
intent that we may not both mark them in the same fashion.'

So Harald looked and thereafter marked his lot and threw it into the
cloth, and Gyrgir did likewise; but the man who was to draw the lot took
up one between his fingers, and lifting his hand said: 'These shall
first ride and row and berth them in haven and choose them tent-places.'
Then did Harald seize the lot with his hand and throw it out into the
sea, and when he had so done he said: 'That was our lot.'

Gyrgir said: 'Why didst thou not let more men see it?' 'Look you,'
answered Harald, 'on that lot which is left, & I wot well thereon will
you know your own mark.'

Then looked they at the lot, and all knew the mark to be that of Gyrgir.

So was it adjudged that the Vaerings should have the choice in all those
matters about which there had been strife. Sundry things befell likewise
on which saw they not eye to eye, but ever it ended in such a fashion
that Harald had his way.


|| Plundering & pillaging whithersoever they went fared together both
hosts during the summer, but when a battle was imminent would Harald
cause his men to hold aloof therefrom, or at least over against that
part where was the fight most open.

Ever said he that he would take good care that he did not lose those
that were of his company; but when a fight chanced and he with his men
only were opposed to an enemy so fierce was he in battle that either
must he win the day or die. For this reason oft-times it befell that
when Harald was captain of the men the victory fell to him, whereas
Gyrgir won naught.

Now when the warriors saw how oft did this come to pass, said they one
to the other that their cause would have better advancement an Harald
were alone captain of the host; and blamed they the leader of the band,
saying that he and his men were but bootless. To this Gyrgir made answer
that the Vaerings would not yield him support, & bade them begone,
whiles he fared with the rest of the host to be successful as far as in
them lay. Even so, thereon went Harald from the host, and with him
likewise the Vaerings and the Latin men, but Gyrgir kept the host of the
Greeks. Then came to pass that which all had awaited, to wit, that
Harald ever gained the victory & the plunder. Thereupon fared the Greeks
home to Miklagard save only the young men who desired to win riches for
themselves, and they gathered round Harald and took him for their
leader.

Then went he with his host westward to northern Africa, which the
Vaerings called Serkland,Sec. and there he gained addition to his host.

In Serkland won he eighty walled towns, some thereof surrendered to him,
whereas others took he by might.

Thereafter went he to Sikiley (Sicily). Thus saith Thiodolf:

  'Towns ten times eight in Serkland,
  Say I, then were taken,
  The young hater of red-glowing gold
  Rushed into the peril.
  Before the fighter went to rouse
  With clashing shields the Hilds,
  Were they long the Serk-men's foe,
  On the plains of Sicily.'

Thus saith Illugi, the skald from Bryn:

  'Harald under Michael strove
  For south-lands with his sword
  The son of Budli, as 'twas said
  Showed friendship by his fellowship.'[Sec.]


|| Now it came to pass that at this season was Michael King of Greece.

Many winters abode he in Africa, and to himself acquired goods and
chattels in plenty, gold likewise and all manner of precious things; but
all the wealth which he took and thereof had not need for his
maintenance sent he by his trusty men to Holmgard (Novgarod), to be
bestowed into the hands and care of King Jarizleif.

Exceeding wealth did he collect together there, as was like to be,
forasmuch as he was pillaging in that part of the world the which is
richest in gold and costly things. And so much did he accomplish withal
that, as has been writ before, took he as many as eighty towns.


|| And being come to Sikiley did Harald lay waste on that isle, and set
he his host over against a large town in which were many people.

So strong were the walls thereof that he feared it were doubtful an he
could brake them down. Now the townsfolk had enough of victuals and
other commodities which were required to withstand a siege, so hit
Harald on the craft of bidding his fowlers to catch small birds, which
had nests in the town & flew out during the day to seek food. On the
backs of these birds caused he to be tied shavings of red pine-wood on
which had he poured melted wax and brimstone; fire thereto was set, and
the birds even so soon as they were loose, flew with one accord at once
to the town with the intent to seek their young and to hie them to their
own nests which were under the roofs.

And these roofs were thatched with reeds or straw.

Then the fire from the birds spread to the eaves, and though each bird
bore but a little burden of fire nevertheless in a brief space was
kindled a great fire, for many birds bore fire to the roofs that were of
the town. Thereafter there burned one house after the other until the
town itself was all aflame, and all the people came out therefrom and
begged for grace.

Yea was this that same folk that for many a day had talked proudly and
with mocking despite of the Greek host and the chief thereof. Harald
gave quarter to all men who craved it, and thereafter held authority
over this town.


|| Another town was there to which Harald went with his host, & right
well peopled was it and strong withal, so much so indeed that it could
not be thought that he would be able to make assault thereon. Flat land
and hard lay round about the walls thereof, so Harald set his men to dig
a trench from the place whence a brook flowed, & that in a deep gulley
wherein men from the town could not spy.

The earth of the trench threw they out into the water and let the stream
bear it away; and in this work they continued even both by night and by
day with fresh shifts after a spell.

After this fashion did the host advance on the town day by day; and the
townsmen flocked to the battlements & both sides shot at one another,
but by night did all betake themselves to sleep.

Now when Harald wot that this hole that was in the earth was so long
that it must have come under and past the walls of the town bade he his
men arm themselves, & towards dawn went they into the trench, and when
they came to the end thereof dug they up above their heads until they
came to stones set in lime; and this was the floor of a stone hall. Anon
they brake up the floor and ascended into the hall, and there sat many
of the townsmen eating and drinking, and great was the mischance of
these good men for they were taken unawares. The Vaerings went about
with drawn swords, and straightway killed some of them though others
fled, to wit, those who could get out.

Some of the Vaerings sought after these townsmen while others went to
the gates to set them open, and by this way in marched the host that
pertained unto Harald.

Then did the townsfolk flee, though many prayed for mercy, and mercy did
all receive who gave themselves up.

In this way was it that Harald was possessed of the town, and therewith
acquired exceeding wealth.


|| The third town to which they came was the one that of all of the
island had waxed largest and strongest, and to it pertained most
importance both by reason of the wealth and the number within its walls.

Even about this town lay great ditches, and the Vaerings marked that
they could not win it by craft after such fashion as they had possessed
themselves of the other towns aforesaid. And so it came to pass that
long lay they before the town yet did they accomplish nothing, and the
townsfolk seeing this waxed even bolder, and set up their array on the
walls, & anon opened the gates of the town and called to the Vaerings,
egging them on & bidding them enter; and they mocked at them for lack of
boldness, averring that for fighting were they no better than so many
hens. Harald bade his men behave themselves as though they wist not
after what fashion were such things said: 'Nought shall we accomplish,'
said he, 'even if we storm the town; they will fling their weapons down
under their feet upon us; and albeit an entrance we perchance effect
with sundry of our folk, yet is the foe strong enough to shut them in,
and shut the others out at their pleasure for they have put watches at
all the gates of the town.

No less mock will we make of them, however, and we will flaunt in their
faces that we have no fear of them. Our men shall go forth on the plain
as near the town as may be, having care nevertheless lest they come
within bowshot, and weaponless must they go & hold sports one with
another so that the townsfolk may wot that we care naught for their
array.'

After this fashion did they behave themselves for sundry days.


|| Now of the Icelanders that were with Harald at this time is it
recorded that Halldor the son of Snorri the Priest-- he it was who took
this chronicle back to his own land-- and in the second place Ulf the
son of Uspak, the son of Usvif the Wise, were the twain of them very
strong & valiant men and much cherished of Harald.

The pair were alike foremost in the sports on the plain. When things had
thus happened for these sundry days, were the townsfolk minded to show
even greater arrogance, & discarding their weapons mounted they up on to
the walls and defiantly set open the gates of the town. Now the Vaerings
seeing this betook themselves one day to their sports in such fashion
that the swords that pertained to them were concealed beneath their
cloaks and their helms beneath their hats. And after they had vied with
one another awhile saw they that the townsfolk in no fashion entertained
suspicion, thereon drawing their swords ran they forward to the gates.
When the townsmen saw this advanced they bravely to meet them, standing
fully armed, and thereon ensued a dire fight within the gates.

To the Vaering folk pertained neither shield nor buckler, & in default
thereof wrapped they their cloaks round their left arm; some were
wounded, some killed, & all were hard pressed.

Harald & the men with him who were in the camp hastened to their
succour, but by then were the townsfolk come up on to the walls from
whence they shot at & stoned those coming thitherwards. Yet more fierce
grew the fight, & those within the gates bethought them help came at a
slower gait than they could desire. Scarce was Harald come to the gates
ere was slain his banner-bearer; then said he: 'Halldor, do thou take up
the banner!' Halldor picked up the banner-staff, but he spoke unwisely:
'Who will bear thy banner for thee when thou followest it so
faint-heartedly as thou hast done now this while past?' These were words
more of anger than of truth, for Harald stood the stoutest among men.
Then hied they them into the gate, and great were the strokes given; but
the outcome thereof was such wise that the victory was to Harald and he
stormed the gates. Sore smote was Halldor, a deep wound gat he in the
countenance, and to him was it a blemish all the days of his life.Sec.


|| The fourth town whereunto Harald was come together with his host was
the stoutest of all those whereof we have yet told. So strong was it
that they wist there was no hope that it could be taken by assault, and
thereon beset they the town even by getting a ring around it so that no
victuals could be taken therein.

Now it chanced when Harald had been before it a while, fell he sick and
betook himself to his bed; & he caused his tent be placed away from
other tents so that he might have the ease that he should not hear the
noise and disquiet of the host. Backwards & forwards to him oft fared
his men, craving his counsel, and this was noted of the townsfolk who
argued rightly that something had befallen the Vaerings, and thereon set
they spies to discover what it might be. When the spies were come back
even into the town brought they intelligence that the chief of the
Vaerings lay sick, & for that cause had they not advanced on the town.
As time waxed big grew the strength of Harald small, and his men became
sorrowful and were heavy of heart.

Now of all this had the townsfolk full knowledge.

To such a pass came it that the sickness pressed Harald hard and his
death was told throughout the whole host. Then went the Vaerings to
speak with the townsmen, telling them of the death of their chief,
& praying the priests to grant him a tomb in the town.

Now when the townsfolk heard these tidings many were there, rulers of
monasteries or of other big churches in the town, who wished much, each
one of them, to have the body for his church, for well wotted each that
it would bring them great offerings; so the whole multitude of the
priests clad themselves in their vestments and walked forth out of the
town in procession well favoured and solemn, bearing shrines and holy
relics.

But made the Vaerings also a mighty funeral train; covered with a costly
pall was the coffin borne aloft, and above this again were held many
banners, & after the coffin in this wise had been borne in through the
town-gates was it set down right athwart them in front of the opening
thereof. Then did the Vaerings blow a war-blast from all their trumpets,
& drew their swords, and the whole host of the Vaerings rushed out of
their tents fully armed, and ran towards the town shouting and crying.
The monks & other priests who had been walking in this funeral train
vying with one another to be the foremost to go out and receive the
offering, now vied twofold as speedily to be the farthest off, for the
Vaerings slew every one who was nearest to them be he clerk or layman.
After this fashion did they go about the whole of the town, putting the
men to the sword and pillaging the churches, whence snatched they
exceeding great wealth.


|| Many summers fared Harald in warfare after this fashion alike in
Serkland and Sikiley.

Thereafter led he his host back to Miklagard, and abode there a short
space ere set he again forth on a journey to Jorsalaheim (Palestine).Sec.
There he left behind him all the gold he had gotten as payment from the
Greek King, & the same did all the Vaerings who went on the journey with
him.

It is told that altogether Harald fought eighteen battles on these
journeys. Thus saith Thiodolf:

  'All men know that Harald
  Eighteen battles grim hath fought,
  Oft hath the peace of the chieftain been broken;
  The gray eagle's sharp claws
  In blood didst thou dye, King,
  Ever was the wolf filled ere thou fared'st homeward.'


|| Harald with his men had now betaken themselves to Jorsalaland
(Palestine) and thence to Jorsalaborg (Jerusalem), and whithersoever he
went in Jorsalaland were all the towns and castles surrendered unto him;
thus saith Stuf, who had himself heard the King recount these things:

  'The blade-bold smiting warrior
  To subjection brought Jerusalem.
  The smiling land was captive to him and the Greeks,
  And by their might, unburned withal,
  Came the country under the warrior's dictate.'


|| Here it is recounted that this land came unburned and unscathed into
Harald's power. Thereafter fared he to the Jordan and bathed himself
therein, as is the way with other pilgrims. On the Sepulchre of the
Lord, the Holy Cross, and other holy relics in Jorsalaland bestowed
Harald great benefactions. Then did he make safe all the road to the
Jordan, slaying robbers and other disturbers of the peace. Thus saith
Stuf:

  'By counsel and wrathful words the King of the Agdir folk
  Withstood on the banks of the Jordan the treason of men,
  But for true trespass had folk to pay dearly;
  Ill from the Prince suffered they.
  (In Christ's eternal house).'


|| After these things fared he back to Miklagard.


|| Now when Harald was returned to Miklagard from Jorsalaland was he
minded to go to the north, even unto his own heritage; for it had come
to his ears that the son of his brother, to wit, Magnus Olafson, was now
King of Norway and of Denmark, and therefor gave he warning to quit his
service with the King of Greece; but when Queen Zoe came to hear thereof
waxed she very wrath & made dire complaint against Harald, averring that
he had gone dishonestly to work with the wealth of the Greek King which
had been taken in warfare what time Harald had been chief of the host.
Now there was a damsel both young and fair, whose name was Maria, and
she was the daughter of the brother to Queen Zoe.[Sec.] Afore had Harald
sought the hand of this maid in marriage, and by the Queen had his suit
been refused. It has been told here in the north by Vaerings, who were
then serving in Miklagard, that among those who should wot well of the
affair was it averred that Queen Zoe desired to have Harald for her own
husband, & therein lay the cause of all that which befell when Harald
desired to leave Miklagard, though mayhap otherwise was given out before
all folk. At that time was Constantine Monomachus King of the Greeks,
and together with Queen Zoe ruled he the kingdom. Wherefore was it on
these counts that the King of the Greeks caused Harald to be seized and
cast into prison.


|| But as Harald was drawing nigh unto the prison there appeared unto him
the holy King Olaf and bade him be of good cheer for that he would come
to his aid; & there in the street was afterwards builded a chapel, and
was it consecrated to King Olaf, & that chapel has stood there unto this
very day.Sec. Now after such fashion was the prison builded that it had a
high tower, & this was open at the top. Into the prison thereof was
Harald thrown, and together with him were Halldor and Ulf. The night
thereafter came a wealthy woman to the uppermost part of the prison,
whither she had ascended by means of ladders, and with her were two
serving-men and to either let they down a rope by which they drew the
prisoners up. This woman had one time been healed by the holy King Olaf,
and now had he appeared to her and laid upon her the injunction that she
should release his brother from out of prison.Thereon hied Harald him to
the Vaerings who with one accord rose to their feet when they beheld
him, and acclaimed him welcome.

Thereafter fell the whole of the host to arms and betook themselves to
the place where the King was sleeping, and taking him captive thrust
they out both his eyes. Thus saith Thorarin Skeggison in his lay:

  'The bold prince gold obtained,
  But the throned King of Greece gat blindness,
  And thereafter went with scars most grievous.'

Thus likewise saith Thiodolf the Skald:

  'The waster of wolves' sorrow
  Let the eyes twain of the throned King be put out;
  The prince of the Agdir folk on the Eastern King
  Laid a grisly mark whereby was he horribly blinded.'

In the twain of these lays concerning Harald, & also in many other
songs, recorded is it how that he himself put out the eyes of the Greek
King; but in lieu of thus singing, had they known it to be truer, full
well might they have named a duke or count or some other nobleman. But
Harald himself and the other men that were with him themselves boasted
of this deed.Sec.


|| That same night went Harald and his men to the chamber wherein Maria
lay sleeping, & by force bare her away. Then betaking themselves to
where their galleys rode took they twain of them and anon rowed into
Siavidarsund,Sec. but when they were come thither found they that the iron
chain was stretched right athwart the inlet, and so Harald commanded his
men to fall to their oars on both the galleys, & those who were not
rowing were all to run aft, and each one to have in his hand his own
baggage-bag.

In this fashion they ran the galleys on to the chain, and as soon as
they were fast and the speed was stayed commanded he all his men to run
forward. Then that galley whereon was Harald plunged forward, and after
it had swayed on the chain slid from off it; but the other brake as it
rode the chain, and many were drowned, albeit some were taken up out of
the water. After this fashion did Harald escape from Miklagard, & thence
fared he forth into the Black Sea. But ere he sailed from land he set
the maid ashore, & gave her trusty followers to take her back to
Miklagard; and he bade her ask her kinswoman Zoe how much power she had
over him, or if her power had been able to hinder him from getting the
maiden. Thereafter sailed Harald northward to EllipaltaSec. and thence
fared all over the East-realm.Sec. On this journey made Harald certain
merry verses which together number sixteen, & all have the same refrain:
this is one of them:

  'Past Sicily, far out, forged the ship;
  Proudly she strode and ably 'neath our feet
  Never before had Norseman come so far amain,
  Yet saith the Maid of the gold-rings in Garda that she scorns me.'


|| By this, allusion made he to Ellisif, the daughter of King Jarizleif
of Holmgard.


|| When Harald was come to Holmgard did King Jarizleif receive him with
exceeding great kindness, and there abode he the winter through; at that
time, moreover, took he into his own keeping all the gold and various
other precious goods which he had sent thither out of Miklagard. So much
wealth was indeed collected together, that no one there in the north had
seen so great an amount before in the ownership of one man. On three
occasions[Sec.] the while he was in Miklagard had Harald ta'en his share in
the spoiling of palaces, for it was a law that every time a Greek King
died the Vaerings should have palace-spoil; at that hour might they go
through all the palaces of the King, wherein his hoards of wealth were
garnered, and take at will as much as ever they could lay hands on.


|| That winter gave King Jarizleif to Harald his daughter in wedlock, her
name was Elizabeth but Norwegians called her Ellisif. To this Stuf the
Blind is witness in the following:

  'The alliance that he wished
  Gat the prince of the Agdirs;
  Gold amain won the friend of the men,
  And to boot the King's daughter.'


|| So it came to pass that ere long there arose some discord betwixt
Magnus and Harald, and then were many men so evil-minded that they
wrought bad blood betwixt the Kings.


|| Now after the departure of Harald in the manner aforesaid, Svein
Ulfson went on sleeping. Later made he close inquiry anent the journey
of Harald; and when he came to know that Harald and Magnus had entered
into covenant, and had now an host one with the other, steered he a
course eastward alongside the coast of Skani and abode there with his
host, until it came to his ears in wintertime that Magnus and Harald had
fared northward even to Norway with their hosts. Thereupon shaped Svein
a course southward (west) to Denmark, and that winter took he possession
by force of all the dues of the King.


|| So soon as the spring was come King Magnus and King Harald called out
a muster from all Norway.

Now it befell once upon a time that both the Kings were lying in the
self-same haven, and the day thereafter Harald being the first to be
ready sailed forthwith, and in the evening hove he to in the haven
wherein he and Magnus had covenanted to lie that night; and brought he
his ship into the King's berth, and hoisted his tilts.

King Magnus, he that had later in the day sailed forth, found also that
haven, but when he was come perceived he that the men of Harald had by
then gotten their tilts up; & saw he furthermore that Harald was lying
in the berth of the King and that there was he minded to lie. Even so
soon as his men had struck sail said King Magnus unto them: 'Now shall
my men take their places by the bulwarks and fall to their oars, and the
others shall undo their weapons and arm themselves, and if Harald and
his men gainsay us and will not make way, then will we fight them.' When
King Harald saw that King Magnus was minded to give battle spake he to
his men and said: 'Cut the hawsers and let us put off; wroth is now
kinsman Magnus.' So said so done; and the ships of Harald were hove out
of berth, and King Magnus put his ships into their place.

When this had been accomplished went King Harald with sundry of his men
up on to the ship of King Magnus, & the King greeted him well and bade
him welcome. Then said King Harald: 'I thought that we were come among
friends; but just now I misdoubted that thou wouldst let this be the
case; but true it is that children are petulent & I will not account it
otherwise than that this was a childish deed.' Then said King Magnus:
'It was a kin-deed, not a child's-deed; I can in good sooth remember
what I gave and what I refused, but an it were allowed that this little
matter were now done in our despite another would soon arise. In all
things will we keep the covenant that we made, but thou on thy part must
fulfil that which was agreed upon.' Then said King Harald: 'There is
also an old custom which hath it that the wisest giveth way,' &
therewith went he back even to his own ship. In such like dealings
betwixt the Kings was it difficult to hold the balance; the men to King
Magnus swore even that he was in the right, but those who were dullards
deemed that Harald had been slighted.

The men that were of King Harald's following said it were well and right
that Magnus should have the berth had the two Kings come thither at the
same time, but that King Harald could not be called upon to leave the
berth wherein he were lying afore; and they declared that Harald had
acted well and wisely, but those who wished to make the worst of things
said that King Magnus desired to break the covenant, and that he had
done King Harald wrong and injustice.

Soon unwise men were talking so much about quarrels of this kind that
discord arose between the Kings, and many things befell which the Kings
took each after his own fashion albeit thereof is but little set down in
writing.


|| So King Magnus & King Harald brought their fleet down to Denmark, and
when Svein heard thereof fled he away to Skani. The two Kings abode long
in Denmark that summer, and brought the land into subjection; the autumn
to them was in Jutland. There one night, when King Magnus lay abed,
dreamt he that he himself stood there where his father King Olaf the
Saint abode, & thought he that his father spake with him: 'Which wilt
thou choose, my son, to fare with me, or become of all kings the
mightiest & live long, but to commit sin so great that thou wilt
scarcely or never be able to atone for it?' And he bethought that he
answered, 'I desire that thou choosest for me.'

Then the King seemed to answer: 'Thou shalt fare even with me.' King
Magnus told his men of this dream. A little while later fell he ill of a
sickness, and lay at a place called Sudatorp,Sec. and when he was nigh unto
death sent he his brotherSec. Thorir to Svein Ulfson bidding the latter
afford Thorir what help he might need, and with this message King Magnus
also made it known that when his days should be ended it was his wish to
have Svein to have dominion over the realm of Denmark, saying that it
was meet that Harald should rule over Norway and Svein over Denmark.
Thereafter died King Magnus the Good, & all folk mourned his death. Thus
saith Od Kikina-Skald:

  'Full many a tear did men shed
  When the mild King was borne to the grave.
  Heavy the burden for those that he had benefited with gold,
  Sore were the hearts of the house carles,
  Their tears held they not back,
  And oft-times in sorrow now are his people down-cast.'


|| When he heard these tidings summoned King Harald his host to a Thing,
and opened unto them a scheme whereof the purport was to fare forth to
the Vebiorg Thing, and cause himself there to be acclaimed King of
Denmark.

Thence would he conquer his country, for he accounted Denmark his own
heritage in succession to his kinsman Magnus in like manner as with the
kingdom of Norway.

And for this purpose bade he his men give him their assistance, for
then, said he, the Norwegians would be masters of the Danes for all
time. Then up and spake Einar Thamberskelfir, and said, rather was it
his duty to convey his foster-son King Magnus to the grave and to the
latter's father King Olaf, than to fight in a foreign land, or to covet
ye might and dominion of another King; therefore concluded he his
speaking by saying that better he deemed it to follow King Magnus dead
than any other king living. Afterwards caused he the corpse to be ta'en
and laid out in solemn state so that all might see it arrayed on board
the King's own ship. Thereafter all the men of Throndhjem and the
Norwegians made them ready to return home with the body of King Magnus &
the war-host was disbanded. Then did King Harald perceive that by so
much was it his wisest policy to fare back even unto Norway and first of
all things to make that country his own, and thereafter wax in power. So
Harald hied him thither with the whole of his host thus unto Norway, and
even so soon as he was come thither held he a Thing of the men of the
land, and caused himself to be acknowledged King over the whole country;
he fared right from the east, from Vik, and was acclaimed King by every
folkland in Norway.


|| Einar Thamberskelfir journeyed to Norway with the corpse of King
Magnus; with him fared all the host of the Throndhjem folk; & they took
the body to Nidaros where it was buried in the chapel of Saint Clement
wherein was then the shrine of the sainted King Olaf.

King Magnus had been of middle height, with a countenance ruddy and
frank, fair-haired was he, and eloquent; quick to think, strong to
decide, bounteous to give; withal a mighty man of war and very valiant
to boot; of all Kings was he the most beloved, & praised was he alike by
friend and foe.


|| That autumn also was Svein Ulfson in Skani & was minded to fare
eastward to the realm of Sweden; moreover thought he that he would lay
down the title of King which he had taken to himself in Denmark.
Peradventure as he was mounting his horse rode certain men up to him &
told unto him the tidings that King Magnus was dead, and how that all
the host of Norway had quitted clean from Denmark.

To this made Svein hasty answer & said: 'I call God to witness that
never hereafter will I flee the realm of Denmark even so long as I
live.' Therewithal mounted he his horse & rode southwards in Skani, & to
him were forthwith many folk gathered. That winter conquered he the
whole of Denmark, & all the Danes took him for their King. Thorir, the
brother of King Magnus, came to Svein with the message of King Magnus,
as has been afore writ, & Svein received Thorir with good countenance;
tarried he long with Svein and it was well with him.


|| After the death of King Magnus Olafson, had King Harald Sigurdson
possession of the whole realm of Norway.

And when he had ruled over Norway for one winter, & the spring was again
incomen mustered he men from out of all the land, one half of the
general host in men & ships, & thence sailed south to Jutland where he
harried & burned even very widely; that same summer hove he to in
Godnarfjord. At that time made King Harald this verse:

  'While the linen-white woman
  Her song chants to her goodman,
  The anchor of the oaken ship
  We drop in Godnarfjord.'

Then spake he to Thiodolf, and bade him add thereunto; and he sang:

  'Next summer (foretell I)
  The anchor more southward
  Shall hold the ship with its fluke;
  Deeper shall we cast it.'

And Bolverk in his lay mentions that Harald fared to Denmark the summer
following on King Magnus's death:

  'From that fair land the year thereafter
  A muster called'st thou out;
  When thou ploughed'st the seas
  With sea-steeds full splendid.
  On darksome billow lay
  The dragons precious, and uneasy
  The host thereof saw off land
      laden were the war-ships of the Danes.'


|| It was at that time that they burned the homestead of Thorkel Geyser.
He was a great chief, natheless were his daughters led bounden to the
ships: the winter before had they shown themselves very scornful of
Harald & had made mock of his war cruise to Denmark, & from cheese had
they cut out anchors and said that most like these would well suffice to
hold the ships of the King of Norway. Then was this chanted:

  'Now from their whey cheeses cut
  The maids of Denmark rings for anchors,
  And this gibe annoyance gave the King.
  Now see I maidens many in the morn
  Reach the King's ships in fetters heavy:
  Fewer laugh now.'


|| It is related that the look-out man who had observed the fleet of King
Harald's cried out to the daughters of Thorkel Geyser, 'Ye Geyser
daughters said that Harald would never come to Denmark.' Quoth one of
them, 'That was yesterday.'


|| At a very high price did Thorkel ransom his daughters. Thus saith
Grani:

  'Of tears her eyes
  Were never dry;
  This wrong-headed woman
  In the thick Horn-woods.
  The lord of Norway the fleeing
  Foe to the shore drave;
  For his daughters wealth amain
  Had to pay their father.'


|| The whole of the summer did King Harald harry in the realm of the
Danes & gat to himself much plunder, natheless did he not there abide
but fared he back to Norway in the autumn, and there tarried the winter
through.


|| That same winter, which was even that one after the death of King
Magnus, did King Harald take to wife Thora, the daughter of Thorberg
Arnason. To them were born two sons, the elder of whom was Magnus, the
younger Olaf.

King Harald and Queen Ellisif had two daughters; one of these was named
Maria, and the other Ingigerd. When that following spring was come, and
of that spring have we writ afore, did King Harald muster his host and
again fared forth to Denmark in the summer & harried there, & the same
did he now one summer after the other. Thus saith Stuf the Skald:

  'Falster was wasted, and to its folk
  Mischance befell (so I heard).
  The raven his fill ate,
  But rapine feared the Danes each year.'


|| Ever since the death of King Magnus had King Svein ruled the whole of
the Danish realm; remained he at peace during the winters, but by summer
went he out with his host & did threaten to journey north with the
Danish host, and there do no less harm than Harald had done in Denmark.
In the winter King Svein offered to meet King Harald in the River, and
there fight together to the last, or else come to agreement; and
thereafter, during that winter, were both one and other of them busied
arming their ships, so that in the summer to come might one half of the
general host be abroad.

It was in that summer that there came from Iceland Thorleik Svein
Ulfson; he had heard to wit, when he was north in Norway, that King
Harald had fared south to the River against King Svein. Then did
Thorleik chant this:

  ''Tis awaited that in spear-storm
  On the sea-king's path
  The doughty men of inner Throndhjem
  Will meet the hardy King.
  God only can bring it to pass
  That one of them there taketh
  Life or land of the other;
  Little wots Svein of concord.'

And furthermore he chanted this:

  'Harald the harsh who beareth
  Oft a red shield off the land,
  Is guiding on Budli's waysSec.
  The broad long-ships from the north.
  But southward o'er the seas,
  Doth come the warlike Svein
  In animals gold-mouthed, masted,
  And painted in colours fair.'


|| To the appointed trysting-place came King Harald with his host, and
there heard that King Svein was to the south and lying off Zealand with
his fleet. Then did King Harald part his host, sending the greater
number of the peasant-host back, but retaining to himself his body-guard
& friends and feudatories, also that part of the peasant-host which had
been mustered nighest to the Danes.

They fared south (west) to Jutland, southward of Vendilskagi,
& thereafter still south past Thioda, & went everywhere with the
war-shield aloft. Thus saith Stuf the Skald:

  'Fled Thioda folk from meeting with the King,
  Bold was he the stately dealer of blows.
  Harald's soul in Heaven.'Sec.


|| They fared southward all the way to Heidaby, and when they were come
thither seized they that town and burned it. Then a man that was thrall
to King Harald wrought this:

  'Burnt from one end to another
  Was the whole of Heidaby;
  Ruthless treatment this, methinks;
  Our work, I trow, arouses grief in Svein.
  In the town spent I last night:
  Ere the eighth hour the flames shot up from the houses.'


|| Likewise Thorleik telleth in his poem that he heard that no battle
befell at the River:

  'Among the King's followers
  Each asks who doth not wot it
  How 'twas that the prince avenger
  To Heidaby did hie him,
  When Harald from the east with ships
  Sped early, without reason,
  To the royal town. In sooth
  Destruction ne'er should have been done.'


|| After this fared Harald northward and with him had he sixty ships, the
greater number were large & well laden with what plunder had been taken
in the summer. But as they were faring northward and past Thioda came
down King Svein from the land with a large host; & he proffered King
Harald to come ashore & do battle. Now King Harald had less than half as
many men as Svein and so he bade Svein fight with him at sea. Thus saith
Thorleik the Fair:

  'Svein, even he who was born to success in Midgard,
  Called on the mighty King in fight on land to meet him;
  But Harald shy of failing would liefer fight, quoth he,
  Aboardship, since the bold King held the land.'


|| Thereafter sailed Harald northward past Vendilskagi; but the wind was
against them & they brought-to under Lesey where they remained the
night. Then were the ships encompassed with a thick sea-fog, but when it
was morning, & the sun rose, beheld they on the other side of the sea
what seemed to them like burning fires. And King Harald being informed
thereof gazed thereat, & said straightway: 'Strike the ships' tilts, and
let the men fall to their oars. The Danish host hath come after us. The
darkness hath lifted, I ween, there where they are, and the sun is
shining on their dragon-heads the which are overlaid with gold.' And it
was even as Harald said for behold there was come Svein, the Danish
King, with a mighty host.

Both the fleets now rowed with all speed, but the Danish ships were
lighter under oars, the Norwegian ships being both water-logged and
heavy laden. So the Danes drew on apace.

Then did Harald perceive that this would never serve his purpose. Now
his dragon was faring astern of all his other ships, and he commanded
that some timber should be thrown overboard and apparel with other wares
be placed thereon, and as the water was calm these things drifted with
the current.

When the Danes saw these goods drifting along on the sea those who were
rowing ahead swerved aside after them, for they deemed it easier to take
the goods as they were floating loose on the water than to seek them on
board the Norwegian ships, and in this manner did their ships linger.
When King Svein overtook them in his ship bade he them proceed, and said
shame was it that with an host as large as his they could not take the
Norwegians, to whom was but few men, and get the fellows into their
power.

Then began the Danes to row the harder again, and when King Harald saw
that they were making way bade he his men lighten their ships by
throwing overboard malt and wheat and swine-flesh, even to chopping open
their kegs of drink, and for a while these aids availed them well. Then
did King Harald command that the war-hurdles should be taken, also
casks, and empty barrels, and be cast overboard and on them and in them
were placed prisoners of war.

Now when King Svein saw all of these floating together on the sea he
ordered that the men should be rescued, and accordingly was this done.
While his men were occupied in this their task, grew greater the
distance between the fleets, and when the Danes were again about the
chase had the Norwegians already made good their escape. Thus saith
Thorleik the Fair:

  'I heard tell in what manner Svein
  The eastmen put to flight at sea,
  How the other King quick-minded gat him gone;
  All the plunder of the Thrond-folk's King
  On the Jutland sea was floating;
  And sundry ships lost he withal.'


|| Under Lesey, did King Svein withdraw his fleet, and there found he
seven Norwegian ships, but aboard them were only peasants and men who
had been mustered for war.

When King Svein took them begged they for quarter and offered money in
ransom. Thus saith Thorleik the Fair:

  'For grace did Harald's friends stout-hearted
  Pray the King, and they few laid down their arms;
  The peasants ready-witted refused to fight thereafter,
  Speaking because their lives out they wished to live.'


|| Anent King Harald be it said that he was masterful and a strong ruler
in his own land, a very sage man withal, & it be common talk that there
was never a chief in the Northlands so wise or ready in resource as he.

A great warrior also, and very valiant, stronger, & defter with weapons
than any other man; but all this have we recorded before.

Nevertheless the greater number of his doughty deeds go unrecorded, and
this in part by reason of our lack of knowledge thereof, & in part by
reason that we will not put in books tales for which there is no
witness, even though in our hearing have such things been told. It
beseemeth us better that something may be added hereafter than that much
should need to be taken herefrom. About King Harald are many tales set
forth in lays which the Icelandic men made to him or to his sons, & for
this reason was he a firm friend to them. A firm friend also was he to
all our countrymen, and once when there was a great famine in Iceland
permitted King Harald four of his ships to carry meal to that island,
and decreed that six bushels thereof should not cost more than a hundred
ells of homespun; furthermore allowed he those that were stricken by
poverty to leave if so be that they could find themselves in victuals
the voyage thro' over to the main, and by these means was the land saved
and the harvest thereof bettered.

King Harald set up a bell for the church which was builded with timber
sent hither by the sainted King Olaf, and raised on a site nigh by where
the Althing takes place. Such memories have we here of King Harald & of
many other great gifts which he granted to men that sought them.

Halldor Snorrason and Ulf Uspakson, whereof we have afore wrote, hied
them to Norway even into the service of King Harald.

In manifold parts were they opposite one from the other. Halldor was
very big & strong and handsome, and King Harald bore witness regarding
him that he was among those of his men who altered least in unawaited
circumstances: whether such might be peril or tidings of joy, or through
things that might occur when danger was toward; never was he more
pleased nor less pleased, never did he sleep more nor less; nor took
meat & drink otherwise than as was his wont. Halldor was a silent man &
harsh, speaking bluntly, also was he stubborn and unmeek; and this was
not to the liking of the King since he had many other bold and willing
men.

Halldor abode with the King but a short time and then fared back to
Iceland, and made to himself a home at Hiardarholt, abiding there till
he was aged and become an old man.


|| In great love dwelt Ulf Uspakson with King Harald; a very wise man was
he, eloquent, strong, large-hearted, & resourceful. King Harald created
him his marshal and gave him in wedlock Jorun the daughter of Thorberg
whose daughter, to wit Thora, was wife to King Harald. The children of
Ulf and Jorun were Joan the Strong of Rasvold, & Brigida, the mother of
Sheep-Wolf, who was the father of Peter Burden-SwainSec. who again was the
father of Ulf Fly and of the other brothers and sisters of this latter.
The son of Joan the Strong was Erling, he that was the father of
Archbishop Eystein and his brothers.

King Harald gave Ulf the Marshal the rights of a feudatory and a grant
of twelve marks with more than half a folkland in Throndhjem; this
according to Stein Herdison in the lay of Ulf.


|| Now it came to pass that King Magnus Olafson had caused the church of
Saint OlafSec. to be builded in Nidaros on the self-same spot whereon his
father's body had rested for a night, and this spot was then above the
town; there too builded he the King's-House.

The church was not finished when the King died. Harald completed that
which was lacking to the church, and in the yard thereof laid he the
foundation of a stone hall, but this was not ready before he set to work
to build the church of Saint Mary up on the sand-bank, nigh the spot
where the holy body of the King lay buried that first winter after his
death.

It was a great minster and so firmly was it builded with lime that it
scarce could be broken when Archbishop Eystein had it pulled down.

In the church of Saint Olaf were preserved ye relics of King OlafSec.
whiles the church of St. Mary was abuilding.

King Harald builded a King's-House below the church of Mary, by the
river, where it now stands; & the hall which he had builded before,
dedicated he to the church of Saint Gregory.Sec.


|| A certain man there was named Ivar the White, who was a bold
feudatory; his seat lay in the Uplands, and himself was a grandson of
Earl Hakon the Great. In appearance was Ivar exceeding comely. The son
of Ivar was named Hakon, and it hath been said of him that he surpassed
all the men in Norway at that time for strength and courage & ability;
he was much in warfare in his youth & made great advancement for
himself, and later was he a very famous man.


|| Einar Thamberskelfir was the most powerful of the feudatories in
Throndhjem; little friendship throve there betwixt himself & Harald,
natheless retained he the land-dues which had pertained to him during
the lifetime of Magnus.

Einar was an exceedingly wealthy man; he was wedded to Bergliot daughter
of Earl Hakon, as hath been writ before. Eindrid, their son, was now
full-grown, and had to wife Sigrid the daughter of Ketil Calf and of
Gunhild, the niece of King Harald through her mother.

Eindrid inherited fairness and beauty from the kindred of his mother, to
wit, Earl Hakon and his sons; and from his father, Einar, gat he height
and strength and the craft which Einar had above all other men; a very
hearty man was Eindrid withal.


|| Orm was the name of a certain Earl in the Uplands, and his mother was
Ragnhild the daughter of Earl Hakon the Great. This Orm was a very
excellent man.

In those days Aslak Erlingson lived eastward at Soli in Jadar; he had to
wife Sigrid the daughter of Earl Svein Hakonson.

Gunhild, another daughter to Earl Svein, was wedded to the Danish King
Svein Ulfson. This anent the offspring in Norway of Earl Hakon at that
time, and moreover anent many other bold men; all of the line of Earl
Hakon were more comely than other folk and the most of them were very
able men, but all were brave.


|| King Harald loved power, & this grew according as he took root in the
land; to so great an extent did it wax that in the case of most men it
bootless was to speak against him, or to bring forward other matters
than those which were to his mind. Thus saith Thiodolf the Skald:

  'The men of the war-wont chieftain
  All humble have to sit or stand
  There in such place as the stern king desireth;
  Before the filler of ravens bend many men,
  And few there are indeed who will not do in all things
  Whate'er the King may bid.'


|| Ever was Einar Thamberskelfir the chief leader of the Throndhjem
peasantry, and their spokesman at the Thing when the King proceeded
against them. Well acquainted was he with the laws; nor, with all the
peasantry at his back, was he lacking in boldness to carry through his
cause at the Things, even though the King himself might be present.

Now this made the King exceeding wroth, and at last were matters at such
a pass that they disputed together with contentious words, Einar
swearing that the peasants would not brook the lawlessness of the King
if he should break the common law of the land. After this fashion did
they fall out on sundry occasions. Then Einar started to have many men
round him when he was at home, and many more when he came to town and
the King was present. On one occasion when he fared in to town had he
with him many folk, eight or nine long-ships, and nigh upon five hundred
men;Sec. and coming to town he went ashore with this fellowship, and King
Harald who by hap was in the outer gallery of his house, stood and
looked on as the men to Einar flocked up from their ships, and it is
said that Harald thereupon chanted this:

  'Here see I speeding up
  With his great following
  Einar Thamberskelfir;
  Yea, he who cleaveth the waves.
  That lord full strong is minded
  A princely throne to fill;
  At the heels of an earl
  House-carles but few will follow.
  He who the sword makes red
  Will beguile us of our land
  If Einar kisseth not
  The thin mouth of the axe.'


|| Some days that while tarried Einar in the town.

Now it came to pass that one day a folk-mote was held, for it had
befallen that a thief had been taken in the town, and it was at this
mote that he was to be brought to trial, & the King himself was present.

Aforetime had the man been in the service of Einar who had favoured him
more than a little. Now of this matter was Einar told, and deemed he
that the King would not be the more prone to liberate the man because
he, Einar, set store by him, so accordingly bade he his men arm
themselves and in force to proceed to the mote, and then took Einar the
man away by dint of sheer strength.

Thereafter mediated the friends of either in the matter, & the end
thereof came that it was agreed that a tryst should be appointed and
that the King & Einar should meet one another. There was a
council-chamber in the King's-House down by the river,Sec. and into this
chamber entered the King and with him therein were but few men; the
others left he standing without in the courtyard. Now the King had had a
shutter placed over the smoke-hole, & there was but a little opening.
Then did Einar come into the courtyard with his men, and said he to his
son Eindrid: 'Remain thou out here with the men, and then will there be
no danger for me.'

Wherefore did Eindrid take up his station without the door of the
council-chamber.

Now when Einar was entered into this room said he: 'Dark is it in the
King's council-chamber,' and even at that moment fell men upon him and
some stabbed him & some hewed at him, and when Eindrid heard the tumult
drew he his sword and rushed into the chamber whereon forthwith was he
felled beside his father.

Then did the King's men run towards the chamber and before the door
thereof, but the peasants were all at a loss because now to them
pertained no leader; yet did they urge one another on saying that it
were shame not to avenge their chief, but for all that did they naught,
& made no essay to fight. Then went the King out to his men, set them in
array, & caused his banner to be unfurled, but made he no onset &
thereafter bade he all his men go out to his ship, then rowed they down
the river and so out on the fjord.

Now apace was brought the intelligence of the death of Eindrid to
Bergliot his wife for she was in the lodging that she and Einar
inhabited in the town. Thence went she up unto the King's-House where
was gathered the peasant host and them incited she to fight inasmuch as
in her lay, but at that same moment rowed the King down the river, then
quoth Bergliot: 'Now lack we my kinsman Hakon Ivarson; ne'er would the
murderers of Eindrid be rowing there adown the river were Hakon on its
banks.'

Thereafter caused Bergliot the bodies of Einar & Eindrid be laid out,
and they were buried in the church of Saint Olaf hard by the tomb of
King Magnus Olafson.

After the fall of Einar became King Harald so greatly hated for his
share in that foul deed, that the feudatories and peasants only held
back from fighting with him because to them pertained no leader to raise
the banner for them.


  [Illustration]

|| Now dwelling at Austrat in Iriar was Fin Arnison, feudatory of King
Harald.

Fin was married with Bergliot, the daughter of Halfdan the son of Sigurd
Sow, & Halfdan was the brother of King Olaf and King Harald.

Thora, wife to King Harald, was the daughter of the brother of Fin
Arnison; sworn friends to the King were Fin and his brethren. Certain
summers had Fin been in viking warfare westward and on those quests he &
Guthorm GunhildsonSec. & Hakon Ivarson had sailed in company. So fared King
Harald down the Throndhjem fjord and out to Austrat, where he was well
received, and thereafter communed they together, Fin and he, & took
counsel one with the other as to the outcome concerning what had but
then befallen, to wit the slaying of Einar and his son, and then of that
murmuring and turmoil the which the Throndhjem folk were raising over
against the King.

Fin answered hastily: 'Wrong art thou on every count; whatsoever thou
doest thou doest ill & thereafter art thou so afeared that thou knowest
no whither to turn.'

The King rejoined laughing: 'Kinsman-in-law, I will send thee in to town
& thou shalt make it up betwixt the peasants and me; & if that business
cometh to naught then shalt thou fare to the Uplands, & good feeling
again cause with Ivar Hakonson & so bring it about that he goeth not to
war against me.' Fin answered: 'What will be my reward an I go on this
fool's errand, for alike Throndhjem folk and Upland folk are so hostile
to thee that no messenger of thine could fare to them save at his own
risk.'

The King answered: 'Go thou on this errand, kinsman-in-law, for well wot
I an any man could bring us to a reconciliation it would be thee, & ask
thyself of us what boon thou wilt have therefor.'

'Keep thou thy word, and I will choose the boon; I choose peace for my
brother Calf and removal of his outlawry, and the restoring unto him of
all his possessions; and furthermore I ask that he shall have all his
appointments and all the power that he had or ever he left the land.'

And the King said yea to all whatever Fin asked of him, & they twain
before witnesses took one another by the hand thereon. Thereafter said
Fin: 'But what am I to proffer Hakon so that he may promise thee peace,
for he it is who hath the upper hand of those kinsmen'? The King said:
'First shalt thou find out what Hakon is like to demand so that
reconciliation may be brought about, and thereafter must thou forward my
cause as best thou canst; but should the worst come to the worst, then
deny him nothing save & except the kingship itself.'


|| Then went King Harald southward to More where mustered he men, and a
great number was gathered unto him.


|| So Fin Arnison fared into the town & took with him his house-carles to
the number of some eighty men, and being come to the town held he a
Thing with the townsmen. Now Fin spoke long and wisely at this Thing,
bidding townsman and peasant take any other course rather than live in
hatred with his King or drive him away; & he reminded them how much ill
they had been brought to suffer when they had acted in this wise
aforetime, towards the sainted King Olaf.

He said, moreover, that the King would atone for these murders in such
manner as the best & wisest men might adjudge; and the outcome of the
speech of Fin was that the men gave their word to let the matter rest
until the return of the messengers despatched by Bergliot to Hakon
Ivarson in the Uplands. Thereafter fared Fin out to Orkadal with the men
who had accompanied him to town, and further up to the Dofrafjal and
eastward (south) across those mountains; and firstly went he to see his
kinsman-in-law Earl Orm (the Earl was wedded to Sigrid the daughter to
Fin) & to him disclosed his errand.


|| When this was done, appointed they a tryst with Hakon Ivarson, & when
they were met did Fin before Hakon lay his errand in accordance with the
behest of King Harald. But on the instant was it seen from the speech of
Hakon that he deemed himself bound to avenge the slaying of his kinsman
Eindrid; and said he, moreover, that he had received word from
Throndhjem that there would come to him forces sufficient for an
uprising against the King.


|| Then did Fin open unto Hakon what a difference would lie, and how much
the more to his own vantage, were he, in lieu of risking battle against
a King to whom he was already bounden by service, to accept from that
King honour as great as he himself might demand. Fin said that Hakon
might be unvictorious; 'and then wouldst thou have forfeited both wealth
and peace; and if thou wert victorious over the King then wouldst thou
be dubbed a traitor.'

The Earl also supported this speaking of Fin.

When Hakon had given the matter thought, made he known to them what was
in his mind, & said: 'I will accept reconciliation from King Harald if
he will give me in wedlock his kinswoman Ragnhild, the daughter of
Magnus Olafson, with such a dowry as is seemly for her, and as she
herself may desire.'

Then Fin answered that he would promise the fulfilment of this request
on behalf of King Harald, & therewith was the matter ratified between
them. Thereafter fared Fin back north to Throndhjem, and all the
disquiet and turmoil was set at rest; and so in the end kept the King
his kingdom in peace within the land, for now the whole of that league
came to naught which the kinsfolk of Eindrid had set against King
Harald.


  [Illustration]

|| Now when the time was come that Hakon was to demand the fulfilment of
the contract, fared he to see King Harald; and when they began talking
of the matter together, said the King to him that he on his side would
keep to everything that had been covenanted twixt Hakon and Fin: 'Thou
shalt speak with Ragnhild herself, Hakon,' said the King, 'and ask her
consent to this match, but I would not advise thee, or any other, to wed
Ragnhild save with her consent.'

Thereafter went Hakon unto Ragnhild and asked her hand, and she
answered: 'Indeed feel I that my father, King Hakon, is dead, since I am
to be given to a peasant, fine man though thou art and of mighty
prowess. Were King Magnus alive would he never yoke me with any mate
less than a king, nor can it be awaited now that I will wed a man
without princely rank.' Now after this went Hakon to King Harald &
opened unto him of the colour of the speech of Ragnhild, & withal to his
memory again commended the agreement betwixt himself and Fin; and Fin
was there present, & sundry others who could also bear witness to what
was pledged betwixt him and Fin. Then of them all demanded Hakon to bear
him out in regard to the agreement that the King should give Ragnhild
such dowry as was to her mind: 'Since she will not wed an unprincely man
then canst thou give me an earldom; lineage have I, and according to
what folk say certain other qualities therewith that may well give me
title to be an earl.' Then said the King: 'When King Olaf, my brother,
& King Magnus, his son, ruled the kingdom, one earl did they allow to be
in the country at a time; this likewise hath been my plan since I have
been King, & therefore will I not take away from Orm the dignity which I
have already given him.' Then saw Hakon that his cause had not been
forwarded and he liked it but ill, and Fin was likewise exceeding wrath
that the King had not kept his word, and thereafter they parted. Hakon
fared straightway from the country in a well-found long-ship, and
southward steered a course for Denmark where he betook him to his
kinsman-in-law, King Svein. The King received him with great pleasure &
gave him large grants in Denmark and made he Hakon also captain of his
coast defences, which were against vikings, who oft-times harried in the
Danish realm, and Wends, and Courlanders, and other folk coming from the
east. Therefore at sea, on his ships, dwelt Hakon in winter as well as
in summer.


|| Asmund was the name of a certain man who was said to be nephewSec. &
foster-son to King Svein, a very able man was he, and well-beloved by
the King.

But when Asmund grew to man's estate soon showed he himself of an unruly
complexion & a manslayer; and the King being ill-pleased thereat sent
him away, but gave him a company of men and a goodly feof whereof could
he full well find support.

Now no sooner had Asmund accepted the money of the King than gathered he
many men to him, and thereafter, since the money the King had granted
him sufficed in no sort for his charges, seized he many possessions of
the King.

For this ill conduct, when the King heard thereof, summoned he Asmund to
him, and when they met told him that obeyed would he be, that he must
enter his body-guard & no longer have his own company of men. When
Asmund had been a time with the King, became he ill-content, & one night
ran he away and rejoined his company, and thereafter wrought even more
evil than aforetime.

Then it befell once upon a time when the King was riding in his
dominions, that he came nigh unto the place where then abode Asmund and
he despatched men to take him by force, and that done the King had him
put in irons and kept him thus for a while to see if he would not grow
meeker. But when Asmund was let loose from his irons forthwith ran he
the more away, & raised men and war-ships, and fell to harrying both at
home and abroad, & much war-work did he, slaying many folk, and
pillaging far and wide. Those men that were the sufferers from his raids
went to the King and made plaint before him, and he rejoined: 'Why say
ye this to me, why do ye not fare to Hakon Ivarson? He is now the warden
of my coasts, and is put there to punish vikings and keep the peace for
ye peasants. It was told me that Hakon was a bold man and brave, but
methinks that now is he never to be found where he deemeth danger to be
toward.'

These words from the King, and many added to them, came to the ears of
Hakon, & thereon went Hakon & his men in search of Asmund, & they were
met on their ships, wherefore Hakon forthwith gave battle. A hard &
great struggle was it; Hakon boarded Asmund's ship and cleared it, and
at the last he and Asmund themselves dealt blows one at another with
their weapons & thus fell Asmund. Thereafter Hakon smote off his head,
& then betook him with all speed to King Svein whom he found sitting at
table.

Hakon advanced before the table and laid the head thereon, in front of
the King, and asked of him whether he recognized it.

Never a word did the King answer, but he was blood-red to behold.

Thereafter went Hakon away. A little later sent the King men to him, to
bid him leave his service, & he said: 'No hurt will I do him, but it is
not for us to be the keeper of all our kinsmen.'


|| Then when all these things were accomplished did Hakon quit Denmark &
thence fared forth to the north of Norway, to his demesne.

By that time was his kinsman, Earl Orm, dead.

The friends and kindred to Hakon were rejoiced over his coming, and many
a bold man set to work to make peace betwixt him & the King, & in the
end were they reconciled, to wit, both King Harald and Hakon; and Hakon
was given Ragnhild, the King's daughter, in marriage, & King Harald gave
him Orm's earldom and such rule as had been Orm's aforetime. Hakon swore
fealty to the King, and likewise to afford him such service as he was
bounden to give him.


|| Since he had fared from Norway had Calf Arnison been living after the
fashion of a viking westward, but the winters through oft-times abode he
in Orkneyja (the Orkneys) with his kinsman-in-law, Earl Thorfin. Fin
Arnison sent to his brother Calf to tell him concerning the covenant
which he and King Harald had encompassed, the purport whereof being ye
outlawry of Calf himself, to wit, that it should be once more lawful to
him to dwell in his own land, and possess his estates, and such land
dues as he had held aforetime from King Magnus. When Calf received this
message, forthwith made he him ready to quit, and sailed he east to
Norway, and firstly sought he his brother Fin.

Thereafter Fin craved a truce for Calf, and then were they confronted,
the King and Calf, & entered into a covenant like unto the agreement to
which the King & Fin had arrived on this matter. Thereon gave Calf his
hand, and bound himself on the same terms as he had bound himself to
King Magnus aforetime, that he would do all such works as King Harald
desired or deemed would be for the strengthening of his kingdom.

Then was Calf re-endowed with all his possessions, and the land-dues
which had been his in former days.


|| Next summer called out King Harald an host and fared to Denmark where
he harried during the summer.

But when he was come south to Fion (Funen) found he a large host
assembled against him, so bade the King his men leave their ships and
arm themselves in order to make a landing; and parted he his host and
gave to Calf Arnison command over one company thereof, and bade them go
the first ashore and told them where to take up their station; himself,
said he, would go up after them, and come to their assistance.

Calf and his men went ashore, and anon a band of men set upon them, and
Calf forthwith gave battle. Not long was the combat, for Calf was
overborne by odds and fled with his folk. The Danes pursued them,
slaying many of the Norwegians, and likewise Calf Arnison.

When King Harald with his company were come ashore soon found they the
slain, more especially the corse of Calf, and this was borne down to the
ships, but the King pursued his march inland where he harried and slew
many men. Thus saith Arnor:

  'The edge so sharp in Fion
  He reddened, and the fire
  Rushed o'er the dwelling;
  Fewer folk were there thereafter in Fion.'


|| After this conceived Fin Arnison enmity against Harald for the slaying
of his brother Calf, for said he that the King had purposely compassed
the death of Calf; and furthermore that it was befooling of him himself,
to wit, this luring of Calf west across the seas into the power of King
Harald, and into putting faith in him. When these words were spread
abroad spake many men their mind that Fin had been simple when he had
deemed that Calf could trust in the good faith of King Harald, for it
was known that the King bore malice for deeds of smaller consequence
than those Calf had committed against his person.

Now let the King every man talk on this matter as he listed: he made
neither confirmation nor yet contradiction of whatsoever they said, and
it was in his own words alone that men did discover satisfaction at what
had happened. King Harald chanted this song:

  'Now of men eleven and two have I the bane been,
  We incite to battle and full many a slaying I remember.
  That mind which is with treason fraught
  Seeks to tame men by falseness;
  Men say 'tis little that it takes such a balance to disturb.'


|| So much to heart did Fin Arnison take the death of his brother that he
quitted the land and came south to Denmark, and going unto King Svein
was well received by him. The King & he spake long together privily,
& at the end thereof was it known how Fin was minded then and there to
take service with King Svein and become his man. To him gave Svein the
title or Earl and therewith Halland to govern, and there Fin tarried to
safeguard the coast against the Norwegians.


|| Now Ketil Calf & Gunhild had a son whose name was Guthorm of Ringanes.
On his mother's side was he the nephew of King Olaf and King Harald,
able was he withal & early come to manhood. Guthorm was oft with King
Harald who to him was of very friendly countenance, and over Harald had
Guthorm much influence for he was a wise man & well-beloved of all.
Guthorm sailed often on viking cruises to the lands in the west, and had
disposition over many men.

His peace-land & place of abode in winter was Dublin in Ireland, where
he was a sworn friend of King Margad.Sec.


|| The summer thereafter King Margad and Guthorm with him fared to
Bretland (Wales) in order to harry there, and thence took they much
wealth which they had pillaged. After having done thus, lay they to in
Anglesey Sound so that they might part their plunder, but when all the
silver, and great was the quantity, was carried before the King and he
beheld it, then desired he to keep all for himself, and seemed now to
set scant store by his friendship with Guthorm.

Guthorm liked ill enough that he and his men should be scotched of their
share of the booty; & still less pleased was he when the King said he
might choose betwixt two things; 'Either to submit to our will, or do
battle with us, and he who gets the victory to have the money; and thou
moreover shalt depart from thy ships and I will take them.' Now on
either hand the task seemed severe; Guthorm deemed it unseemly that he
should without rime or reason give up his ships & money, but natheless
was it ill fighting over against a King to whom was an host so large as
that which followed Margad. Grave also was the disparity betwixt the
crews thereof, inasmuch as to the King were sixteen long-ships & to
Guthorm only five. So Guthorm prayed the King grant him three nights'
truce in the which to confer with his men on this matter, for thought he
that he could soften the King within this time, and aided by the
pleading of his men could set the matter on a better footing with the
King, but never a bit did he get what he asked for. This was on the eve
of St. Olafmas.Sec. So Guthorm chose to die, the stout fellow he was, or
win the day, rather than suffer the shame and disgrace and mockery of
having lost so vast a deal.

And called he upon God and the sainted King Olaf, his kinsman, praying
for their help and support, and vowing to bestow on that holy man's
house a tithe of all the plunder which would fall to them an they gained
the victory. Thereafter did he array his host, and rank it against the
greater host, and he advanced on them and fought with them, and by God's
help and that of the holy King Olaf did he gain the victory. There fell
King Margad, and every man who was with him, young & old. After this
glorious victory Guthorm returned home joyfully with all the wealth he
had gotten from the strife; & from the silver which had changed hands
every tenth penny was set aside for the sainted King Olaf even as
Guthorm had vowed. A vast deal of money was there so that from the
silver caused Guthorm to be made a rood of his own stature, or of that
of the captain of his ship, and that holy symbol is seven ells in
height.

This cross did Guthorm give to the church of the holy St. Olaf, & thereSec.
has it remained ever since in testimony of ye victory of Guthorm and the
miracle of ye sainted King Olaf.


|| Now there was in Denmark a Count who was evil & envious, and he had a
Norwegian serving-woman and the stock of her was from Throndhjem. She
worshipped the holy King Olaf, and put staunch faith in his sanctity;
but the Count misdoubted all that had been told him of the miracles of
that holy man, & affirmed that naught were they but rumour and talk, and
laughed to scorn all the praise and worship which the folk of the land
accorded the good King.

But now was drawing nigh the day whereon the gentle King laid down his
life, a day which all Norwegians kept, but which this unwise count
refused to hallow; & he bade his serving-woman fire the oven and bake on
that day.

And deeming from the mood of the Count that he would soon avenge himself
on her an she did not obey him in all that he had bidden her do, went
she all unwillingly and laid fire under the oven, and made much plaint
while she worked, & called on King Olaf, saying that she would never
believe more on him if he did not by some token or other avenge this
unseemliness. And now shall ye hear of a meet chastisement & true
miracle: it befell forthwith, in the self-same moment, that the Count
became blind in both eyes and that the bread which she had baked was
turned into stone.

Some of the stones have been brought to the church of the holy King
Olaf, and also to many other places. St. Olafmas has ever been kept holy
in Denmark since that happening.


  [Illustration]

|| Westward in Valland (France) was there a man who was so malformed that
he was a cripple, and crawled he ever on his knees and knuckles. One day
when he was abroad, on a road, he fell asleep & dreamt that a man all
glorious without came to him and asked whither was he bound, and the
cripple answered with the name of a certain town.

Then the man all glorious said: 'Fare thee rather to St. Olaf's Church
in London, and there wilt thou be healed.' Thereafter awakened the
cripple and straightway fared in search of St. Olaf's Church, and after
a while was come to London Bridge & there asked of the townsmen whether
they could direct him to St. Olaf's Church; but for answer gat he that
there were too many churches for them to know to what man each of them
was dedicated. A while later came up a man & asked him whither was he
bound, and he told him whither he was bound, and that man said
afterwards: 'We will both go to St. Olaf's Church, for I know the way
thither.'

So then crossed they the bridge, and went to the street which led to
St. Olaf's Church. When they were come to the gates of the churchyard
the man stepped over the threshold which is between the gates, but the
cripple rolled over it, and lo, straightway rose he up a whole man. When
he looked round his comrade was gone.


|| King Harald founded a merchant town eastward in Oslo,Sec. and often
tarried there for it had broad countrysides round about, and was a place
suited for the ingathering of victuals; likewise was it well situated
for the defence of the land against the Danes, & also for onsets on
Denmark which Harald was wont to make even at such times when he had a
large host at his beck.

One summer fared King Harald with some light ships and but few men and
set he sail south for Viken; but on a fair wind springing up, crossed he
the sea to Jutland where he began to harry.

The men of the land, however, collected themselves together & defended
their country, so then sailed King Harald on to Limfjord and went up
that fjord.

Now Limfjord is so fashioned in shape that going up it is like entering
into a narrow river-groove, but as thou goest on up the fjord it
becometh like a great sea.

Harald harried there on both shores, but beheld the Danes everywhere
assembled in numbers. King Harald brought-to his ships alongside an
island which was small & thereon were no buildings; and when they went
in search of water they found none, and told it unto the King.

Then he did send men to see if no adder could be found on the isle, &
when one had been found they brought it to the King and he had the adder
taken to the fire so that it might be warmed and teased thereby, and
become right thirsty. Thereafter a twine was bound to its tail and the
adder was let loose, and it crawled away and the twine was unwound from
the ball, and they followed after the adder until it struck into the
earth.

Then the King bade them dig for water, and they dug for it, and there
found water in abundance.


|| From his spies learned King Harald the intelligence that King Svein
was come with a large fleet of ships to the mouth of the fjord, and that
he was making way but slowly, for his ships could only pass in one at a
time. King Harald took his ships up Limfjord, and over against where it
is broadest it is called Lusbreid. Now from the creek within is there a
narrow neck of land westward (north) leading to the sea, and thither did
the men to Harald row in the evening; after nightfall, when it was dark,
they cleared the ships & haled them right over this isthmus, and before
daylight all was accomplished and the ships once more ready for sea.
Then shaped he the course northward past Jutland, and they sang:

  'From Danish grip
  Did Harald slip.'


|| At that time said the King that he would come to Denmark once again,
& would bring with him more men & larger ships. After these things fared
they northward to Throndhjem.


|| That winter abode King Harald in Nidaros, & at this time caused he a
ship to be builded out on the islands, and it was a bussa-shipSec. made
after the model of the Long Serpent and wrought every way as carefully
as might be.

At her bows was a dragon-head and at her stern a crook, and the ......Sec.
were all overlaid with gold. On her were thirty-five benches, and broad
was she of beam in comparison therewith.

Very fair to behold was she. The King caused all the appurtenances of
the ship to be chosen with exceeding great care, both the sail, the
running tackle, the anchor and the cables.

That winter King Harald sent word southward to Denmark to King Svein,
bidding him come in spring from the south to the River, to a meeting
with him, & saying that they would then fight to the end that one or
other of their countries should change hands, & the victor become master
of both kingdoms.


|| That winter called out King Harald a host, a general host, from all
Norway, and by spring-tide had been assembled together a mighty array of
men.

Then launched the King his great ship on the river Nid, and after that
was accomplished caused he the dragon-head be placed thereon.

Then sang Thiodolf the Skald:

  'Fair maid, forward is the ship guided, from river to main.
  Mark where off the land there lieth the long hull of the dragon.
  The mane of the serpent yellow-green glints on the deck,
  The prows were burnt-gold as from off the slip she glided.'


|| Thereafter fitted King Harald out the ship and his men for a cruise,
and all being made ready, stood he down the river, and right well
answered she to the oars. Thus saith Thiodolf:

  'Saturday the prince casts off the long land tilts,
  There where the widows proud the serpent watch,
  As she glideth from the town.
  West from the Nid thereafter the King doth steer,
  Into the sea drop the oars of his men.
  Move can they, the King's lads, the straight oars in the water.
  The widows stand and wonder at the oar-strokes so swift,
  The thole knows hurt when seventy oars do move her
  I' the water ere the war-folk on the sea their oars do strain.
  Northmen the serpent row (nailed is she)
      out on the billow-stream icy;
  'Tis eagles' wings that we behold.'


|| Southward sailed King Harald with his host alongside the land, so that
he might call out a general muster of men and ships. But when they were
come eastward, and were off Vik, arose a strong contrary wind wherefore
was the fleet obliged to stand in for harbour, making such havens as
were to be found in the skerries as well as those in the fjords.

Quoth Thiodolf:

  'Lee have the shaven hulls of the ships under the woods,
  The King's war-host towards land doth lean with its prow beams.
  The land-folk in the skerries, within the creeks, do lie;
  The ships white-mailed hide under the land-necks.'


|| Now in the tempest which fell upon them the great ship had need of
good anchor tackle, and thus saith Thiodolf:

  'Prow foremost the prince cleft
  High fences of the sea;
  The ropes of the King's ship
  Are strained to the utmost;
  The wind is unfriendly
  Against the anchor-iron out-hollowed,
  Grit and wind-squalls ugly
  Chafe at the anchor flukes.'


|| As soon as there was come to him a fair wind, took King Harald the
host east to the River, and thither came towards nightfall. Thus saith
Thiodolf:

  'Now drave King Harald hotly the war-ships towards the River,
  At nightfall Norway's King anigh the marches is.
  A Thing the King now holds at Thumla, there where Svein
  Will meet to war if so be the Danes shirk not the tryst.'


|| When the Danes learned that the hosts of the Norwegians were come, all
those that were able to do so fled away.

The Norwegians likewise learnt that the Danish King had his host out,
and was lying south off Funen and the small-isles; but when King Harald
saw that King Svein would not come to meet him as had been agreed, nor
do battle with him, then did he after the same fashion as before & let
the peasant host return to Norway; but manned he one hundred and fiftySec.
ships, & with these steered a course alongside Halland. There he
plundered widely; and he put in also to Lofufjord with his host, and
going up onto the land harried there likewise. Somewhile later came King
Svein to the encounter with the Danish host, and to him was a tale of
three hundredSec. ships. When the Norwegians saw this fleet bade King
Harald a blast be blown to summon his host together, & many spake saying
that they ought to flee, & that it was unavailing for them to fight, but
the King answered thus: 'We will fall one atop of the other rather than
flee!' Thus saith Stein Herdason:

  'Said the chief high-minded, what now he awaited.
  Here (said the King) he had all hope of peace lost.
  Rather than yield, cried the King,
      should each man fall one on the top of the other.
  Their arms then took the men.'


|| Then let King Harald his ships be cleared for action, and brought his
great dragon forward into the very midst of the host. Thus saith
Thiodolf:

  'The giver of kindly gifts
  Who oft to the wolf gave food,
  His dragon-ship put forward
  Midmost in the war-host.'


|| This ship was well fitted out, and had a large crew.

And again saith Thiodolf:

  'The peace wishing King his ranks bade
  Bind fast the war-shields on the ships' sides;
  The prince's friends well ordered stand methinks.
      The leader of manly deeds,
  The doughty dragon closed,
  Outside the Niz, with shields, and one o'erlapped the other.'


|| Ulf the Marshal brought his ship up alongside the royal ship, & bade
her men place her well forward. Stein Herdason was on Ulf's ship, and he
chanted thus:

  'Ulf, the Marshal of the King,
  Cheered us all on to battle;
  The spears trembled when
  The ships were rowed to the fight.
  And, no doubt, the wise King's
  Valiant friend did bid his men
  His ship advance beside
  The prince's; the lads obeyed.'


|| Stationed farthest out on one of the arms was Ivar Hakonson; under him
had he many and the men to him were well equipped. Farthest out on the
other arm were the chiefs of Throndhjem, and to them likewise was a
large and goodly host.


|| And King Svein likewise ranged his host, and his ship laid he over
against ye ship of Harald, in the midst of the host, and nighest to him
was Earl Fin, and next to him again the Danes ranked all of their host
that was bravest and best equipped. Thereafter either side lashed their
ships together in the midmost part of the fleet, but the hosts being so
large it befell that there was a great number of ships faring loose, and
so each captain placed his ship as far forward as he had courage for;
but that was exceeding varied. Now though the odds were so great yet
nevertheless had either side a vast host, and in his to King Svein
pertained as many as seven earls. Thus saith Stein Herdason:

  'The "hersirs'" valiant lord a risk did take him,
  With ships fifty and a hundred he waited for the Danes.
  Next was it that the ruler dear who dwells in LeidraSec.
  The sea cleft thither with three hundred sea-steeds.'


|| Even so soon as he had made ready his ships, commanded King Harald the
war-blast to be sounded, and after this was done, rowed his men ahead.
Stein Herdason saith:

  'Before the river's mouth, damage did Harald Svein.
  Hard withstanding made he; Harald asked not for peace.
  The King's sword-swinging lads forward off Halland rowed,
  And yonder on the sea caused wounds with blood to stream.'


|| Then did either side join combat, and the struggle waxed very fierce.
Either King lustily cheered on his men, as saith Stein Herdason:

  'Eager for war the good shield-bearers bade their lads
  To shoot and hew (but short the space was 'twixt the hosts).
  Both stones & arrows streamed when the sword shook from it,
  The light blood, depriving of life the men of either host.'


|| It was late in the day when battle was joined and the combatants
fought the whole night; King Harald himself shot for long with his bow.
Thiodolf saith thus:

  'Elm-bow did the Upland
  King draw all the night;
  Shrewd ruler of the land sent
  Arrows 'gainst the white shields;
  Barbs bloody harmed the peasants,
  And the King's arrows
  Fast in the shields did lodge
  (The spear-shots grew apace).'


|| Earl Hakon & the men of his company did not lash their ships together,
but rowed against the Danish keels that were faring loose, and every
ship that they grappled did they clear. When the Danes noted this same
did every man move his ship away from the spot whither the Earl was
faring, but went he after them even as they withdrew, and wellnigh to
fleeing were they.

But then came a boat rowing towards the Earl's ship, and those in it
shouted & said that the other arm of ye battle array of King Harald had
given way, and that many of their men had fallen there, so then rowed
the Earl away thither and fierce was his onset, so that the Danes again
caused their ships to fall astern. Thus did the Earl fare the whole of
that night, rowing round outside the combatants, and laying about him
wheresoever it was required; & whithersoever he went he was in no
fashion to be withstood.

During the waning part of the night was there a general fight among the
Danes; this was after King Harald & his band had boarded the own ship to
King Svein, and so utterly cleared it that all his men were slain save
and except those that leapt into the sea. Thus saith Arnor Earl's-skald:

  'Svein courageous went not from off his ship
  Without good cause (that is my mind);
  Hard was the fight for the helmets wasted,
  And empty did his craft float ere the eloquent friend of the Jutes
  Fled from his dead chosen fighters.'


|| After the banner of King Svein had fallen & the ships to him had been
cleared, fled away all his men save those who were slain, & they that
fled sprang into the deep from those ships that were lashed together or
climbed on to other ships that were faring loose, but all of the men of
King Svein who were able to do so rowed off. Full many men fell there.
And there, where the Kings themselves had fought & the greater number of
the ships had been lashed one to another, lay over seventy of the ships
of that King; thus saith Thiodolf:

  'Bold King of the Sogn-folk,
  (So 'tis sung) ships seven
  Times ten of men and arms
  From Svein's fleet cleared away.'


|| King Harald after the Danes rowed hard and put them to rout, but no
easy task was it, for so little sea-room was there betwixt the keels
that motion was well-nigh not possible. Earl Fin would in no wise
consent to flee and was taken captive; he could not see well. This is
what Thiodolf saith:

  'To six Danish earls a guerdon hast thou to give
  For one single victory,
  (They whet the heat of battle).
  In the midst of the ranks
  Fin Arnason was taken
  Battle-strong, stout-hearted;
  Ne'er would he think to flee.'


|| Earl Hakon tarried behind with his ship, while the King and the rest
were pursuing after the fugitives, for the Earl could not get his ship
away from the spot where she was lying. Just at that time rowed up a man
in a boat to the ship and brought-to at the poop; a big man was he with
a broad-brimmed hat; 'Where is the Earl?' quoth he up to the ship. 'In
the forehold,' answered they him back, 'binding the wound of a man who
is bleeding.' The Earl viewed the man with the hat and asked what might
his name be, to which he made answer: 'VandradSec. is here, speak to me,
Earl.' Then looked the Earl over the gunwale at him.

Then said the boatman: 'I will receive my life of thee if thou wilt give
it me.' Then the Earl rose up and called to two of his men, either of
whom was dear to him, and said: 'Get into the boat and set Vandrad
ashore; go with him to my friend Karl the Peasant, and tell him for a
token to give Vandrad the horse which I gave to him yesterday, and to
give him his own saddle, and his son for a guide.' Then stepped they
into the boat & took the oars, & Vandrad steered.

This was hard nigh to the dawn of day, and there was much movement among
the ships, craft both large and small, some rowing to land, others to
sea.

Vandrad steered there where thought he there was most sea-room betwixt
the craft, & whensoever any of the Norwegian ships rowed nigh them said
the Earl's men who they were, & then all let them go as they listed.
Vandrad steered along the shore & did not put to land ere they had come
past the place where there was a great throng of ships.


|| Thereafter walked they to the homestead of Karl at about the hour when
the light began to wax, and so went they into the living-room, and
beheld Karl but now clad. To him told the men from the Earl on what
mission had they come, and Karl said that first must they eat, & caused
food to be set before them, & himself fetched them water for
hand-washing. Then came the housewife into the chamber and straightway
said she: 'Wondrous is it that we gat no sleep nor rest all night
through, for the tumult and noise.' Karl answered: 'Knowest thou not
that the Kings fought together yesternight?' She asked: 'Who won?' Karl
answered: 'The Norwegians won.' 'Belike our King hath fled again,' said
she. Karl replied: 'In a bad way are we with our King for he is both
halt & craven.' Then spake Vandrad: 'The King is not craven, but neither
he is victorious.' Now Vandrad was the last to wash his hands, and when
he took the towel he dried himself in the midst thereof; but the
housewife seized it and pulled it from him, saying: 'Little good canst
thou do; 'tis the way of common folk to wet all the towel at once.'
Vandrad answered: 'I shall yet come thither where I may dry myself
midmost in the towel.' Then sat they at meat for a while but afterwards
went out, and there was the horse standing ready, and that son of Karl
who was to bear Vandrad company sat another horse, and together rode
they forth to the forest. But the men from the Earl went back to their
boat, & rowed out again to their ship.


|| Harald and his men pursued the fugitives a short way, and thereafter
returned to those ships which had been deserted. And then searched they
the slain, finding in the King's ship a number of dead men; yet not
among them was the body of King Svein; natheless was it deemed certain
that he must have fallen. King Harald let the corses of his men be laid
out, or the wounds bound up of them that required it. Then caused he the
bodies of the men of Svein to be borne ashore, & sent word to the
peasants that they should bury them; thereafter caused he the plunder to
be divided, and abode for a while there at that spot. And there learnt
he the tidings that King Svein was come to Zealand, and that all of his
host which had not been routed in battle had rejoined him, and to him
likewise were come many other men, and that to him therefore was
assembled a mighty large host.


|| Now as ye have heard tell afore, was Earl Fin Arnason captured in the
battle, and before the King was he led. King Harald was then exceeding
joyful, and said he, 'Here meet we twain, Fin, though lastwhiles in
Norway; scarce hath the Danish court stood by thee! An ill piece of work
will the Norwegians have to drag thee, blind man, after them, and keep
thee alive.'

Then answered back the Earl: 'Many ill things have the Norwegians now to
do, & the worst of these is thy bidding.'

Then said King Harald: 'Wilt thou have grace, though grace deservest
thou not?' The Earl answered: 'Not from thee, hound!' The King said:
'Dost desire that thy kinsman Magnus should give thee grace?' Magnus,
the son of King Harald, was captain of a ship at that time. Then said
the Earl: 'What hath that whelp to do with the meting out of grace?'
Thereat laughed the King, for he deemed it good sport to bait him, and
said he: 'Wilt thou accept thy life from the hand of Thora, thy
kinswoman?'

Then the Earl said: 'Is she here?' 'She is here,' said the King.

Then did Fin utter the scurvy words which were remembered long
thereafter, and all were witness of how wroth he was since he could not
still his words: 'It is not to be wondered at that thou hast bitten well
since the mare is with thee.'

To Earl Fin was given quarter, and King Harald kept him with him for a
time, but Fin was somewhat unjoyful, and unmeek in his words. Then King
Harald said: 'I see thou wilt not be friends with me nor with my
kindred, so I will give thee leave to fare to Svein, thy King.' The Earl
answered: 'That will I accept, and the sooner I fare hence the more
grateful I shall be.' Thereafter the King let Fin be taken even to the
land, where was he made welcome by the Hallanders.

Thence sailed King Harald north with his host to Norway, faring first to
Oslo, and in that place gave leave to all his men who desired it to go
even to their own homes.


|| It is said that King Svein abode that winter in Denmark, and held his
state as before.

And in the winter sent he men northward to Halland to fetch Karl the
Peasant to him, and likewise Karl's wife; and when they were come and he
had summoned Karl unto him he asked him if he had seen him before. Karl
answered: 'I know thee now, King, and I knew thee then even so soon as I
saw thee, and it is under God that the little help which I was able to
afford thee was of use.' The King answered: 'For all the days I have yet
to live I have to reward thee. Now firstly will I give thee whatever
homestead in Zealand thou art minded to have, and I will furthermore
make thee a great man an thou wottest how to act.'

Karl thanked the King well for his words, and said that there was still
a favour he would pray of him. And the King asked what that might be.
Karl said: 'I would ask this thing, King, that thou lettest me take my
wife with me.' The King answered: 'I will not promise thee this thing,
for I will get thee a much better & wiser wife; but thy wife may keep
the small homestead ye have already; on that she can live.'

And the King gave Karl a large & noble stead & gat him a good marriage.
This was known and told far and wide, yea even as far north as Norway.


|| The winter following on the battle of the Niz King Harald spent in
Oslo. And when the host came up from the south in autumn many tales and
legends went abroad of the autumn outside the Niz river, & everyone who
had been there deemed he had something to tell. Once it happened that
some men were sitting drinking in a small chamber, & full of talk were
they, talking of the battle of the Niz, and of whom might have derived
the greatest renown therefrom. All were agreed on one issue, however,
and that was that no other had been such a man there as Earl Hakon: he
it was who had shown greatest prowess, who was the boldest under arms,
and the ablest, and the most fortunate, and whatsoever he did was that
which availed most, & to him was accounted the victory. Now Harald was
without, in the courtyard, speaking with some of his men, and thereafter
went he before the doorway of the chamber and said: 'Every man now would
like to be named Hakon,' and therewith went his way.


|| Earl Hakon fared to the Uplands in autumn, even to his dominions, and
there tarried throughout the winter.

Right well beloved was he of the Upland folk. Now once it befell, when
spring was drawing nigh, that some men were sitting drinking, & their
talk was yet again of the battle of the Niz; and men lauded greatly Earl
Hakon, but a few praised others no less.

When they had been talking thus a while a man answered: 'Mayhap other
men besides Earl Hakon fought boldly outside the Niz, yet nevertheless
methinks no one can have had the luck he had.'

They said it was no doubt his greatest luck that he had routed many of
the Danes. The same man answered: 'Luckiest for him was it that he gave
King Svein his life.' Another answered him: 'Thou wottest not what thou
art saying.' He answered: 'Yea, I wot full well, for he who set the King
ashore told me himself.' Thus it befell, as oft is said, that 'many are
the King's ears.' These things were told to the King straightway, and
the King had many horses taken and rode forthwith away in the night with
two hundred men,Sec. and rode he the whole of that night and the following
day. Then there came towards them on horseback certain men who were
making for the town with meal and malt. Now faring with the King was one
Gamal, & he rode up to one of the peasants who was a friend of his and
spoke privily with him.

Gamal said: 'Money will I give thee, an thou wilt ride furiously by
hidden ways such as thou wottest to be shortest to Earl Hakon: tell him
that the King will slay him, for the King wotteth that the Earl helped
King Svein to land outside the Niz.'

And the matter being covenanted between them rode the peasant hard, and
came even to the Earl who was sitting drinking and had not gone to his
rest. But when the peasant made known his errand, rose the Earl
forthwith and all his folk; and the Earl caused his chattels to be
removed from the house during the night. When the King arrived thither
tarried he there the night, but Hakon the Earl had ridden his way. And
in time came he east to the realm of Sweden, to King Steinkel, and abode
with him the summer. King Harald then turned him back to town. In the
summer the King fared north to Throndhjem and abode there, but in the
autumn fared eastward again to Vik.


|| Earl Hakon went back in the summer to the Uplands, so soon as he
learned that the King had fared northward, and there dwelt he until such
time as the King came south again. Thereafter fared the Earl eastward to
Vermaland and tarried there long in the winter; and King Steinkel gave
the Earl rule and dominion over that part of the land.

When winter was wearing to an end, fared he westward to Kaumariki, and
took with him many men whom the Gauts and Vermalanders had given him.
And he took thence his land-dues and the taxes which he had a right to
demand, & thereafter fared he back east to Gautland and dwelt there the
spring.

King Harald abode the winter in Oslo, and sent his men to the Uplands to
gather taxes and land-dues and the King's fines; but the Uplanders said
that they would not pay to him all dues which it behoved them to pay
into the hands of Earl Hakon even so long as he was alive and had not
forfeited life or dominions; & no land-dues did the King therefrom
obtain that winter.


|| Now betwixt Norway and Denmark there were sent that winter messengers
and messages, for both Norwegians and Danes alike desired to make peace
and agreement either with other, and they prayed their Kings to do the
same. The sending of these messages appeared prone to bring about
concord, for in the end a peace-meeting was agreed upon in the River
betwixt King Harald and King Svein. When spring-tide was come both Kings
called out many men and ships for this journey. Saith a skald in a poem:

  'Leader of armed men, he who the ground engirdles
  From Eyrasund northward shuts with his long-ship's prows
  The land (the haven spurned he).
  Gleaming with gold the stems cut the waves keenly;
  Onward of Halland west, with host aboard, and the keels thrilling.
  Harald firm-oathed!
      oft hast thou the earth engirdled with thy ships;
  Svein, too, through the sound sailed the King to meet.
  Praise-dight filler of ravens, who every bay doth close,
  Hath out a teeming host of Danes, from the south all.'


|| It is said here that these Kings kept to their agreement, to wit, that
there should be a meeting betwixt them; and that both came to the
marches. It is set forth thus below:

  'Shrewd leader of armed men
  To trysting south once more
  Thou sailst as all Danes wished
  (No lesser was thy purpose).
  Svein now to the northward fares
  The land-marches nigh,
  The tryst to keep with Harald--
  Windy was the weather off the land.'


|| When the Kings were come face to face the one with other forthwith
betwixt them was broached ye matter of peace; and no sooner was this
opened than many men made plaint of the harm they had suffered through
war-fare, rapine, and the slaying of men. And long talked they about
this, as is said hereafter:

  'The yeomen shrewd
  Such words do say aloud
  That when the men meet,
  An' angered are mostly
  The others. Far seemeth
  Concord to lie from men
  Who on all things quarrel
  (The chiefs' arrogance waxeth).
  With danger fraught will be
  Wrath of the princes be
  If peace be agreed on,
  Those who are peace-makers
  In scales must weigh all things.
  Seemly for Kings to say
  What e'er the host liketh;
  Bad will would it cause
  Were the yeomen's state worsened.'


|| Then the best men and the wisest conferred together, and peace was
made betwixt the Kings, in such wise that King Harald was to have Norway
& King Svein Denmark as far as the marches which had aforetime divided
the kingdoms; neither was to make redress to other; there where the land
had been pillaged the matter was to be passed over; and he who had taken
plunder was to keep it.

This peace was to ensue even so long as the twain were Kings; the
covenant was bounden with oaths, & thereafter gave the Kings one another
hostages; even as is said hereafter:

  'Thus have I heard it said
  That Svein and Harald both
  (God works it) gladly gave
  Hostages one to other.
  Let them so keep their vows
  (All ended was with witness)
  And the whole peace so fully
  That the folk break it not.'


|| King Harald tarried in Vik during the summer, and sent men to the
Uplands to collect the dues & taxes he had there; but the peasants in
plain words said that they would bide the coming of Earl Hakon, until
such time as he should come to them. Earl Hakon was then up in Gautland
with a large host. When summer was wearing to a close sailed King Harald
south to Konungahella (King's Rock), and he took all the light craft
whereon he could lay hands & went up the River, and at the falls thereof
had the boats haled across land and so put onto Lake Wenern. Thereafter
rowed he east across the lake where he asked tidings of Earl Hakon.

Now when the Earl gat news of the journey of the King, came he down from
the country and made endeavour to prevent the King from harrying, for to
Earl Hakon was a large host which the Gauts had given him. King Harald
laid his boats up the mouth of a river, and thereafter made a landing,
but left some of his men behind to watch the craft. And the King himself
and some of his men rode on horseback, but many more went afoot. Their
way led them through a wood, & thereafter a bog lay before them on which
were small bushes, then after that a copse, and when they were come up
to the copse sighted they the host of the Earl; and a bog there was
betwixt them and it.

Then both hosts arrayed themselves, & King Harald commanded his men to
sit up on the hillside: 'Let us first tempt them to make an onset; Hakon
hath no mind to wait,' said he.

The weather was frosty with some driving snow, and the men to Harald sat
under their shields.

Now the Gauts had taken little apparel on them and were starved with the
cold, but the Earl bade them bide until the King should make an onset
and they could all stand alike in height. Earl Hakon had the banner
which had been that of King Magnus Olafson. Now the head-man to the
Gauts was one hight Thorvid, and he was mounted on a horse the reins of
which were tied to a stake standing in the bog. He spake & said: 'God
knows we have a large host here and many stout men; let not King
Steinkell hear that we are not helping this good Earl well. I wist that
if the Norwegians make onset against us we shall stand firm, but if the
young men falter & bide not, then do not let us run farther than thither
to the brook, and if the young men again falter, which I wot will not
befall, then do not let us run farther than thither to the hill.'

At that moment ran up the host of the Norwegians shouting their war-cry
and beating their shields, & then the host of the Gauts likewise began
to shout, and the horse to the head-man pulled so hard at its rein,
being afrighted at the host-cry, that the stake came up & flew past the
head of the chief, wherefore he shouted: 'Such a mischance as thou
shootest, Northmen,' and therewith galloped away. King Harald had ere
this said to his men: 'Though we make din and shouting about us, yet let
us not go down the hill or ever they come hither to us,' and they did
according as he had said.

As soon as the war-cry was heard, caused the Earl his banner to be borne
forward, and when they were come under the hill rushed the King's men
down upon them, and some of the men to the Earl fell forthwith and some
fled; but the Norwegians drave not them that fled very far, for it was
late in the day. There took they the banner of Earl Hakon, and as much
of weapons and apparel as they could lay hands on. And the King let both
the banners be borne in front of him when he fared down the hill; and
his men spake one with another as to whether or no Earl Hakon might be
fallen. Now when it came to faring through the wood they had to ride in
single train, and behold a certain man rode straight across their way,
and thrust a spear through him that bore the banner to the King, and
seizing the stave thereof rode he off another way in the wood with the
banner. When the King was told of this cried he: 'The Earl lives! Give
me my mail-shirt!' And rode he in the night to his ships. Now said many
men that the Earl had avenged himself. Then chanted Thiodolf:

  'Steinkell's host who to the
  Warlike Earl should help yield
  (That brought the King to pass)
  To hell, I ween, have fared.
  But those who would better
  The matter say,
  Hakon fled because the hope of help
  Therefrom but ill had proven.'


|| King Harald spent what was left of the night on his ship. In the morn,
when it was light saw men that ice had formed round the ships so thick
that it was feasible to walk round about them.

Then bade the King his men hew the ice and release his ships into the
lake, and so went the men and set to work to hew the ice. King Harald's
son Magnus steered the ship which lay lowest in the river-mouth and
nighest out to the lake.

Now when the men had almost chopped the ice away a certain man ran out
on it to the place where they were about to hew, and thereafter fell to
chopping as if he were mad and raving. Then said a man: 'Now is it again
as often before, no one is so good at giving a helping hand as Hall
Kodransbane; behold now, how he is hewing the ice.'

But the man of Magnus's ship who was hight Thormod Eindridison, when he
heard the name of 'Kodransbane,' ran to Hall and gave him his
death-blow.

Kodran was the son of Gudmund Elyolfson, and Valgerd that was sister to
Gudmund was the mother of Jurunn, Thormod's mother.

Thormod was a winter old when Kodran was slain, and never had he set
eyes on Hall Utryggson before this time.

By this, then, the ice was broken away even so far as the lake and
Magnus brought his ship out, & got under way forthwith, and sailed west
across the lake; but the King's ship which was the uppermost in the
channel came out the last. Now Hall had been of the fellowship of the
King and was very dear to him, and the King was exceeding wroth, so that
when he came latest into haven he found that Magnus had already helped
the murderer to the forest, though he offered atonement for him, would
he have gone against Magnus and his folk, had not the friends of both
brought about their appeasement.


|| King Harald fared up to Raumariki this winter, and to him was a large
host.

And he bore cases against the peasants for the keeping back from him of
dues and taxes, and for inciting his enemies to strife against him.

And some of the peasants caused he to be taken, and some he maimed and
others killed and others he deprived of all their possessions.

Those who could get away fled, but the King burned the countrysides wide
about and laid them waste. Thus saith Thiodolf:

  'Waster of isle-dwellers
  Hard hands laid on Raumfolk,
  Steadily on the ranks
  Of Harald went, as I trow.
  Fire did requite them;
  But the chief commanded,
  And high flames poor peasants
  To obedience led.'


|| After this fared King Harald up to Heidmark and there burned, and did
no less war-work than has been writ afore. From thence fared he to
Ringariki, there burned, and went everywhere with the war-shield aloft.
Thus saith Thiodolf:

  'Burned were the fell folk's steads,
  Roofwards the red fire flamed.
  Hit did the lord of chiefs
  The Heiners with hard stones.
  For their lives the sufferers craved;
  So great a hurt the flames
  The men of Ringariki wrought
  Or ever the fire was stayed.'


|| After this gave the peasants the whole matter into the hands of the
King.


|| After the death of King Magnus were spent fifteen winters ere the
battle of the Niz, and after that two winters or ever Harald and Svein
made peace. Thus saith Thiodolf:

  'The prince of the Hords
  (Brought peace the third year was made)
  The strife to an end; on
  The strand steel hit the shields.'


|| After this peace-making endured the war of the King with the Uplanders
three half-years. Thus saith Thiodolf:

  'Hard of the King's work 'tis
  In seemly wise to speak
  When to have idle ploughs
  The upland men he taught.
  The chieftain wise hath honour won
  These three half-years
  Which ever will be minded.'


|| Edward, the son of Ethelred, was King of England after his brother
Hordaknut; he was hight Edward 'the Good' and right good he was.

The mother to King Edward was Queen Emma, the daughter of Richard, the
Rouen-Earl; and her brother was Earl Robert, the mother of William the
Bastard, who was at that time duke of Rouen in Normandy. King Edward was
wedded to Queen Gyda,Sec. the daughter of Earl Godwin & he was the son of
Wolfnoth. The brothers to Gyda were: the eldest Earl Tosti, the second
Earl Morcar, the third Earl Walthiof, the fourth Earl Svein, and fifthly
Harald. Now Harald was the youngest and was brought up at the court of
King Edward and was his foster-son, and the King loved him very greatly
and eyed him ever as his own son, for the King was childless.


|| It befell one summer that Harald the son of Godwin had to go a journey
to Bretland (Wales) and fared he on a ship, but after they had set sail
sprang up a contrary wind & they were driven out to sea.[Sec.]

They made land westward in Normandy after undergoing a perilous storm.

And putting into the town of Rouen found they there Earl William, who
received Harald and his travelling companions joyfully, and Harald
tarried there in good cheer for long during the autumn, for the tempests
continued to blow and it was not weather for sailing out at sea. As
winter was approaching spoke the Earl and Harald together concerning the
dwelling of Harald there throughout the winter. Now Harald sat in the
high-seat on one side of the Earl and on the other side of him sat the
Earl's wife, and fairer was she than any other woman whom men had seen.

Harald and she would hold converse together all the time that the cups
were going round, and when the Earl retired to rest, as he did betimes,
Harald would sit long talking with the wife to the Earl, and so fared
things for a long time during the winter.

Once when they were talking together said she: 'Now hath the Earl spoken
with me hereon, and asked what it is we twain ever talk about, and now
is he wroth.' Harald answered: 'We will forthwith let him know all our
conversations.'

The day thereafter Harald called the Earl to speak with him, & went they
to the council-chamber where were also the Earl's wife and their
councillors.

Then Harald spoke the first and said: 'This must I inform thee, Earl,
that there is more in my coming hither than I have revealed to thee:
I desire to ask the hand of thy daughter, and have oft-times spoken of
this my wish to her mother, and she hath given me her word to support me
in this matter with thee.'

When Harald had made known his desire, all those who were present
received the news with gladness and supported it with the Earl, and this
matter was brought to end by the maid being betrothed to Harald; but
since she was young some winters' delay were agreed upon before the time
of bridal.


|| When spring came, equipped Harald his ship and sailed away, and he and
the Earl parted in full friendship.

And Harald fared to England, to King Edward, and returned no more to
Valland to claim the marriage. King Edward ruled over England for
twenty-four winters, & died a straw death in London, None Janurii (5th
January); he was interred in St. Paul's ChurchSec. and the English call him
sainted.

The sons of Earl Godwin in those days were the most powerful men in
England. Tosti had been made captain over the host of the King, and
warden of the land when the King began to wax old; and he had been
placed over all other Earls.

His brother Harald was ever within the court the next man to the King in
all service, & his duty had been to guard the treasure of the King.Sec. It
is recorded by men that as the King was approaching to his end was
Harald near by, and few other men, and Harald leant over the King and
said: 'I call all of ye to witness that the King gave me but now the
kingdom, and all might in England.' Then was the King borne dead from
out his bed. That same day there was a meeting of lords and the taking
of a King was discussed, and Harald then let his witnesses testify that
King Edward on his death-day had given him the kingdom.

This meeting ended in such fashion that Harald was hailed as King &
consecrated with royal consecration in St. Paul's Church on the 13th
day;Sec. when all lords and folk swore fealty to him.

But when his brother, Earl Tosti, heard what had befallen, liked he it
no whit, for thought he himself to be equally near the King.

'I desire,' quoth he, 'that the lords of the land choose him for King
whom they deem best fitted therefor.' And such like words went between
the brothers.

King Harald declared that he would not give up the kingdom for he had
been throned in that city which had been the King's, and had been
thereafter anointed and consecrated with royal consecration; with him
also sided the multitude, and he had moreover all the treasure of the
dead King.


|| Now when King Harald became aware that his brother Tosti desired to
oust him from the kingdom believed he but ill in him, for Tosti was a
very wise man and a great warrior, and was full friendly, to boot, with
the lords of the land.

So Harald deprived him from command of the host, and of all the power he
had had aforetime more than other earlsSec. there in the land. And Earl
Tosti, who by no means would suffer himself to be the serving-man to his
brother, fared away with his men, and so south to Flanders across the
sea, and tarried there a while before faring to Friesland & thence to
Denmark, to his kinsman King Svein. Earl Ulf the father to King Svein
and Gyda that was mother to Tosti, were brother and sister. The Earl
craved the aid of King Svein and men for his assistance, and King Svein
bade him come to him & told him that he should have an earl's realm in
Denmark, such as would make him a seemly chief in that country. The Earl
answered thus: 'My desire is to fare back to England, to my heritage;
but if I am given no assistance for that purpose from thee, King, then
would I liefer make a pact to afford thee all the support I can procure
in England, an thou wilt take the Danish hosts thither and conquer the
land, even as thy mother's brother Knut (Canute) conquered it.'

The King answered: 'So much less a man am I than my kinsman King Knut
that I have hard work to hold the Danish realm against the Norwegians.

Knut the Old gat his Danish kingdom by inheritance but won England by
warfare and strife, yet nevertheless at one time seemed he like to lose
his life thereby. Norway gat he without battle.

Now would I liefer keep within compass according to my smaller
conditions than assay to rival the success of my kinsman Knut.' Then
said Tosti the Earl: 'Lesser is my errand hither than I had thought for;
I deemed not that thou, a bold man, wouldst let me go in need. It may be
that I am seeking friendship where it is not meet to seek it. But
natheless it may hap that I find a chief who is less afeared of great
ventures than thou art, King.' Thereafter they parted, the King and the
Earl, and were not very well of one accord.


|| Tosti the Earl now turned him another way: he fared onward to Norway,
to King Harald who was in Vik, and when they met the Earl made he known
his mission to the King, recounting to him all concerning his journey
since he had left England. And he craved help of the King so that he
might regain his dominions in England.

But the King said as followeth: that the Norwegians had no wish to fare
to England and harry with an English chief over them; 'folk deem,' said
he, 'that the English are not full trustworthy.' The Earl answered:
'I wonder if it is sooth, that which I have heard men say in England,
to wit, that thy kinsman King Magnus despatched men to King Edward, with
the message that he, Magnus, owned England with no less right than
Denmark, that he inherited it from Hordaknut (Hardicanute) and that the
pact was ratified by their oaths?' The King answered: 'Why did he not
have it if he owned it?' The Earl said: 'Why hast thou not Denmark even
as King Magnus had it before thee?' The King answered: 'Little have the
Danes to plume themselves on above us Norwegians, for many a hole have
we burnt in those kinsmen of thine.'

Then said the Earl: 'Though thou wilt not tell me yet can I,
nevertheless, tell thee how it was King Magnus took possession of
Denmark, to wit, was it because the lords of the land there helped him,
but thou gat it not because all the people of the land were against
thee. King Magnus fought not to gain England because all the people
desired to have Edward for their King. If thou wishest to conquer
England then can I bring it about that many of the lords there will be
thy friends and supporters, for nothing lack I against my brother Harald
save the name of King. All men know that there has never been born in
the northlands a warrior such as thou art.

Astonished am I that thou who foughtest fifteen winters for Denmark will
not take England which is lying at thy hand.' King Harald pondered with
care over what the Earl had said to him, and well wot he that in great
measure had he said sooth; and added thereto conceived he the wish to
conquer that kingdom.

Thereafter the King and the Earl talked long & oft together, & in the
end covenanted they an agreement that come the summer they would fare to
England and conquer the country. King Harald sent round the whole of
Norway calling out a levy, one half of the general war-muster.

Now all this was much spoken of by men, and many were the guesses as to
how things would go on the faring. Some reckoned & counted up all deeds
of valour, swearing how naught would be impossible of King Harald, but
said others that England would be difficult to conquer inasmuch as the
people were exceeding numerous, & those warriors who were called the
Thingmanna-hostSec. so doughty that one of them was better than two of
Harald's best men.

Thus answered Ulf the Marshal:

  'Never would the marshals
  Of the King (uncompelling
  Ever gat I riches)
  Turn them to the King's stern-hold
  Noble woman, an twain should be pressed back by
  One Thingman (other than
  That when young I learned me).'


|| That spring Ulf the Marshal died, & Harald when he stood by his grave
said ere he quitted it: 'Here lies he that was ever the most faithful &
the most dutiful to his lord.' To Flanders also sailed Earl Tosti in
springtide so that he should meet the men the which had followed him
from England, with those others also who were to join him from England
and likewise from Flanders.


|| The host to King Harald was gathered together in SolundirSec. and when
all things were made ready and he was about to set sail from Nidaros
went he to the shrine of King Olaf, and thrusting his hands into the
sanctuary cut he off the hair and the nails pertaining to the saint, and
thereafter turned he the key once of the shrine and then threw that same
key into the Nid; and since that time forsooth hath the shrine of the
holy King Olaf never been opened.

Five and thirty winters had been encompassed since his fall, and five
and thirty years had he lived in the world.

Then King Harald and the men that were with him gat them a course
southward to meet his host; or ever that time it was a mighty force that
met together, and it is told among men that to King Harald were nigh
upon two hundredSec. keels, besides victualling ships and smaller craft.
When they were lying off Solundir a certain man named Gyrd, who was on
the own ship to the King, dreamed a dream, and to him it seemed as
though he stood on that same ship and beheld up on the isle a great
troll-woman, & in one hand held she a short sword and in the other a
trough. And to him also did it appear that he was looking at all the
other ships, and on the prow to each was perched a fowl of the air, and
all of those same fowl were either eagles or ravens.

The troll-woman sang:

  'King from the east in sooth
  To battle inciteth
  Many a warrior westward,
  (Joyful am I therefor);
  There may the raven find
  For itself food on the ships
  (It knows enow there is);
  With thee will I ever fare.'


|| Now a certain man hight Thord abode on one of the ships nigh to the
own ship of the King, and on a night dreamed he that he saw the fleet to
King Harald faring landward, and he seemed to wot that to England were
they coming.

Then he saw on the land a vast host of men & both hosts were making them
ready for battle, and for each were many banners held on high. Before
the host of the men of the land rode a swarth troll-woman, sitting on a
wolf, and the wolf had the body of a man in its mouth, & blood flowed
from the corners thereof. And when it had eaten the man she threw yet
another into its mouth, and thereafter threw she one man after another,
but notwithstanding made it scant ado at swallowing them all. And so she
sang:

  'The troll makes the red shield gleam when war comes nigh.
  Bride of the giant-brood mishap to the King foretells.
  The quean with the jaws flings flesh of fallen warriors;
  Raging the wolf's mouth she dyes red with blood.'


|| Furthermore it befell that King Harald dreamed one night and in his
vision lo he was in Nidaros, and there met he his brother, King Olaf,
who chanted a verse to him:

  'The burly King in many fights with honour conquered.
  I gat (because at home I stayed) a holy fall to earth.
  Still of this I fear me that death is nigh thee, King;
  The greedy wolves thou fill'st;
  Ne'er was this caused by God.'


|| Men spake low of many other dreams and omens of divers kinds, and the
bulk of them were of ill import. Or ever King Harald left Throndhjem
caused he his son Magnus to be accepted as King, and made he him ruler
over the kingdom of Norway.

Thora, the daughter of Thorberg, also remained behind, but Queen Ellisif
fared forth with King Harald and with them likewise her daughters Mary
and Ingigerd; Olaf the son to King Harald also fared with him from the
land.


|| When King Harald was ready, and a favourable wind had sprung up,
sailed he out to sea & came to land at the Shetlands, but some of his
ships went on to the Orkneys. King Harald lay at these isles a while or
ever set he sail for the Orkneys, & from these latter took he with him
many men & the Earls Paal and Erling, twain sons to Thorfin the Earl,
but behind him left he there Queen Ellisif & their daughters Mary &
Ingigerd. Thereafter sailed he southward alongside Scotland, & then
alongside England, and went ashore there where it is called Cleveland.

And being come on land forthwith harried he the countryside, bringing it
into subjection under him, & withal encountering no resistance.
Thereafter went King Harald into Scarborough, & fought there with the
men of the town, and he went up on to the cliff there and ordered a vast
bonfire to be made and a light thereto put, and when it was ablaze, his
men took large forks and with them rolled it down into the town, and
then one house after the other began to burn, so that there was naught
for the townsmen to do save to surrender. There slew the Norwegians many
men, and took all the goods whereon they could lay hands. No choice had
then the Englishmen, an they wished to keep their lives, save to make
submission to King Harald.

Wheresoever he fared brought he the land into subjection, and he
continued on his way southward off the coast with the whole of his host,
bringing-to at Holderness, and there a band came against him, and King
Harald did battle with them and gained the day.


|| Now having come thus far on his journey King Harald fared south to the
Humber and went up that river and lay in it beside the banks.

At that time there were up in Jerirk (York) Earl Morcar and his brother
Earl Walthiof and with them was a vast host. King Harald was lying in
the Ouse when the host of the Earls swooped down against him.

And King Harald went ashore and set to arraying his host, and one arm of
the array was ranked on the banks of the river, whereas the other
stretched up inland over towards a certain dyke, and a deep marsh was
there, both broad, and full of water.

The Earls bade the whole multitude of their array slink down alongside
the river.

Now the banner to the King was nigh unto the river and there the ranks
were serried, but near the dyke were they more scattered, and the men
thereof also the least trustworthy.

The Earls then came down along by the dyke, and that arm of the
battle-array of the Norwegians which faced the dyke gave way, and
thereon the English pushed forward after them and deemed that the
Norwegians would flee. Therefore did the banner of Morcar fare forward.


|| But when King Harald saw that the array of the English had descended
alongside the dyke and was coming right toward them, then commanded he
the war-blast to be sounded, and eagerly encouraged his men, and let the
banner 'Land-waster' be carried forward; and even so fierce was their
advance on the English, that all were repulsed and there fell a many men
in the host of the Earls.

This host was even soon routed, and some fled up beside the river and
some down, but the most of the folk ran right out into the dyke, and
there the fallen lay so thick that the Norwegians could walk dry-shod
across the marsh.

There too fell Earl Morcar.Sec. Thus saith Stein Herdason:

  'Many in the river sank
  (The sunken men were drowned);
  All round about young Morcar of yore lay many a lad.
  To flight the chieftain put them;
  The host to swiftest running
  Olaf the Mighty is.'Sec.


|| The song that followeth was wrought by Stein Herdason about Olaf ye
son to King Harald, and he saith, the which also we wot of that Olaf was
in the battle with his father. This is told likewise in 'Haraldsstikka:'

  'There the dead lay
  Down in the marsh
  Walthiof's fighters
  Weapon-bitten,
  So that they might
  The war-wonted horsemen
  There wend their way
  On corses only.'


|| Earl Walthiof and those men that contrived to make their escape from
out the battle fled even up to the town of York, and there it was that
the greatest slaughter took place. This battle was on the WednesdaySec. or
ever St. Matthew's Day.


|| Earl Tosti had come west (south) from Flanders to King Harald, and
being even come to England joined himself with the Earl so that he had
his part in all three battles. And now things came to pass even as he
had told Harald at their meeting they would come to pass, to wit, that a
number of men would flock to them in England, and these were both
kinsmen and friends to Tosti; and their company added greatly to the
strength of the King.

After the battle whereof we have but now heard related, all the men of
the countryside hailed King Harald, albeit some few fled. And now set
King Harald forth to take the city, and placed he his host by Stanford
Bridge,Sec. but for the reason that the King had won so fair a victory over
great lords and overwhelming odds were the people dismayed & deemed it
hopeless to withstand him. Then took the citizens council together, &
they were of one mind to send word to the King giving themselves and
likewise the town into his power. This same was proffered even at such
time that on the Sunday[Sec.] fared King Harald and his men to the city,
and there they held a council of war without the walls, and the citizens
came out and were present at the council.

Then did all the folk promise obedience to King Harald; and gave him as
hostages the sons of great men even according as Tosti chose, for the
Earl knew all men in this town; and in the evening fared the King to his
ships elated with the victory he had won and withal was very joyful.

It was furthermore covenanted there should be held a Thing in the citySec.
early on that Monday when would King Harald appoint governors and grant
fiefs and rights. Now that self-same evening, after the sun had gone
down, approached King Harald Godwinson with a vast host the city from
the south, and rode he into the city by the will and consent of all the
citizens.

Then were men posted at all the gates, and at all the roads, so that to
the Norwegians there might get no tidings of what had befallen, and this
host passed the night within the walls.


|| On the Monday,[Sec.] when Harald Sigurdson had eaten his fill at dinner,
ordered he a blast to be sounded for a landing. And thereon made he
ready his host and parted them, some to fare and some to tarry; and of
each company he let two men go up for every one left behind.

And Tosti the Earl prepared him to go up with his company, but to guard
his ship there tarried behind Olaf own son to the King, Paal and Erling
the Orkney Earls, and Eystein Blackcock, the son of Thorberg Arnason,
who was in those days the man of most renown and withal dearest to the
King of all feudatories, & King Harald had at that time promised him the
hand of his daughter Maria. Very fine was the weather with warm
sunshine, and wherefore because of this left the men their shirts of
mail behind them and went with their shields and helms and spears, with
their swords girded on; and many had likewise bows and arrows, and
withal were they very merry. But as they advanced on the city, behold a
great host rode out towards them and they saw the smoke of horses, and
here and there fair shields and white coats of mail. Then halted the
King his host and summoned Earl Tosti to him, and asked what manner of
host this was like to be.

And the Earl answered and said that he deemed it might be strife, yet
nevertheless it might be that they were some of his kinsmen who were
seeking for protection & friendship, & would promise the King their
support and fealty in return. Then the King said that they would first
of all keep quiet and learn more particulars anent this host. So they
did this, & the host waxed greater the nearer it came, and everywhere
was it like a sheet of ice to behold, so white was the gleaming of the
weapons.


|| Then King Harald Sigurdson spake and said: 'Let us now take goodly &
wise counsel together, for it cannot be hidden that this forebodes
strife, and most like it is the King himself.' To which the Earl
answered: 'Our first course is to turn back and go our swiftest to the
ships that we may fetch folk and weapons, and thereafter offer what
resistance we can; or even might we also let the ships protect us and
then no power would the horsemen have over us.' Then said King Harald:
'Another counsel will I choose, namely to send three bold fellows on our
swiftest horses and let them ride hotly a'pace and impart to our men
what hath befallen; then will they the sooner come to our aid, and a
right sharp combat shall the Englishmen fight or ever we suffer defeat.'
The Earl answered and said that the King should decide in this matter as
in all else: 'no manner of desire had he either to flee.' Then caused
the King his banner 'Land-waster' to be borne aloft, and Fridrek was the
man hight who bore the banner.


|| After these things arrayed King Harald his host.

And he let the muster be long and not dense, and then after doing this
doubled he both the arms thereof backward so that they reached together
and made a wide ring thick and even on all sides without, shield by
shield, and the same within likewise; and the King's company was without
the ring and there too was his banner.

In another spot was Earl Tosti with his company, and another banner had
he, and the men to him were all picked men. Now the array was made in
this fashion because the King wist that the horsemenSec. were wont to ride
forward in a mass & thereupon fall back. Now said the King that his
company should advance whithersoever it were most needed, 'but our
archers shall also be with us, and those who stand farthest forward will
set their spear handles in the earth and point their spears at the
breasts of the riders if they should ride us down, and those who stand
in the next row will thrust their spears into the chests of the horses.'


|| It was with an exceeding vast host that King Harald Godwinson had come
thither, a host of both horse and foot-folk. Around his array rode King
Harald Sigurdson having a wary eye to see how it had been ranked, and he
bestrode a black piebald horse.

Now the horse fell under him but the King arose in haste & said:
'Falling when faring betokens fortune.' Then said Harald, the King of
the English, to those Norwegians who were with him: 'Knowest thou the
big man yonder who fell from his horse, the man with the blue kirtle and
the fair helme?' 'That is the King,' said they.

'A big man and of masterful appearance, yet belike his luck is over,'
answered the English King.


|| Twenty horsemen rode forward from the Thingmanna host before the
battle-array of the Norwegians; and they were wholly clad in chain-mail
and their horses like unto them. Then said one horseman: 'Is Earl Tosti
in the host?' to which was made answer: 'There is no hiding it, ye can
find him there.'

Then said the horseman: 'Harald, thy brother, sent thee a greeting, and
word therewith that thou shouldst have grace & the whole of
Northumberland; and rather than thou shouldst not go over to him will he
give thee a third share of the whole of his kingdom.' Then answered the
Earl: 'That is a very different message from the strife and scorn of the
winter: had it been offered then many a man would still be alive who is
now dead, & more firmly too would the kingdom stand in England. Now if I
should accept these terms, what would he offer King Harald Sigurdson for
his pains?' 'He hath said something of what he would grant him in
England, Seven feet of room or as much longer as he is taller than other
men,' made answer that rider. 'Fare thee now to King Harald and bid him
make ready for battle,' said the Earl, 'other shall be said among
Norwegians than that Earl Tosti quitteth King Harald Sigurdson for the
fellowship of his foemen when he hath to fight in England. Nay, let us
all rather be of one mind: to die with honour or to win England by
conquest.' Then did the horseman ride away, and King Harald Sigurdson
asked of the Earl, 'who was that long-tongued man, yonder?' 'That was
King Harald Godwinson,' said the Earl. 'Too long was this kept from us,'
said King Harald Sigurdson, 'they were come so nigh unto our host, that
nought would this Harald have known how to tell of the death of our
men.' 'True it is,' said the Earl, 'that such a chief went right
unwarily, and that it might have been as thou sayest; I saw that he
wished to offer me grace and much dominion, but that I should be his
slayer an I said who he was. Rather would I that he should be my slayer
than I his.' Then said King Harald Sigurdson: 'A little man was he, but
firm in his stirrups.'

It is said that King Harald chanted this verse:

  'Forward go we in folk array
  Without our mail
  Under blue blades;
  The helmets shine,
  No mail have I;
  On the ships yonder
  Our garb doth lie.'


|| Now the mail-shirt to Harald was hight 'Emma,' and it was so long that
it reached down even unto the midst of his foot, and so strong that no
weapon had ever lodged fast in it. Then said King Harald Sigurdson:
'That was ill wrought; I must make another, a better verse in its
place,' and then he chanted this:

  'Ne'er do we in battle
  Creep behind our shields,
  The clash of weapons fearing
  (E'en so the word-fast woman bade me).
  Of yore the necklet-wearer bade me
  Carry high my head in battle,
  Where sword and shield do meet.'

And Thiodolf likewise sang thus:

  'Never, if e'en the prince himself to earth should fall,
  (As God wills so goeth it)
  Will I flee from the heirs of the chief.
  The sun shines not better on these than these twain shine.
  Avengers of Harald are resourceful hawks full grown.'


|| And now they fall to battle, and the English ride onward toward the
Norwegians, but the resistance is stubborn, and because of the shots it
is not easy for the English to ride against the Norwegians, and so they
ride round about them in a ring. At first the battle is altogether even,
that is so long as the Norwegians hold their array, but the English
charge them & then if they have done no hurt ride aback, and when the
Norwegians see this, namely that the English seem to ride on them
without spirit, set they themselves upon them and would have pursued
them, but behold no sooner is the wall of shields broken than the
English ride towards them from all directions bringing spears and shots
to bear on them. And King Harald Sigurdson seeing this goeth forth into
the brunt of the battle, even there where the hardest struggle is taking
place, and many men falling from both hosts.

King Harald Sigurdson waxeth so fierce that he runneth forward right out
from the array, & heweth with both hands, & hath neither helme, nor
shield holden before him.

All those who are nighest to him draw aback, and far are the English
from fleeing. Thus saith Arnor Earl's-skald:

  'In battle swift the chief's heart ne'er did quake,
  And the strong King the greatest courage showed
      'mid the helmes' thunder,
  There, where in the hersirs' chief the hosts saw this,
  That by his bloody sword the men to death were wounded.'


|| Now it happened that King Harald Sigurdson was wounded by an arrow in
the throat, and this was his death-wound. He fell with the whole of that
company which was advancing with him, save those that drew back; and
these held stoutly to the banner.

Yet a conflict full as hard was foughten after Tosti the Earl had taken
his place under the King's banner. Then both the hosts fell to arraying
themselves for the second time, and an exceeding long truce was there in
the battle. Thereof sang Thiodolf:

  'Mishap hath fallen on us,
  (in peril is now the host);
  In vain hath Harald brought us
  This journey from the east.
  The chieftain shrewd's life-passage
  So hath ended that we now
  (the King bepraised his life lost)
  Row in peril of our lives.'


|| But ere the combatants again joined issue offered Harald Godwinson his
brother Tosti grace, and he likewise offered grace to the other men
surviving from the Norwegian host; but the Norwegians shouted out that
they would rather fall one above the other, than accept quarter from the
English. And thereon shouted they their war-cry, & then the battle began
for the second time.

Thus saith Arnor Earl's-skald:

  'In an hour of misfortune
  The King austere gat death;
  The arrows gold-inwoven
  Spared not the robbers' foe.
  Gentle and bounteous King--
  His friends choose all to fall
  Round their host-wonted chief
  Rather than quarter seek.'


|| Now it befell that Eystein Blackcock came up just at that moment from
the ships with his company, and they were in full armour, and Eystein
gat him hold of the King's banner 'Land-waster,' and for the third time
the men fell to battle; exceeding sharp was it and the English lost men
full heavily and were on the point of fleeing. That fray was called
'Blackcock's Brunt.' Eystein's men had hastened so furiously from the
ships that at first, or ever they were come to the combat, they were
weary and scarce fit for battle, but afterwards so raging were they that
they defended themselves as long as they could stand upright. At the
last cast they from off them their mail-shirts, and then was it easy for
the English to find a vulnerable spot on them; but some who were
unwounded yet died from their haste and fury.

Nearly all the great men among the Norwegians fell at that time.

This befell late in the day.

As was to be looked for not all men fared alike in fortune, many fled &
many who thus made their escape met differing fates. Mirk was it in the
evening ere the slaughtering was brought to an end.


|| Among those who escaped was Styrkar, the marshal of King Harald
Sigurdson, & this befell from his getting him a horse and thereon riding
away. Now a wind sprang up in the evening and the weather waxed somewhat
cold, and Styrkar had no other apparel than his shirt, a helme on his
head, and a naked sword in his hand.

And he waxed cold as his weariness wore off. Then a certain waincarle
came driving towards him, and this man had a lined coat. Styrkar said
unto him: 'Wilt thou sell thy jacket, peasant?' 'Not to thee,' quoth he,
'thou art a Norwegian, as I wist by thy tongue.'

'An I am a Norwegian what wilt thou do then?' said Styrkar. 'I would
slay thee; but alack I have no weapon to do it with,' the peasant
replied. 'If thou canst not slay me, peasant, I will make trial if I
cannot slay thee,' and therewith Styrkar swung his sword and brought it
down on the man's neck so that his head was cut off; and then took he
the fur coat and springing on to his horse rode down to the shore.


|| Now tidings were borne to the Rouen Earl, William the Bastard, of the
death of King Edward his kinsman, & furthermore was it told how Harald
Godwinson had been acclaimed as King of England and had been consecrated
thereto. Now William deemed he had a better right to that kingdom than
Harald, to wit by reason of the kinship betwixt him & King Edward, and
withal furthermore inasmuch as he deemed it but fair to avenge himself
on Harald for the slight of that broken betrothal with his own daughter.

For all these self-same reasons, then, assembled William an host
together in Normandy, and a multitude of men were mustered, with a
goodly sufficiency of ships. And on the day that he rode from the city
unto his ships, when he had mounted up on to his horse, his wife went to
him & would have spoken with him, but when he saw this he thrust at her
with his heel, setting his spur in her breast so that it penetrated deep
therein, and she fell and straightway died.Sec. But the Earl rode to his
ships and fared with his host over to England. At that time was his
brother Otta with him.

When the Earl came to England plundered he there, & brought the land
into subjection under him wheresoever he went.

Earl William was bigger and stronger than other men, a good horseman,
the greatest of warriors, and very cruel; a very wise man was he withal,
but accounted in no wise trustworthy.


|| King Harald Godwinson gave Olaf, the son of King Harald Sigurdson,
permission to fare his way, and in like fashion treated he those men of
the host who had been with the King and had not fallen. King Harald then
turned southward with his host, for he had learned that William Bastard
was faring northward through England, & was conquering the country.
There were with Harald Godwinson at that time his brethren Svein,Sec. Gyrd,
and Walthiof. King Harald and Earl William met in the south of England
at Hastings and a great battle befell there.

In it were slain King Harald and his brother Earl Gyrd, & a great part
of their host. Nineteen nights was it after the fall of King Harald
Sigurdson,Sec. Earl Walthiof, own brother to Harald, made good his escape
by flight, and at even fell in with a band of William's men; whereupon
Earl Walthiof set fire to the forest and burned them all up. Thus saith
Thorkel Skallson in Walthiof's lay:

  'An hundred King's own court-men
  The warrior had burned
  In hottest fire (to the men
  An eve of singeing was it).
  'Tis said that the men
  'Neath the wolf's claw must lie;
  Gray steed of the troll-quean
  Gave victuals to the swords.'


|| Thereon caused William himself to be proclaimed King of England, and
thereafter sent he to Earl Walthiof proffering him peace & appointing a
truce so that a meeting might take place betwixt them. The Earl fared to
it with but few men, and when he was come on the heath north of the
castle bridge two of the King's bailiffs advanced upon him with a band
of men, and when they had taken him they put him in chains; thereafter
he was beheaded.Sec. The English call him sainted. Thus saith Thorkel:

  ''Tis doubtless that manly Walthiof
  By William (he who from the south
  Across the chill main came)
  Is bewrayed in his trusting.
  Sooth is that long 'twill be
  Ere ends the slaying of men
  In England (swift was my master.
  No prince like him doth live).'


|| Afterwards lived William as King of England for one and twenty
winters, and ever since have his descendants ruled as Kings of England.


|| Now Olaf the son to King Harald Sigurdson took his men and fared away
from England, sailing forth from Ravenseer whence they came in autumn to
the Orkneys, & there learned they the tidings that Maria the daughter of
King Harald Sigurdson had died of a sudden death on the self-same day
and in that same hour as her father King Harald had perished. Olaf
tarried in the Orkneys the winter through but the summer thereafter
fared he east to Norway, and was made King there together with his
brother Magnus.

Queen Ellisif journeyed eastward with her step-son Olaf and her daughter
Ingigerd.

Skuli also, he who was afterwards called King's-fosterer, & his brother
Ketil Crook, likewise fared overseas with Olaf. The twain of them were
doughty men, and noble in England, and both were very sage and
well-beloved by the King. Ketil Crook fared northward to Halogaland and
King Olaf gat him a good marriage, and from him are descended many great
men. Skuli, King's-fosterer, was a wise and strong man, very fair to
behold; he became captain of King Olaf's body-guard, lent his counsel at
the Things, and ruled with the King in all governances of the land. King
Olaf desired to give Skuli a province in Norway, whichever he was minded
to have, with all the incomes and dues that the King held disposition
over, but Skuli thanked him for this offer and said that he would liefer
ask for other things because should there be a change of kings perchance
the gift would be taken back: 'I will,' said he, 'accept certain domains
which lie nigh to the towns, where ye, Sire, are wont to be, and where
the Yule feasts are held.' So King Olaf gave him his word thereon, and
made over to him lands in the east at Konungahella, and at Oslo, at
Tunsberg, at Borg, at Bergen, and in the north at Nidaros. They were
nigh upon the best estates at each place, and they have ever since been
the possessions of men of the lineage of Skuli.

King Olaf married Skuli to his kinswoman Gudrun Nefsteinsdotir, whose
mother was Ingirid the daughter of King Sigurd Sow and his wife Asta.
Asta was own sister of King Olaf the Saint & of King Harald. The son of
Skuli and Gudrun was Asolf of Reini who was wedded to Thora the daughter
of Skopti Ogmundson. The son of Asolf and Thora was Guthorm of Reini,
the father of Bard, the father of King Ingi and Duke Skuli.


|| On a winter after the fall of King Harald was his body transported
from England to Nidaros and interred there in the Church of St. Mary,
that selfsame church the which he himself had caused to be builded.

It was allowed by all that King Harald had exceeded other men in wisdom
& resourcefulness, both when he had been fain to act swiftly or had
debated long, either for himself or others. The most valiant of all men
was he, and victorious withal, even as hath been set forth this while:

  'The waster of Zealand's dwellers
  In boldness ne'er was lacking;
  Mind ruleth half of victory,
  And soothly Harald proveth it.'


|| King Harald was stately and goodly to behold, fair hair and a fair
beard had he, and a long moustache; of his eyebrows the one was somewhat
higher than the other, & he had large hands and feet, but either
shapely. Five ells was he in stature. Towards his foes was he cruel, and
when withstood revengeful. Thus saith Thiodolf:

  'Sage Harald doth arrogance
  In his thanes chastise;
  Methinks the King's men bear
  But that which they mete out.
  Such burdens bear they
  As for themselves they care to have
  (The law is used for each against the other);
  Thus doth Harald change revenge.'


|| King Harald vastly loved power & all worldly advantages, but towards
his friends, even to those whom he liked well, was he very bountiful.
Thiodolf telleth us as followeth:

  'Of ships'-battle the awakener
  For my work a mark bestowed;
  To praise vouchsafeth he
  Each one who proveth him thereof worthy.'


|| King Harald was fifty years of age when he fell. We have no tales of
count regarding his up-growing, or ever he was fifteen winters old and
was at Stiklastad, in the battle, with his brother King Olaf. Thereafter
lived he for five and thirty years, and during all that time had ever
turmoil and strife. King Harald never fled from any battle, but
oft-times sought he expedients when the odds of war were against him.

All men who followed him in battle or warfare avowed that when he found
himself hard pressed or was obliged to make a swift resolution, he chose
that course which afterwards all men saw to be the likeliest to avail.


|| Halldor, the son of Bryniolf the Camel, hight likewise the Old, was a
wise man and a great lord, and thus spake he when he heard the
conversation of men in respect to the very different natures of King
Olaf the Saint and his brother King Harald.

'I was with both brothers,' said he, 'and high in favour, and I wotted
the natures of both: never did I find two men so alike at heart. Both
were very wise and valiant men, loving possessions and power, masterful,
not lowly-hearted, overbearing, haughty, and quick to chastise. King
Olaf constrained the people of the land to Christianity and the true
Faith, but punished harshly those who turned a deaf ear to his commands.

The chiefs of the land who would not suffer his even-handed dispensation
of justice rose up against him and slew him in his own land, and it is
for that reason he is called saintly.

But King Harald harried for renown and dominion, bringing under his yoke
all people that he could bring under it, and he fell in the land of
other kings.

Both these brothers in normal life were men of religion and had regard
for their honour; they were likewise travelled & vigorous in mind, & it
is from such-like qualities that they waxed so far-famed.'


|| King Magnus Haraldson ruled Norway the first winter after the fall of
King Harald, but thereafter ruled he the land for two winters together
with his brother King Olaf, and there were then two kings together,
Magnus having dominion in the northern half of the land & Olaf in the
eastern half. King Magnus had a son who was hight Hakon & his
foster-father was Steig-Thorir; a youth of promise was he.


|| After the death of King Harald Sigurdson, Svein, the Danish King, gave
out that peace was at an end betwixt Norwegians and Danes, for the pact
was made to endure only as long as both kings lived. So then were men
mustered in both realms; King Harald's sons called out a general-host
and ships from Norway, and King Svein fared northward with the host of
the Danes.

And so it was that messengers were thereafter despatched betwixt the
kings with offers of peace, and the Norwegians said that they would
either keep to the covenant which had been made aforetime or fight. For
that reason the following verse was sung:

  'With threats and words of peace
  Olaf his land defended,
  So that no one from the King
  Durst claim a right thereto.'

And thus saith Stein Herdason in the lay of Olaf:

  'His heritage 'gainst Svein
  The warlike King defended
  In that merchant town where resteth
  (Great is he) the saintly King.'


|| But a compact was come to betwixt the kings at the time of this
mustering, & peace ensued in the lands. King Magnus was afterwards
stricken with a sickness, the rift-worm sickness, and when he had lain
abed for some time died he at Nidaros, and there was buried. He was a
King right well-beloved of all the people.




NOTES


These notes, with few exceptions, are taken from Professor Gustav
Storm's Norwegian version of the Heimskringla, from which this
translation of the Saga of Olaf Tryggvason and of Harald Hardrad
(Harald the Tyrant) is made.

    ETHEL H. HEARN.

  [Transcriber's Note:

  For this e-text, the word or phrase referenced in the note is shown
  in {braces} before the page-and-line citation. Moved markers are
  individually noted.

  "Translator" refers to the English translation (the present text).]


{King Valdamar} Page 12, line 11. Vladimir the Great of Russia
(980-1015) became Grand Duke of Novgorod in 970.
  [Marker printed after "high favour" on following page.]

{'hersir'} Page 19, line 25. The head of a 'her,' _i.e._, a hundred
families. The territory inhabited by them was called a 'herath.' The
'hersir' seems to have combined the offices of commander in time of war,
and religious head of his tribe. --Translator.

{the Fjords} _Ibid._ Nordfiord and Soendfiord.

{war-fine} Page 20, line 1. Those who absented themselves when the ships
were called out for war, or who came to a wrong place of meeting, or at
a wrong time, were compelled to pay a war-fine.

{Vingulmark} Page 28, line 31. This is not in accord with page 22,
line 2, in which Vingulmark is mentioned as being given to Harald the
Grenlander. Perhaps the error is on the page aforesaid, as on page 53,
line 30, Harald is described as King of Vestfold only.

{Vindland (Wendland)} Page 30, line 14. The present North Germany, from
eastern Holstein to eastern Prussia.
  [Marker printed after "good havens" on next line.]

{Burizlaf} Page 30, line 17. _I.e._, Boleslaw. By 'Burislav,' as
mentioned here, must not be understood Boleslaw I of Poland (992-1025),
but his father Miesco or Mieczyslaw (964-992).

{Emperor Otta} Page 31, line 12. The Emperor Otta is the Emperor Otho II
(973-983). His march on Denmark did not take place in 988 as Snorri
calculates, but late in the autumn of 974. Nor was the Emperor's object
the conversion of King Harald, for the latter had accepted Christianity
about 960-- but to bring Denmark under his own vassalage.

{Danavirki} Page 31, line 18. The Danavirki, or Danish wall, began in
the east at the head of the Slefjord, and extended to the west only as
far as the Traeaa, the tributary river of the isthmus, and not to the
sea.
  [Marker printed after "his call" earlier in sentence.]

{likewise King Burizlaf} Page 32, line 24. It is not historical that
Burislaw (or Miesco) accompanied the Emperor to the Danish wall; nor was
Olaf Tryggvason, who was not full grown in 974, with him.

{saintly bishop} Page 33, line 33. As early as 968 Vidkund of Corvey, in
his chronicle of that year, mentions Poppo's miracle and its effect in
causing Harald to embrace Christianity. The incident must be ascribed to
about the year 906.

{other learned men} Page 34, line 12. 'Learned men' means men trained in
the learning of the Church, that is to say, belonging to the priesthood.

{Gat answer Fret} Page 35, line 3. 'Go to Fret' (?) means to consult the
gods by means of the so-called 'blotspaan,' or sacrificial shavings.
These, and pieces of wood (perhaps inscribed with runes) were disposed
in a particular manner, for the purpose of gaining information from the
gods as to the future.

{Gyda} Page 39, line 6. Gyda was the daughter of Olaf Kvaran, and not
his sister. Olaf Kvaran died an old man in 980.
  [Correct line reference is 7.]

{holmgangsman} Page 40, line 3. 'Holmgang' so called in Norway because
the two combatants retired alone to a holm or uninhabited islet to
fight. --Translator.

{across the isthmus} Page 48, line 1. Mandseidet in Stadland.

{Vissavald} Page 55, line 15. The Russian name Wsevolod.

{King Olaf Kvaran} Page 57, line 22. According to English sources Olaf
was lying with his fleet off Southampton during the winter of 994-995.
He received instruction there in Christianity from English bishops, and
was confirmed in the spring of 995, on which occasion King Ethelred was
his sponsor. He returned home to his country early in the summer.

{Rimul} Page 59, line 28. Rimul now the farm of Romol (Guldalen) on the
west side of the Gula river, opposite Melhus.

{Urgutherjot and Brimiskiar, Page 66 bottom.}
  _Note missing._

{eastward as far as Lidandisnes} Page 72, line 6. The 'Sogn-sea' formed
the boundary between Sogn and Hordaland so that the territory given to
Erling was Hordaland, Rogaland, and the western part of Agder, as far as
the Naze.

{Sigurd Sow} Page 74, line 4. So-called because he 'rooted in the soil,'
_i.e._, practised agriculture.

{Olaf her son} Page 74, line 11. This is not historical. Olaf the Saint
was not christened until he was full grown. According to the oldest
sources he was baptized in Rouen by Archbishop Robert, the brother of
Duke Richard.

{Easter Eve} Page 76, line 21. April 16, 998.

{never should Odin beguile them} Page 78, line 20. Olaf, like all
Christians at that time, thought Odin to be an evil spirit.

{war-arrow} Page 78, line 27. A war-arrow was furnished with a cord or
twist of withy at one end, and was intended to summon all men armed to a
Thing.

{Scipa-Krok} Page 82, line 8. 'Ship-corner,' a little creek of the river
Nid, at the end of the present Strand Gade in Trondhjem.

{the Skeggi barrow at Austratt} Page 82, line 13. This barrow,
Skjeggehaugen, existed at the beginning of the nineteenth century;
it was situated to the south of the farm of 'Oestraat' (Austrat).

{aft with a crook} Page 91, line 33. _Svirar_: what these were is not
known; they must have been at the stern of the ship.

{Michaelmas} Page 93, line 16. September 29, 999.

{white weeds} Page 94, line 3. _I.e._, in christening raiment, which was
worn for a week after baptism.

{Aldeigiaborg} Page 100, line 31. The town of Ladoga; it was situated at
that time on the river Volkhov which debouches into the lake of Ladoga.

{Adalsysla & Eysysla} Page 101, line 8. The island of Oesel was named in
Old-Norse Ey-Sysla (island district) and the mainland opposite
Adal-Sysla (chief district), and the whole of Estland (or Esthonia)
together Sysla.

{Queen Gunnhild fell sick and died} Page 101, line 32. This is
incorrect. Gunnhild was put away by King Svein and sent home to
Wendland; after the death of Svein in 1014 her sons had her brought back
to Denmark.

{Vineland the Good} Page 107, line 29. North America, probably Nova
Scotia.

{skeid} Page 108, line 7. A particular kind of long-ship without a
'head' at the prow.

{Svold} Page 110, line 7. Svold is not an island as Snorri thought, but
a haven or creek in the mouth of a river somewhat west of Ruegen.

{Finnish} Page 118, line 1. _I.e._, Lappish. --Translator.

{the burner of the Bulgars} Page 126, line 10. Harald Hardrad, or Harald
the Tyrant was in the service of the Greek Emperor in the year 1041, and
took part in the pillaging of the rebellious Bulgarians. The account of
this was not known to Snorri who lived so much later, but Thiodolf had
heard of it.

{Laesirs} Page 127, line 23. An unknown people, perhaps 'Lechers,'
_i.e._, Poles.

{Gyrgir} Page 128, line 10. Georgios Maniakes, the brave commander of
the Greeks in the valley of the Euphrates 1033-1035, and in Sicily in
1038-1040.

{Vaerings} Page 128, line 13. Mercenaries, chiefly the northern
inhabitants of Russia and of Greece.

{Serkland} Page 130, line 26. Snorri here confuses 'Serkland' in Asia
with Africa. Harald was taking part in the wars in Syria and Armenia in
the years 1035-1037, before going in 1038 with the Greek army to Sicily.

{The son of Budli, as 'twas said / Showed friendship by his fellowship}
Page 131, lines 8 and 9. These two lines refer to Atli the King of the
Huns, who according to the legend invited his brothers-in-law (Gunnar
and Hogn) to a feast in order to betray them.

{all the days of his life} Page 135, line 7. Snorri Sturlason was
descended from Halldor in the fifth degree.

{Jorsalaheim (Palestine)} Page 136, line 24. The Greek Emperor concluded
a peace with the Calif of Egypt in 1036 which enabled the Emperor to
build churches near the Holy Sepulchre. Craftsmen were despatched
thither for this purpose by the Emperor, and among the troops sent to
protect them was Harald Hardrad, or Harald the Tyrant.

{the daughter of the brother to Queen Zoe} Page 138, line 1. Zoe never
had a brother, so the relationship, at all events, is inaccurate.

{that chapel has stood there unto this very day} Page 138, line 18.
No such chapel has ever been known to exist in Constantinople.

{this deed} Page 139, line 15. It is a fact that Harald was one of those
who blinded the 'Greek King' Michael Kalafates. The latter was accepted
as the son of Zoe and became Emperor together with her in 1041. After
deposing her (April 21, 1042) he was himself deposed, and was blinded in
the street by his body-guard, in which Harald was serving as
'spatharokandidat' (colonel). Michael is in this case confused with his
successor Constantine.

{Siavidarsund} Page 139, line 19. Siavidarsund (_i.e._, 'the sound with
the sea-wood') is the present Golden Horn; the heavy iron chain, which
was stretched across its extremity, in times of dispute rested on wooden
floats.

{Ellipalta} Page 140, line 3. The mouth of the Dnieper in the Black Sea.

{East-realm} Page 140, line 4. East-realm, _i.e._, Russia, or its
eastern provinces.

{three occasions} Page 140, line 21. If this is correct Harald must have
gone to Constantinople before 1034, as there was a change of monarch in
1034, 1041, and 1042.

{Sudatorp} Page 143, line 13. In south Jutland, west of Aabenraa. Magnus
died in Zealand. His successor Svein (who was also named Magnus) died at
Sudatorp.

{brother} Page 143, line 14. _I.e._, half-brother (Alfhild's son, not
Olaf's).

{Budli's ways} Page 148, line 10. Budli's, or the sea-king's way-- the
sea.

{Harald's soul in Heaven} Page 148, line 28. This line with line 23 on
page 137 and one omitted from the foregoing verse form together a kind
of refrain which runs as follows: "May it dwell where it listeth-- In
Christ's eternal House-- Harald's soul in Heaven."

{Peter Burden-Swain} Page 152, line 33. So named because upon a certain
occasion he carried King Sigurd Slembe at a Thing.

{the church of Saint Olaf} Page 153, line 7. Ruins of the church of
Saint Olaf are to be found under the present Town Hall on the northern
side of Kongens Gade, in Trondhjem.

{relics of King Olaf} Page 153, line 20. They were moved thither from
St. Clement's church.
  [Marker printed at end of sentence.]

{church of Saint Gregory} Page 153, line 23. This church was west of the
church of Saint Olaf, on the north side of the present Kongens Gade,
where the Savings Bank now stands.

{eight or nine long-ships, and nigh upon five hundred men} Page 155,
line 13. That is to say, 600.

{the King's-House down by the river} Page 156, line 10. 'The
King's-House down by the river' was the new King's-House which Harald
had built east of the church of Saint Mary.

{Guthorm Gunhildson} Page 158, line 11. The son of Ketil Calf and
Gunnhild (mentioned on page 154).

{said to be nephew} Page 162, line 32. Asmund's father was Biorn Ulfson,
the brother of Harald (died 1049).

{King Margad} Page 166, line 35. Margad (in Irish Eachmargach)
Rognvaldson was the King of Dublin in 1035-1038 and 1046-1052.

{St. Olafmas} Page 167, line 26. July 28, 1052.

{there} Page 168, line 11. _I.e._ in the Cathedral.

{Oslo} Page 170, line 20. On the site of part of the present city of
Christiania.

{bussa-ship} Page 171, line 34. A '_Bussa_' was a particular kind of
large ship, broad in the beam, especially a war-ship.

{......} Page 172, line 2. _Svirar_, see note on page 91, line 33.

{one hundred and fifty} Page 174, line 8. That is to say, 180.

{three hundred} Page 174, line 13. 360 ships.

{Leidra} Page 176, line 1. Later Leire, near Roskilde in Zealand.

{Vandrad} Page 178, line 21. _I.e._, one who is in distress.

{two hundred men} Page 182, line 34. That is to say, 240.

{Queen Gyda} Page 190, line 29. Her name was Eadgitha; Gyda was her
mother's name. The sons of Earl Godwin were Harald, Tosti, Svein (died
1052), and Gyrd. Harald was the _eldest_ son. Morcar, or Morkere, and
Walthiof were not Earl Godwin's sons; Morcar was the son of AElfrik of
Mercia, and from 1065 was Earl of Northumberland; Walthiof was the son
of the Danish Earl Siward of Northumberland (died 1055).

{driven out to sea} Page 191, line 6. At Ponthieu, where the Count took
him prisoner. William released him and had him brought to Rouen. It is
not historical that Harald held undue intercourse with William's wife.
William made use of Harald's compulsory sojourn to make him swear
allegiance to him, and affiance him to his daughter.

{St. Paul's Church} Page 192, line 11. Unhistorical. The church referred
to is St. Paul's in London, but Edward died and was buried at
Winchester, where Harald was likewise crowned.

{to guard the treasure of the King} Page 192, line 18. This is
unhistorical. Tosti had been Earl of Northumberland since 1055, but was
driven away by the Northumbrians in October 1065 and fled to Flanders,
so that he was not in England at the time of Edward's death. Harald was
Earl of Wessex and the most powerful man in the land.

{the 13th day} Page 192, line 28. _I.e._, the thirteenth day of
Christmas, January 6.

{more than other earls} Page 193, line 11. Not historical, see page 192,
line 18.

{Thingmanna-host} Page 195, line 20. The name of King Canute's Danish
guard, instituted 1018.

{Solundir} Page 196, line 3. The Sulen Islands outside Sognefjord.

{two hundred} Page 196, line 16. That is to say, 240.

{Earl Morcar} Page 199, line 20. Unhistorical. Morkere, or Morcar,
escaped later and joined Harald the son of (Earl) Godwin.

{Olaf the Mighty is} Page 199, line 27. Part of the refrain which runs
as follows: 'Olaf the Mighty is-- the very greatest chief-- born under
the sun.'

{the Wednesday} Page 200, line 9. September 20 (1066).

{Stanford Bridge} Page 200, line 21. Now Stamford Bridge across the
Derwent. Snorri thought that Stamford was situated nearer York than it
really is.

{the Sunday} Page 200, line 27. September 24.

{a Thing in the city} Page 201, line 2. This is incorrect. The Thing was
to be held at Stamford Bridge and Harald was to be given there hostages
from the whole of Yorkshire. It was for this reason that the battle
occurred there.

{the Monday} Page 201, line 11. September 25 (1066).

{the horsemen} Page 202, line 32. Legends referring to the battle of
Hastings (October 14, 1066) are incorporated in this and the following
narrative. It was the Norwegians who fought on horseback, and who used
the expedient of pretended flight against the English, and not the
reverse: the latter had no horse.

{she fell and straightway died} Page 208, line 19. Quite unhistorical.

{Svein} Page 208, line 34. Svein was killed in 1052.

{the fall of King Harald Sigurdson} Page 209, line 4. October 14, 1066.

{thereafter he was beheaded} Page 209, line 24. Walthiof submitted to
William immediately after the battle, and became in 1070 Earl of
Northumberland. In 1074 he took part in a plot against William and,
although he made a timely confession of it, was beheaded outside
Winchester in 1075.
  [Marker printed after following sentence.]

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errors and Anomalies

  "whithersoever"
    _occasionally printed "withersoever"_

  ye relics of King Olaf
    _text unchanged_
  no power would the horsemen have over us
    _text reads "Norsemen"_

  Hyphenated Words:
  To the war-gathering on the longships
    _hyphen missing in original; normal form is "long-ships"_
  When the fore-castle men on the 'Serpent' saw this
  leap over-board each on his own side
    _hyphens in original; normal forms are "forecastle" and "overboard"_

  Punctuation:
  Thorstein the White of Oprostad,
    _text has period (full stop) for comma_
  After the death of King Harald Sigurdson,
    _text has hyphen for comma_
  and choose them tent-places.'
    _close quote missing_






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sagas of Olaf Tryggvason and of
Harald The Tyrant (Harald Haardraade), by Snorri Sturluson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SAGAS OF OLAF TRYGGVASON ***

***** This file should be named 22093.txt or 22093.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/0/9/22093/

Produced by Louise Hope, Charlene Taylor, Ted Garvin and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
