The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seventh Day Sabbath, a Perpetual Sign,
from the Beginning to the Entering into the Gates of the Holy City, According to the Commandment, by Joseph Bates

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Seventh Day Sabbath, a Perpetual Sign, from the Beginning to the Entering into the Gates of the Holy City, According to the Commandment

Author: Joseph Bates

Release Date: July 18, 2007 [EBook #22098]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEVENTH DAY SABBATH ***




Produced by Cally Soukup, Heiko Evermann, Lisa Reigel, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









THE
SEVENTH DAY SABBATH,

A
PERPETUAL SIGN,

FROM THE BEGINNING TO THE ENTERING INTO THE
GATES OF THE HOLY CITY,

ACCORDING TO THE COMMANDMENT.


BY JOSEPH BATES:


     "Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old
     commandment which ye had from the _beginning_. The old
     commandment is the WORD which ye have heard from the
     _beginning_." _John_ ii: 7.

     "In the _beginning_ God created the heaven and the earth."
     Gen. i: 1. "And God blessed the seventh day, and rested from
     all his work." ii: 3.

     "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have
     right to the tree of life and enter in," &c. _Rev._ xxii: 14.


NEW-BEDFORD
PRESS OF BENJAMIN LINDSEY
1846.




[1]PREFACE.

TO THE LITTLE FLOCK.


"Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy." "Six days work may be done,
but the _seventh_ is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt
not do any work." This commandment I conceive to be as binding now as it
ever was, and will be to the entering into the "gates of the city." Rev.
xxii: 14.

I understand that the _seventh_ day Sabbath is not the _least_ one,
among the ALL things that are to be restored before the second advent of
Jesus Christ, seeing that the Imperial and Papal power of Rome, since
the days of the Apostles, have changed the seventh day Sabbath to the
first day of the week!

Twenty days before God re-enacted and wrote the commandments with his
finger on tables of stone, he required his people to keep the Sabbath.
Exo. xvi: 27, 30. Here he calls the Sabbath "_my commandments and my
laws_." Now the SAVIOR has given his comments on the commandments. See
Matt. xxii: 35, 40. "On these two (precepts) hang ALL the law and the
prophets." Then it would be impossible for the Sabbath to be left out. A
question was asked, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? Says Jesus,
"If thou wilt enter into life keep the commandments"--xix. Here he
quotes five from the tables of stone. If he did not mean all the rest,
then he deceived the lawyer in the two first precepts, love to God and
love to man. See also Matt. v: 17, 19, 21, 27, 33. PAUL comments thus.
"The law is holy, and the commandments holy, just and good."
"Circumcision and uncircumcision is nothing but the keeping the
commandments of God." "All the law is fulfilled in one word: thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself." JOHN says, "the old commandment is the
WORD from the beginning."--2, 7. Gen. ii: 3. "He carries us from thence
into the gates of the city." Rev. xxii: 14. Here he has particular
reference to the Sabbath. JAMES calls it the _perfect_, royal law of
liberty, which we are to be doers of, and be judged by. Take out the
fourth commandment and the law is imperfect, and we shall fail in one
point.

The uncompromising advocate for present truth, which feeds and nourishes
the little flock in whatever country or place, is the restorer of all
things; one man like John the Baptist, cannot discharge this duty to
every kindred, nation, tongue and people, and still remain in one place.
The truth is what we want.

  _Fairhaven_, August 1846.                    JOSEPH BATES.




[3]THE SABBATH.


FIRST QUESTION IS, WHEN WAS THE SABBATH INSTITUTED?

Those who are in the habit of reading the Scriptures just as they find
them, and of understanding them according to the established rules of
interpretation, will never be at a loss to understand so plain a passage
as the following: "And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it;
because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and
made." Gen. ii: 3. Moses, when referring to it, says to the children of
Israel, "This is that which the Lord hath _said_, to-morrow is the REST
of _the_ holy Sabbath unto the Lord." Exod. xvi: 23.

Then we understand that God established the seventh day Sabbath in
Paradise, on the very day when he rested from all his work, and not one
week, nor one year, nor two thousand five hundred and fourteen years
afterwards, as some would have it. Is it not plain that the Sabbath was
instituted to commemorate the stupendous work of creation, and designed
by God to be celebrated by his worshipers as a weekly Sabbath, in the
same manner as the Israelites were commanded to celebrate the Passover,
from the very night of their deliverance till the resurrection of Jesus
from the dead; or as we, as a nation, annually celebrate our national
independence; or as type answers to antetype, so we believe this must
run down, to the "keeping of the Sabbath to the people of God" in the
immortal state.

It is argued by some, that because no mention is made of the Sabbath
from its institution in Paradise till the falling of the manna in the
wilderness, mentioned in Exo. xvi: 15, that it was therefore _here_
instituted for the Jews, but [4]we think there is bible argument
sufficient to sustain the reply of Jesus to the Pharisees, "that the
Sabbath was made for MAN and not man for the Sabbath." If it was made
for any one exclusively it must have been for Adam, the father of us
all, two thousand years before Abraham (who is claimed as the father of
the Jews) was born. John says, the old commandment was from the
beginning--1: ii: 7.

There is pretty strong inference that the antideluvians measured time by
weeks from the account given by Noah, when the waters of the deluge
began to subside. He "sent out a dove which soon returned." At the end
of _seven_ days he sent her out again; and at the end of _seven_ days
more, he sent her out a third time. Now why this preference for the
number _seven_? why not five or ten days, or any other number? Can it be
supposed that his fixing on upon _seven_ was accidental? How much more
natural to conclude that it was in obedience to the authority of God, as
expressed in the 2d chap. of Gen. A similar division of time is
incidentally mentioned in Gen. xxix:--"fulfill her _week_ and we will
give thee this also; and Jacob did so and fulfilled her _week_." Now the
word _week_ is every where used in Scripture as we use it; it never
means more nor less than _seven_ days (except as symbols of years) and
one of them was in all other cases the Sabbath. But now suppose there
had been an entire silence on the subject of the Sabbath for this
twenty-five hundred years, would that be sufficient evidence that there
was none. If so, we have the same evidence that there was no Sabbath
from the reign of Joshua till the reign of David, four hundred and six
years, as no mention is made of it in the history of that period. But
who can be persuaded that Samuel and the pious Judges of Israel did not
regard the Sabbath. What does God say of Abraham? that he "obeyed my
voice, and kept my charge, my _commandments_, my _statutes_ and my
_laws_." (See what he calls them in Exo. xvi: 27, 30.) This, of course,
includes the whole. Then Abraham reverenced God's Sabbath. Once more,
there is no mention of the circumcision from the days of Joshua till the
days of Jeremiah, a period of more than eight hundred years. Will it be
believed that Samuel and David, and all those pious worthies with the
whole Jewish nation, neglected that essential seal of the covenant for
eight hundred years? It cannot be admitted for a moment. How [5]then
can any one suppose from the alleged silence of the sacred history that
Adam, Enoch, Noah and Abraham, kept no Sabbath, because the fact was not
stated? If we turn to Jer. ix: 25, 26, we find that they had not
neglected this right of circumcision, only they had not circumcised
their hearts; so that the proof is clear, that silence respecting the
keeping any positive command of God, is no evidence that it is not in
full force.

Again, if the Sabbath was not instituted in Paradise, why did Moses
mention it in connection with the creation of the world? Why not reserve
this fact for two or three thousand years in his history, until the
manna fell in the wilderness, (see Exo. xvi: 23) and then state that the
seventh day Sabbath commenced, as _some_ will have it? I answer, for the
very best of reasons, that it did not commence there. Let us examine the
text. "And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as
much bread as on any preceding day, and _all the rulers of the
congregation came and told Moses_. And he said unto them this is that
which the Lord hath said, _to-morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath_,
bake that which ye will bake, &c. &c." If this had been the establishing
of the holy Sabbath and Moses had said to-morrow _shall be_ the Sabbath,
then would it have been clear; but no, he speaks as familiarly about it
as we do when we say that to-morrow is the Sabbath, showing conclusively
that it was known before, or how could the people have known that they
must gather two day's manna on Friday the sixth day, unless they had had
some previous knowledge of the Sabbath? for Moses had already taught
them not to "leave any of it until the morning"--v. 19. The 20th verse
shows that the Sabbath had not yet come since their receiving the manna,
because it spoiled and "bred worms by the next morning;" whereas, on the
Sabbath morning it was found sweet and eatible--24th v. This was the
thirtieth day after leaving Egypt (1st v.) and twenty days before it was
given on Sinai. The weekly Sabbath then was appointed before this or
before the days of Moses. Where was it then? Answer, in the second
chapter of Genesis and no where else; and the same week on which the
manna fell, the weekly Sabbath was revived among or with God's chosen
people. Grotius tells us "that the memory of the creation's being
performed in seven days, was preserved not only among the Greeks and
Italians, but among the Celts and Indians." Other [6]writers say
Assyrians, Egyptians, Arabians, Britons and Germans, all of whom divide
their time into weeks. Philo says "the Sabbath is not peculiar to any
one people or country, but is common to all the world." Josephus states
"that there is no city either of Greeks or barbarians or any _other
nation_, where the religion of the Sabbath is not known." But as they,
like the great mass of God's professed people in christendom, paid
little or no heed to what God had said about the particular day, (except
the Jews, and a few others) they (as we are informed in history) adopted
peculiar days to suit themselves, viz: the christian nations chose to
obey the Pope of Rome, who changed the _seventh_ day Sabbath to the
first day, and call it the holy Sabbath; the Persians selected Monday;
the Grecians Tuesday; the Assyrians Wednesday; the Egyptians Thursday;
the Turks Friday, and the Jews the seventh day, Saturday, as God had
commanded. Three standing miracles a week, for about forty years
annually, ought to perpetuate the Sabbath. 1st, double the quantity of
manna on the sixth day; 2d, none on the seventh; 3d, did not spoil on
the seventh day. If it does not matter which day you keep holy to the
Lord, then all these nations are right. Now reflect one moment on this,
and then open your bible and read the commandment of the God of all
these nations! "REMEMBER! (what you have been taught before) _the
Sabbath day to keep it holy_;" (which day is it Lord?) "_the_ SEVENTH
_is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work,
thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man servant nor thy maid
servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger, that is within thy gates_."
Who is the stranger? (Gentiles.) Now the reason for it will carry us
back again to Paradise. "_For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested on the_ SEVENTH;
_wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it_."
"Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the
_Sabbath_ throughout their generations for a _perpetual covenant_; it is
a SIGN between me and the children of Israel _forever_." (Why is it
Lord?) "_For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the_
SEVENTH _day he rested and was refreshed_." Exo. xx and xxxi. Which day
now will you choose? O, says the reader, the seventh if I knew which of
the days it was. If you don't know, why are you so sure that the _first_
day is right? O, [7]because the history of the world has settled that,
and this is the most we can know. Very well then, does not the _seventh_
come the day before the eighth? If we have not got the days of the week
right now, it is not likely that we ever shall. God does not require of
us any more than what we know; by that we shall be judged. Luke xxiii:
55, 56.

Once more: think you that the spirit of God ever directed Moses when he
was giving the history of the creation of the world, to write that he
(God) "blessed the _seventh_ day and sanctified it, because that in it
he had rested from all his work," unless he meant it to be dated from
that very day? Why, this is as clear to the unbiassed mind as it is that
God created man the sixth day. Would it not be the height of absurdity
to attempt to prove that God only intended Adam should be created at
some future period, or that the creation of the heavens and earth was
not in the beginning, but some twenty-five hundred years afterward? All
this would be as cogent reasoning as it would be to argue that God did
not intend this day of _rest_ should commence until about twenty-five
hundred years afterwards. (The word Sabbath signifies rest.)

It follows then irresistibly, that the weekly Sabbath was not made for
the Jews only, (but as Jesus says, for 'man') for the Jews had no
existence until more than two thousand years after it was established.
President Humphrey in his essays on the Sabbath says, "That he (God)
instituted it when he rested from all his work, on the _seventh_ day of
the first week, and gave it primarily to our first parents, and through
them to all their posterity; that the observance of it was enjoined upon
the children of Israel soon after they left Egypt, not in the form of a
new enactment, but as an ancient institution which was far from being
forgotten, though it had doubtless been greatly neglected under the
cruel domination of their heathen masters; that it was reenacted with
great pomp and solemnity, and written in stone by the finger of God at
Sinai; that the sacred institution then took the form of a statute, with
explicit prohibitions and requirements, and has never been repealed or
altered since; that it can never expire of itself, because it has no
limitation."

In Deut. vii: 6-8, God gives his reasons for selecting the Jews to keep
his covenant in preference to any other nation; only seventy at
first--x: 22. God calls it his [8]"Sabbath," and refers us right back
to the creation for proof. "For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth and sea, and all that in them is, and rested on the _seventh_,"
&c. Here then we stand fixed by the immutable law of God, and the word
of Jesus, that "the Sabbath was made for man!" Paul says, "there is no
respect of persons with God." Rom. ii: 11. Isaiah shows us plainly that
the Jew is not the only one to be blessed for keeping the Sabbath. He
says "Blessed is the _man_ (are not the Gentiles men) that keepeth the
Sabbath from polluting it." "Also the sons of the stranger, (who are
these if they are not Gentiles?) every one that keepeth the Sabbath from
polluting it, (does he mean me? yes, every Gentile in the universe, or
else he respects persons) even them will I bring to my holy mountain and
make them joyful in my house of prayer; for my house shall be called an
house of prayer for _all_ people." Isa. lvi: 2, 6, 7. If this promise is
not to the Gentile as well as the Jew, then "_the_ house of prayer for
all people" is no promise to the Gentile.

Now we ask, if God has ever abrogated the law of the Sabbath? If he has
it can easily be found. We undertake to say without fear of
contradiction, he has not made any such record in the bible; but to the
contrary, he calls it a perpetual covenant, a "sign between me and the
children of Israel forever," for the reason that he rested on the
seventh day. Exo. xxxi: 16, 17. Says one, has not the ceremonial law
been annulled and nailed to the cross? Yes, but what of that? Why then
the Sabbath must be abolished, for Paul says so! Where? Why in Cols. 2d
chapter, and xiv. Romans. How can you think that God ever inspired Paul
to say that the _seventh_ day Sabbath was made void or nailed to the
cross at the crucifixion, when he never intended any such change; if he
did, he certainly would have deceived the inhabitants of Jerusalem, in
the promise which he made them about two thousand four hundred and
forty-six years ago! Turn now to Jer. xvii: 25, and tell me if he did
not promise the inhabitants of Jerusalem that their city should remain
forever if they would hallow the Sabbath day. Now suppose the
inhabitants of Jerusalem had entered into this agreement, and entailed
it upon their posterity (because you see it could not have been
fulfilled unless it had continued from generation to generation,) to
keep the Sabbath holy, would not God have been bound to let Jerusalem
remain forever? You say [9]yes. Well, then, I ask you to shew how he
could have kept that promise inviolate if he intended in less than six
hundred and fifty years to change this seventh day Sabbath, and call the
first day of the week the Sabbath, or abolish it altogether? I say,
therefore, if there has been any change one way or the other in the
Sabbath, since that promise, it would be impossible to understand any
other promise in the Bible; how much more reasonable to believe God than
man. If men will allow themselves to believe the monstrous absurdity
that FOREVER, as in this promise, ended at the resurrection, then they
can easily believe that the Sabbath was changed from the _seventh_ to
the first day of the week. Or if they choose the other extreme,
abolished until the people of God should awake to be clothed on with
immortality. Heb. iv: 9.

Now does it not appear plain that the Sabbath is from God, and that it
is coeval and co-extensive (as is the institution of marriage) with the
world. That it is without limitation; that there is not one thus saith
the Lord that it ever was or ever will be abolished, in time or
eternity.--See Exod. xxxi: 16, 17; and Isa. lxvi: 22, 24; Heb. iv: 4, 9.
But let us return and look at the subject as we have commenced in the
light of Paul's argument to the Romans and Collossians, for here is
where all writers on this subject, for the change or the overthrow of
the _seventh_ day Sabbath attempt to draw their strong arguments. The
second question then, is this:


HAS THE SABBATH BEEN ABOLISHED SINCE THE SEVENTH DAY OF CREATION? IF SO,
WHEN, AND WHERE IS THE PROOF?

The text already referred to, is in Rom. xiv: 5, 6.--"One man esteemeth
one day above another; another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man
be persuaded in his own mind. He that regardeth the day, regardeth it
unto the Lord; and he that regardeth not the day to the Lord, he doth
not regard it." Does the apostle here mean to say, that under the new or
Christian dispensation it is a matter of indifference which day of the
week is kept as a Sabbath, or whether any Sabbath at all is kept? Was
that institution which the people of God had been commanded to call a
delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, now to be esteemed of so
carnal a nature as to be ranked among [10]the things which Jesus "took
out of the way, nailing it to his cross." If this be true, then has
Jesus, in the same manner, abolished the eight last verses in the
fifty-eighth of Isaiah, and the 2d, 6th and 7th verses of the 56th
chapter have no reference to the Gentile since the crucifixion. O Lord
help us rightly to understand and divide thy word. But is it not evident
from the four first verses in the same chapter of Romans, that Paul is
speaking of feast days; giving them again in substance the decrees which
had been given by the Apostles in their first conference, in A. D. 51,
held at Jerusalem. See Acts xv: 19. James proposes their letter to the
Gentiles should be "that they abstain from pollution of Idols, and from
fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood;" to which the
conference all agreed. Now please read their unanimous _decrees_ (xvi:
4,) from twenty-three to thirty verses. "For it seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary
things." "That ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood,
and from things strangled, and from fornication, from which if ye keep
yourselves ye shall do well." Reading along to the 13th of the next
chapter, we find Paul establishing the Churches with these decrees; (see
4, 5,) and at Philippi he holds his meeting, (not in the Jews Synagogue)
but at the river's side, on the _Sabbath_ day. A little from this it is
said that Paul is in Thesalonica preaching on the Sabbath days. Luke
says this was his _manner_! What was it? Why, to preach on the Sabbath
days, (not 1st days.) Observe here was three Sabbaths in succession.
xvii: 2. A little while from this Paul locates himself in Corinth, and
there preaches to the Jews and Greeks (or Gentiles) a year and six
months _every Sabbath_. Now this must have been seventy-eight in
succession. xviii: 4, 11. Does this look like abolishing the Sabbath
day? Has anything been said about the 1st day yet? No, we shall speak of
that by and by.

Before this he was in Antioch. "And when the Jews were gone out of the
synagogue the GENTILES besought that these words might be preached to
them the next Sabbath. And the next Sabbath day came almost the whole
city together to hear the word of God." xiii: 42, 44. Here is proof that
the Gentiles kept the Sabbath. Now I wish to place the other strong text
which is so strangely adhered to for abolishing or changing this
[11]Sabbath along side of this, that we may understand his meaning.
"Blotting out the hand-writing of ordinances that was against us, which
was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his
cross."

"Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a
holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days." Coll. ii: 14, 16.
Now here is one of the strong arguments adhered to by all those who say
the seventh day Sabbath was abolished at the crucifixion of our Lord;
while on the other hand by the great mass of the Christian world, (so
called,) the seventh day Sabbath ceased here, and in less than
forty-eight hours the change was made to the first day of the week. Now
remember Paul's manner, (before stated) itinerating from city to city
and nation to nation, always preaching to Jews and Gentiles on the
seventh day Sabbath, (for there is no other day called the Lord's
Sabbath in the Bible.) Now if the Apostle did mean to include the
Sabbath of the Lord God with the Jewish feasts and Sabbaths in the text,
then the course he took to do so, was the strangest imaginable. His
_manner_ always was, as recorded, with the exception of one night, to
preach on the very day that he was laboring to abolish. If you will look
at the date in your bibles, you will learn this same apostle had been
laboring in this way as a special messenger to the Gentiles, between
twenty and thirty years since (as you say) the Sabbath was changed or
abolished, and yet never uttered one word with respect to any other day
in the week to be set apart as a holy day or Sabbath. I understand all
the arguments about his laboring in the Jewish Synagogue on their
Sabbath, because they were open for worship on that day, &c., but he did
not always preach in their Synagogues. He says that he preached the
Kingdom of God, and labored in his own hired house for two years. He
also established a daily meeting for disputation in the school of
Tyranus. Acts xix: 9. Again he says, I have "kept _back_ NOTHING that
was PROFITABLE _unto you_. (Now if the Sabbath had been changed or
abolished, would it not have been _profitable_ to have told them so?)
and have taught you publicly, and from house to house." "For I have not
shunned to declare unto you ALL the council of God."--Acts xx: 20, 27.
Then it is clear that he taught them by example that the Sabbath of the
Lord God was not abolished. Luke says it was the _custom_ (or manner) of
Christ [12]to teach in the synagogues on the Sabbath day. iv: 16, 31.
Mark says, "And when the Sabbath day was come he began to teach in their
synagogue." Mark vi: 2.--Now if Jesus was about to abolish or change
this Sabbath, (which belonged to the first code, the moral law, and not
the ceremonial, the second code, which was to be nailed to his cross, or
rather, as said the angel Gabriel to Daniel, ix: 27, "he (Christ) in the
midst of the week shall cause the _sacrifice_ and _oblation_ to cease,"
meaning that the Jewish sacrifices and offerings would cease at his
death.) Jesus did not attend to any of the ceremonies of the Jews except
the passover and the feasts of tabernacles. Why did he say, "Think not I
am come to destroy the _law_ or the prophets? I am not come to destroy
but fulfill. One jot or one title shall in no wise pass from the _law_
'till all be fulfilled." "Whosoever therefore shall break one of these
least commandments" &c. Did he mean the ten commandments? Yes; for he
immediately points out the third, not to take God's name in vain; sixth
and seventh, not to kill nor to commit adultery, and styles them the
_least_. Then the others, which include the fourth, of course were
greater than these. Matt. v: 17, 19, 21, 27, 23, and were not to be
broken nor pass away. Then the Sabbath stands unchanged.

Almost every writer which I have read on the subject of abolishing or
changing the seventh day Sabbath, call it the Jewish Sabbath, hence
their difficulty. How can it be the Jewish Sabbath when it was
established two thousand years before there was a Jew on the face of the
earth, and certainly twenty-five hundred before it was embodied in the
decalogue, or re-enacted and written in stone by the finger of God at
Sinai. God called this HIS _Sabbath_, and Jesus says it was made for
man, (not particularly for the Jews.)

"Well," says one, "what is the meaning of the texts which you have
quoted, where it speaks of Sabbaths?"--Answer: These are the Jewish
Sabbaths! which belong to them as a nation and are connected with their
feasts. God by Hosea makes this distinction, and says, "I will also
cause all _her_ mirth to cease, her feast days, her new moons and _her_
Sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts." These then belong to the text
quoted, and not God's Sabbath. Do you ask for the proof? See xxiii
Levit. 4. "_These are the_ FEASTS _of the Lord, which ye shall proclaim
in their [13]seasons_, EVERY THING UPON HIS DAY"--37th v. (May we not
deviate a little? If you do it will be at your peril.) Fifteenth and
sixteenth verses gives them a fifty day's Sabbath; twenty-fourth verse
says: "Speak unto the children of Israel, saying in the seventh month in
the first day of the month, shall ye have a _Sabbath_, a memorial of
blowing of trumpets, an holy convocation."

"Also on the tenth day of the seventh month there shall be a day of
atonement. It shall be unto you a _Sabbath_ of rest." 27, 32.

"Also on the fifteenth day of the seventh month when ye shall have
gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord
seven days. On the first shall be a Sabbath, and on the eighth day shall
be a Sabbath. 39v. And Moses _declared_ unto the children of Israel the
FEASTS of the Lord." 44v. Now here we have FOUR kinds of _Jewish_
Sabbaths, also _called_ "FEASTS _of the Lord_," to be kept annually. The
first fifty days or seven weeks Sabbath ends the third month, seventh.
In three months and twenty-four days more commences the second Sabbath,
seventh month, first; the next, the tenth; the last the fifteenth of the
month. Between the first two Sabbaths there is an interval of one
hundred and twelve days; the next two, ten days, and the next, five
days. Now it can be seen at a glance, that neither of these Sabbaths
could be on the seventh day any oftener than other annual feast could
come on that day. These then are what Hosea calls HER Sabbaths. Paul
calls them HOLY DAYS, _new moons, and Sabbaths_; and this is what they
are stated to be. The first day of the seventh month is a _new moon_
SABBATH, the tenth is a Sabbath of rest and Holy convocation, a day of
atonement, and the fifteenth a feast of Sabbaths. Do you ask for any
more evidence that these are the Jewish Sabbaths, and that God's Sabbath
is separate from them? Read then what God directed Moses to write in the
third verse: "Six days shall work be done, but the _seventh_ day is the
Sabbath of rest, an holy convocation, ye shall do no work therein, it is
the Sabbath of the LORD in all your dwellings." Now Moses has here
declared from the mouth of the Lord, that these are ALL the feast of the
Lord, (there is no more nor less) and every thing is to be upon _his
day_, and he has clearly and definitely separated his Sabbath from the
other four. And in the 28th and 29th chapters of Numbers the sacrifices
[14]and offerings for each of these days are made so plain, beginning
with the Sabbath, 9v, that we have only to read the following to
understand. 26. xxix: 1. First day, seventh month, (new moon;) 7v, 10th
day Sabbath; 12v; 15th day Sabbath, and 35v, 23d day Sabbath. And in the
days of Nehemiah when Ezra had read the law to the people, viii (more
than one thousand years after they were promulgated,) they bound
themselves under an oath "to walk in God's law which was given _by the
hand of Moses_, the servant of God." "And to observe and _do all the
commandments_ of the Lord, our Lord." x: 29. And that there might be no
misunderstanding about the kind of Sabbaths, they say, "If the people
bring ware or any victuals on the Sabbath day to sell, that we would not
buy it of them on the Sabbath or on the holy day," (31v.) but they would
"charge themselves yearly with a third part of a shekel" (to pay for)
"the burnt _offerings_ of the _Sabbaths_, of the _new moons_, for the
_set feasts_," &c. (33v.) for the house of God, including what has
already been set forth in Leviticus and Numbers. Now as their feast days
commenced and ended with a Sabbath, so when their feasts ceased to be
binding on them these Sabbaths must also, and all were "nailed to the
cross." Now I ask if there is one particle of proof that the Sabbath of
the Lord is included in these Sabbaths and feast days? Who then dare
join them together or contradict the Most High God, and call HIS the
_Jewish_ Sabbath. _Theirs_ was nailed to the cross when Jesus died,
while the Lord's is an _everlasting_ sign a _perpetual covenant_. The
Jews, as a nation, broke their covenant. Jesus and his disciples were
one week (the last of the seventy) that is seven years, confirming the
new covenant for another people, the Gentiles. Now I ask if this
changing the subjects from Jew to Gentile made void the commandments and
law of God, or in other words, abolished the fourth commandment; if so,
the other nine are not binding. It cannot be that God ever intended to
mislead his subjects. Let us illustrate this. Suppose that the Congress
of these United States in their present emergency, should promulgate two
separate codes of laws, one to be perpetual, the other temporary, to be
abolished when peace was proclaimed between this country and Mexico. The
time _comes_, the temporary laws are abolished; but strange to hear, a
large portion of the people are now insisting upon it that because peace
is proclaimed that both [15]these codes of laws are forever abolished;
while another class are _strenuously_ insisting that it is only the
_fourth_ law in the perpetual code that's now abolished, with the
temporary and all the rest is still binding. Opposed to all these is a
third class, headed by the ministers and scribes of the nation, who are
writing and preaching from Maine to Florida, insisting upon it without
fear of contradiction, that when peace was proclaimed this fourth law in
the perpetual code was to change its date to another day; gradually,
(while some of them say immediately) and thenceforward become perpetual,
and the other code abolished; and yet not one of these are able to show
from the proceedings of Congress that the least alteration had ever been
made in the perpetual code. Thus, to me, the case stands clear that
neither of the laws or ten commandments in the first code, ever has or
ever can be annulled or changed while mortality is stamped on man, for
the very reason that God's moral law has no limitation. Jesus then
brought in a new covenant, which continued the Sabbath by writing his
law upon their hearts. Paul says "written not with ink, but with the
spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables
of the heart." 2 Cor. iii: 3. And when writing to the Romans he shews
_how_ the Gentiles are a law unto themselves. He says, they "shew the
work of the law written in their hearts, their consciences always
bearing them witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else
excusing one another," (when will this be Paul) "in the day when God
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel."
ii: 15, 16. How plain that this is all the change. The Jews by nature
had the law given them on tables of stone, while the Gentiles had the
law of commandments written on their hearts. Paul tells the Ephesians
that it was "the law of commandments contained in ordinances," (ii: 15)
not on tables that were nailed to the cross. If the ten commandments,
first written by the finger of God on stone, and then at the second
covenant on fleshy tables of the heart, are shadows, can any one tell
where we shall find the substance? We are answered, in Christ. Well,
hear Isaiah. He says, "that he (Christ) will magnify the law and make it
honorable." lxii: 21. Again, I ask, where was the necessity and of what
use were the ten commandments written on our hearts, if it was not to
render perfect obedience to them. If we do not keep the day God has
sanctified, then [16]we break not the least, but one of the greatest of
his commandments. Still, there are many other texts relating to the law,
presented by the opposite view, to show that the law respecting the
Sabbath is abolished. Let us look at some of them. But it will be
necessary in the first place, to make a clear distinction between what
is commonly called the


MORAL AND CEREMONIAL LAW.

Bro. S. S. Snow, in writing on this subject about one year ago, in the
Jubilee Standard, asks "by what authority this distinction is made." He
says "neither our Lord or his apostles made any such distinction. When
speaking of the law they never used the terms moral or ceremonial, but
always spake of it as a _whole_, calling it _the_ law," and further
says, "we must have a thus saith the Lord to satisfy us." So I say! I
have no doubt but thousands have stopped here; indeed, it has been to me
the most difficult point to settle in this whole question. Now let us
come to it fairly, and we shall see that the old and new testament
writers have ever kept up the distinction, although it may in some parts
seem to be one code of laws.

From the twentieth chapter of Exodus, where the law of the Sabbath was
re-enacted, and onward, we find two distinct codes of laws. The first
was written on two tables of stone with the _finger_ of God; the
_second_ was taken down from his mouth and recorded by the hand of Moses
in a book. Paul calls the latter carnal commandments and ordinances,
(rites or _ceremonies_) which come under two heads, religious and
political, and are Moses's. The first code is God's. For proof see Exo.
xvi: 28, 30. "How long refuse ye to keep _my_ commandments and _my_
laws: see for that the Lord hath given you the Sabbath; and so the
people rested on the Sabbath day." Also in the book of Leviticus, where
the law of ceremonies is given to the levites or priests, Moses closes
with these words: "_These_ are the commandments which the Lord commanded
Moses for the children of Israel in Mount Sinai;" in Heb. vii: 16, 18,
called carnal commandments.

Again, "the Lord said unto Moses, come up to me into the Mount, and be
there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments
which I have written." Exo. xxiv: 12. Further he calls them the ten
[17]commandments--xxxiv: 28. And Moses puts them "into the ark"--xl:
20. _Now for the second code of laws._ See Deut. xxxi: 9, 10; and xxiv:
26. "And when Moses had finished writing the law, he commanded them to
put _this book_ of the LAW (of ceremonies) in the side of the ark of the
covenant, to be read at the end of every seven years." This is not the
song of deliverance by Moses in the forty-fourth verse of the
thirty-second chapter. For, eight hundred and sixty-seven years after
this, in the reign of Josiah, king of Israel, the high priest found this
book in "the Temple," (2 Chron. xxxiv: 14, 15) which moved all Israel.
One hundred and seventy-nine years further onward, Ezra was from morning
till noon reading out of this book. Neh. viii: 3; Heb. ix: 19. Paul's
comments.

Bro. Snow says in regard to the commandments, "The principles of moral
conduct embraced in the law, was binding before the law was given,
(meaning that one of course at Mt. Sinai) and is binding _now_; it is
immutable and eternal! It is comprehended in one word, LOVE." If he
meant, as we believe he did, to comprehend what Jesus did in the xix.
and xxii. chap. Matt. 37-40, and Paul, and James, and John after him,
then we ask how it is possible for him to reject from that code of laws,
the only one, _the seventh day rest_, that was promulgated at the
_beginning_, while at the same time the other nine, that were not
written until about three thousand years afterwards, were eternally
binding; without doubt, the whole ten commandments are co-eval and
co-extensive with sin. Again, he says, "We readily admit, that if what
is called the decalogue or ten commandments be binding on us, _we ought_
to observe the seventh day, for that was appointed by the Lord as the
Sabbath day." Let us see if Jesus and his apostles do not make it
binding. _First then, the distinction of the two codes by Jesus._

The Pharisees ask the Saviour why his disciples transgress the tradition
of the elders? His answer is, "Why do ye transgress the commandment of
God?" and he immediately cites them to the fifth commandment, Matt. xv:
25. Again, "The law and the prophets were until John; since that time
the kingdom of God is preached," &c. Luke xvi: 16. Jesus was three years
after this introducing the gospel of the kingdom, unwaveringly holding
his meetings on the Sabbath days, (which our opponents say were now
about to be _abolished_; others say changed,) and never uttering a
syllable to show to the contrary, but that this was [18]and always
would be the holy day for worship. Mark says when the Sabbath (the
Seventh day, for there was no other,) was come, he began to teach in the
Synagogue, vi: 2. Luke says, "as his _custom_ was, he went into the
Synagogue and taught on the Sabbath day." iv: 16, 31. Will it be said of
him as it is of Paul on like occasions, some thirty years afterwards,
that he uniformly held his meetings on the Sabbath because he had no
where else to preach, or that this day was the only one in the week in
which the people would come out to hear him? Every bible reader knows
better; witness the five thousand and the seven thousand, and the
multitudes that thronged him in the streets, in the citys and towns
where they listened to him; besides, he was now establishing a new
dispensation, while theirs was passing away. Then he did not follow any
of their customs or rites or ceremonies which he had come to abolish.

I have already quoted Matt. v: 17, 18, where Jesus said he had come to
fulfil the law, and immediately begins by showing them that they are not
to violate one of the least of the commandments, and cites them to
some--see vi: 19, 21, 27, 33. Again, he is tauntingly asked "which is
the great commandment in the law: Jesus said unto him, thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind. This is the _first_ and great commandment. And the second is
like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two
commandments hang all the law and the prophets." xxii: 36, 40. Here
Jesus has divided the ten commandments into two parts, or as it is
written on two tables of stone. The first four on the first table treat
of those duties which we owe to God--the other six refers to those which
we owe to man, requiring perfect obedience.

Once more, "One came and said unto him, good master what good thing
shall I do that I may have eternal life? He said, If thou wilt enter
into life keep the commandments. Then he asked him which? He cited him
to the last part of what he called the second, loving his neighbor as
himself." If he had cited him to the first table, as in the xxii, quoted
above, he could not have replied "_all_ these have I kept from my youth
up." Why? Because he would have already been perfect, for Jesus in reply
to his question, what he should do to inherit eternal life, said he must
"keep the commandments." Matt. xix: 16-20. Is not the Sabbath included
in these commandments? Surely [19]it is! Then how absurd to believe
that Jesus, just at the close of his ministry, should teach that the
way, the only way, to enter into life, was to keep the commandments, one
of which was to be abolished in a few months from that time, without the
least intimation from him or his Father that it was to take place. I say
again, if the Sabbath is abolished, we ask those who teach it to cite us
to the chapter and verse, not to the law of rites and ceremonies which
are abolished, for we have already shown that the Sabbath was instituted
more than twenty-five hundred years before Moses wrote the carnal
ordinances or ceremonies. God said, "Abraham kept _my_ charge, _my_
commandments, _my_ statutes, and _my_ laws." Gen. xxvi: 5. This must
include the Sabbath, for the Sabbath was the first law given, therefore
if Abraham did not keep the Sabbath, I cannot understand what
commandments, statutes and laws mean in this chapter. Jesus says, "As I
have kept my Father's commandments," John xv: 10. Did he keep the
commandments? Yes. Mark and Luke, before quoted--(but more of this in
another place.)

In John vii: 19, Jesus speaks of "Moses law," "_your law_." x: 34.
Again, "_their law_." xv: 25. Here then we show that Jesus kept up a
clear distinction between what God calls _my_ law and commandments and
Moses law, "_their_ law," "_your_ law." Let us now look at the argument
of the Apostles. Paul preaching at Antioc taught the Brethren that by
Jesus Christ all who believed in him "are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the _Law of Moses_." Acts xiii:
39.

The Pharisees said "that it was needful to circumcise them and commend
them to keep the _Law of Moses_." xv: 5.

Again, when Paul had come to Jerusalem the second time, (fourteen years
from the time he met the Apostles in conference where they established
the decrees for the churches. See Acts xx: 19; Gal. ii: 1,) the Apostles
shewed him how many thousands of Jews there were which believed and were
zealous of the _law_: "And they are informed of thee, that thou teachest
_all_ the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake _Moses_ and the
_customs_." xxi: 20, 21. Any person who will carefully read the eight
chapters here included, must be thoroughly convinced that the Apostle's
troubles were about the law of ceremonies written and given by Moses,
and nothing to do with the ten commandments. For you see a little before
he comes to Jerusalem, he had been preaching at Corinth every
[20]Sabbath for eighteen months. xxiii: 4, 11. And this, be it
remembered, was more than twenty years after the Jewish Sabbaths and
ceremonies were nailed to the cross.--And you see that Paul was the man
above all the Apostles to be persecuted on account of the abolition of
the Jews' law of ceremonies, for he was the "_great_ Apostle to the
Gentiles:" and if the "Sabbath of the Lord our God" was to have been
abolished when the Saviour died, Paul was the very man selected for that
purpose. It is clear, therefore, that he did not abolish the seventh day
Sabbath among the Gentiles. This same Apostle tells the Romans "that
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believeth." x: 4. Again, that "sin shall not have dominion over you, for
ye are not under the _law_ but under grace." vi: 14. Once more: He says
the Gentiles having not the _law_, are a _law_ unto themselves. Why?
Because, he says in the next verse, it shows the _law_ written on their
hearts. The law of ceremonies? No; that which was on tables of stone.
ii: 14-16. We might quote much more which looks like embracing the whole
law. Let us now look at a few texts in the same letter, which will draw
a distinguishing line between the two codes of laws. Paul, in the vii
ch. 9-13v. brings to view the carnal commandment, and the one unto life,
and sums up his argument in these words: "Wherefore the _law_ is holy,
and the commandment holy and just and good." In the 7v he quotes from
the decalogue. Again, he that loveth another hath fulfilled the _law_.
How? Why thou shalt not steal, nor commit adultery, nor bear false
witness, nor covet, thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Therefore
_love_ is the fulfilling of the law. Rom. xiii: 8, 10.--This then is
what the Saviour taught the young man to do to secure "eternal life."
Matt. Once more, in concluding a long argument on the law in Rom. iii:
31, he closes with this language: "Do we then make void the law through
faith? God forbid ye, _we establish_ the _law_."--What _law_ is here
established? not the law of rites and ceremonies. What then, for Paul
means some _law_. It can be no other than what he calls the law of
"life," of "love," the ten commandments. How could even that be
established twenty-nine years after the crucifixion, if one of the
_greatest_ commandments had been abolished out of the code, that is the
Sabbath.

Paul's letter to the Corinthians teaches that "circumcision is nothing,
and uncircumcision is nothing but the _keeping_ [21]of the commandments
of God." vii: 19. Again, in his epistle to the Galatians, his
phraseology is somewhat changed, but the argument is to the same point,
although some passages read as though every vestage of _law_ was swept
by the board when Jesus hung upon the cross. For instance, such as the
following: "But that no man is justified by the _law_ in the sight of
God it is evident, for the just shall live by faith, and the LAW is not
of faith, but the man that doeth them shall live by them." "Christ hath
redeemed us from the curse of the _law_, being made a curse for us."
"But before faith came we were kept under the _law_, shut up unto the
faith which should afterwards be revealed." "Wherefore the law was our
schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ that we might be justified by
faith, but after that faith has come we are no longer under a
schoolmaster." Gal. iii: 11-13, 23-25. Again: "For as many as are of the
works of the _law_ are under the curse." 10v. Now are we to understand
from these texts that whosoever continueth in the _law_ is cursed, and
that the law, _the whole law_, was abolished when Christ came as our
schoolmaster, he being the "end of the law?" Rom. x: 4. If so, how is it
possible for any man, even Paul himself, to be saved. But we do not
believe that Paul taught these brethren any different doctrine than what
has already been shown in the Acts, Romans, and Corinthians, and also
the Eph., Phil., Col., and Heb. If he did not mean the law written by
the hand of Moses, distinguishing it from the _law_ of the ten
commandments, written by the finger of God on tables of stone, then pray
tell me if you can, what he means (in the closing of this argument,) by
saying, "For _all_ the LAW is FULFILLED in one word, even this: Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." v: 14. Surely he is quoting the
Saviour's words in Matt. xxii: 39, relative to the commandment of the
Lord our God. To his son Timothy he says: "Now the end of the
commandment is charity," (love) meaning of course the _last_ part of the
ten commandments. In vi: 2, he says: "Bear ye one anothers burdens and
so fulfil the _law_ of Christ." Does this differ from the _law_ God?
Yes, a little, for it is the new commandment, (some say the eleventh.)
See John xiii: 34. "A new commandment I give unto you, (what is it,
Lord?) that ye love one another." And also xx: 12. The other is to love
our neighbor as ourself. John says: "And this commandment have we from
him (Christ,) that he who loveth God loveth his brother [22]also." John
iv: 21, and ii: 8-11. In his letter to the Ephesians he says: "Having
abolished in his flesh the _enmity_ even the law of commandments
contained in ordinances." ii: 15. See the reverse. vi: 2. To the
Colossians he asks, "Why as though living in the world, are ye subject
to ordinances where all are to perish with their using?" And says:
"Touch not, taste not, handle not." (Does Paul here teach us to forsake
the ordinances of God, instituted by the Saviour--Baptism and the Lord's
Supper? Yes, just as clearly as he does to forsake the whole law.)

When writing to the Hebrews more than thirty years after the
crucifixion, he calls these ordinances _carnal_, imposed on them (the
Jews) until Christ our High Priest should come. ix: 10, 11. He also
calls the law of commandments _carnal_, too, and says: "For there is
verily a disannulling of the commandments going before, for the law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did." vii: 16,
18-19. "For when Moses had spoken _every precept_ to all the people
according to the _law_ he took the blood of calves and of goats, with
water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the BOOK and all
the people." ix: 19. Now we see clearly that the book of the law of
Moses from which Paul has been quoting through the whole before
mentioned epistles, is as distinctly separate from the tables of stone
(or fleshly table of the heart,) as they were when deposited in the Ark
thirty-three hundred years ago. Therefore we think that here is clear
proof that he has kept up the distinction between the "handwriting of
ordinances" (meaning Moses' own handwriting in his book,) and the "ten
commandments written by the finger of God."

Let us now turn to the Epistle of James, said to be written more than
twenty-five years after the law of ceremonies were nailed to the cross,
and see if he does not teach us distinctly, that we are bound to keep
the commandments given on tables of stone. He says, "the man that shall
be a DOER of the _perfect law_ of liberty shall be blessed in his deed."
i: 25. "If ye fulfill the royal _law_ according to the scripture, thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, ye do well." Why? Because the
Saviour in quoting from the commandments, in answer to the Ruler, what
he should do to inherit eternal life, taught the same doctrine. Matt.
xix: 19. Further: "For whosoever shall keep the whole _law_ and yet
offend in one point, shall be guilty of _all_." In the next verse he
quotes from the [23]ten commandments again, namely, Adultery and
Murder, (what the Saviour in the fifth chapter of Matt. calls the least,
that is the smallest commandment,) and says if we commit them we become
transgressors of the _law_. Of what _law_? Next verse says the _law_ of
_liberty_ by which we are to be "judged." ii: 8, 11.

Now will it not be admitted by every reasonable person that James has
included the whole of the ten commandments, by calling them the perfect
law of liberty. 2d, "The royal _law_ according to the scripture," and
3d, "the _law of liberty_ by which we are to be judged." (Royal relates
to imperial and kingly.) Perfect means COMPLETE, _entire_, the WHOLE.
Then I understand James thus: This _law_ emanated from the king, the
Supreme Ruler of the universe, and to be perfect must be just what it
was when it came from his hand, and that no _change_ had, or could take
place, (and remember now, this is more than twenty-five years since the
ceremonies with the Jewish Sabbaths were nailed to the cross,) for the
very best of reasons, until the judgment, because he shows that we are
to be judged by _that law_. Then I ask by what parity of reasoning any
one can make the law of the ten commandments perfect, while they at the
same time assert that the fourth one is abolished? and that on no better
evidence than calling it the JEWISH Sabbath. Now let us look at the
Apostle John's testimony.

"And hereby we do know that we know him if we keep his commandments. He
that saith I know him and keepeth not his commandments is a LIAR, and
the truth is not in him." Now no man, more especially one who professes
to abide by the whole truth, feels entirely easy if he is called a
_liar_. Now John please explain yourself. Hear him: "Brethren, I write
no new commandment unto you but an _old_ commandment which ye had from
the beginning. The old commandment is the _word_ which ye have heard
from the BEGINNING." What do you mean by _beginning_? Turn to my Gospel,
1st ch. "In the _beginning_ was the word,"--"the same was in the
_beginning_ with God." 1, 2. See Gen. i ch.: "In the _beginning_ God
created the heavens and the earth." Then you are pointing us to the
seventh day of creation, in which God instituted the seventh day Sabbath
of rest, for the _old_ commandment in the _beginning_. ii: 3. Certainly
there is no other place to point to. Does not Jesus point us to the same
place for the _beginning_ when marriage was first instituted. Matt. xix:
4. [24]In my second letter to the church, I have taught the same
doctrine: viz. "This is the commandment that as ye have heard from the
_beginning ye should walk in it_." (practice it.) ii: 5, 6. "A _new_
commandment I write unto you." 7th v. This is the one that Jesus gave us
on that memorable night in which he was betrayed, after he had
instituted the sacrament and washed our feet. He said "By this shall all
men know that ye are my disciples if ye have love one to another." xiii:
34, 35. The first then teaches us, Love to God, 2d, to Love our neighbor
as ourself; "on these two commandments (says Jesus) hang all the law and
the prophets." Then we understand this is the essence of the ten
commandments, and if we do not keep the Sabbath we do not love God.
Jesus says, "If ye love me ye will keep my commandments." We are
repeatedly told that the Sabbath was changed or forever abolished, at
the crucifiction of our Lord, and it is stated by the most competent
authorities that John wrote this epistle about sixty years afterwards,
and that about six years after this our blessed Lord revealed to him the
state of the Church down to the judgment of the great day. In the xiv
ch. Rev. 6-11, he saw three angels following each other in succession:
first one preaching the everlasting gospel (second advent doctrine); 2d,
announcing the fall of Babylon; 3d, calling God's people out of her by
showing the awful destruction that awaited all such as did not obey. He
sees the separation and cries out, "Here is the patients of the Saints,
here are they that keep the _commandments_ of God and the faith of
Jesus." And this picture was so deeply impressed on his mind, that when
the Saviour said to him "Behold I come quickly and my reward is with
me," he seemed to understand this, saying--"Blessed are they that _do_
his commandments that they may have right to the tree of life, and may
enter in through the gates into the city." xxii: 14. Now it seems to me
that the seventh day Sabbath is more clearly included in these
commandments, than thou shalt not steal, nor kill, nor commit adultery,
for it is the only one that was written at the creation or in the
_beginning_. He allows no stopping place this side of the gates of the
city. Then, if we do not keep that day, John has made out his case, that
we are all _liars_. We say in every other case the type must be
continued until it is superseded by the antitype, as in the case of the
passover, until our Lord was crucified. So then, as Paul tells us,
"there remaineth a keeping of the Sabbath to the people of God," and
that we believe will be in the Milenium, [25]the seven thousandth year,
so that the seventh day Sabbath and no other will answer for the type,
and those who keep the first or the eighth day Sabbath cannot
consistently look for the antitype of rest or the great Sabbath, short
of one thousand years in the future.

Again: Isaiah says: "To the law and to the testimony if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." viii:
20. Now if the Gentiles are under no law, as 'is asserted,' pray tell me
what right, as Gentiles, have we to appeal to the law and testimony, or
to this text.

In the xxiv. of Matt. our Saviour says to his disciples, in answer to
their questions, When shall these things be? and what shall be the sign
of thy coming, and the end of the world? "When ye therefore shall see
the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in
the holy place," &c. 15v. "Pray ye that your flight be not in the
winter, neither on the Sabbath day." 20v. The first question is, at what
age of the world is this, where our Lord recognizes the Sabbath? 1st. It
is agreed on all hands that this time to which he here refers, never
transpired until the destruction of Jerusalem in A.D. 70, about forty
years after his crucifiction. 2d. Some others say, down to the second
Advent! The first mentioned is safe ground and sufficient for our
purpose; nor need we stop to inquire why our Lord gave these directions,
it is forever settled that he directed the minds of his followers to
THE, not _a_ Sabbath. Keep it in remembrance, that he told the Pharisees
that he was Lord, not of _a_, but of THE Sabbath, meaning that one which
of course had already been established. The 2d question is, did our Lord
ever trifle with, or mislead his disciples? The response is No! Then it
is clear that if he taught them to pray at all, it must be in faith, and
he of course would hear them and mediate with the Father to change the
day of their flight. I ask what kind of a prayer and with what kind of
faith would his disciples have asked to have this day changed, if as we
are told, it was abolished some forty years before, and they had,
contrary to the will of God, persisted in keeping up this seventh day
Sabbath. Any one who has confidence in God's word, knows that such a
prayer never would be answered. What if you do say the Jews always kept
that Sabbath, and it was the same seventh day Sabbath which they kept
when he was teaching them in their synagogues? I, say so too! (and that
fact will be presented by and by, in its place.) This does not touch the
point. Jesus was here giving instructions to his [26]followers, both
Jew and Gentile, respecting _the_ Sabbath which they would have to do
with. It is immaterial what kind of sophistry is presented to overthrow
the point, nothing can touch it short of proving it a mistranslation.
Jesus did here recognize the perpetuity of the _seventh day Sabbath_.
And John will continue to make all men liars that say they know him and
refuse the light presented and disregard this commandment. If God
instituted the Sabbath in Paradise and has not abolished it here, then
must it be _perpetual_? If Paul's argument in iii. Rom. that the law is
established through faith, is correct then is it _perpetual_. If James'
royal _perfect law_ of liberty, which we are to be doers of, and judged
by, means the commandments, then is the Sabbath _perpetual_. If the
Apostle John has made out a clear case, by citing us back to the
_beginning_ of creation, and by _walking_ in and doing these
commandments, we shall have right to the tree of life and enter in by
the gates into the city; then it _must be perpetual_. If the earthly
Sabbath is typical of the heavenly, then must it be _perpetual_. If not
one jot or one tittle can ever pass from the law, then must it be
_perpetual_. If the Saviour, in answer to the young man who asked him
what he should do to inherit _eternal life_, gave a safe direction for
Gentiles to follow, viz: "If thou wilt enter into _life_ keep the
commandments (and these included those commandments which his Father had
given), then, without _contradiction_ the Sabbath is _perpetual_, and
all the arguments which ever can be presented against the fourth
commandment being observed before God wrote it on tables of stone to
prove that it is not binding on Gentiles, falls powerless before this
one sentence: _If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments._ I
say the proof is positive that the Sabbath was a constituent part of the
commandments, and Jesus says the Sabbath 'was made for man.' The Jews
were only a _fragment of creation_.

"The principle is settled in all governments that there are but two ways
in which any law can cease to be binding upon the people. It may expire
by its own limitations, or it may be repealed by the same authority
which enacted it; and in the latter case the repealing act must be as
explicit as that by which the obligation was originally imposed." Now we
have it in proof that the Sabbath was instituted in Paradise, the
_first_ of all laws without any limitation, and no enactment by God to
abolish it, unless what we have already referred to can be considered
proof. One more passage which I have not alluded to will show that it
was not [27]abolished at the crucifiction, for his disciples kept the
Sabbath while he was resting in his tomb. See Luke xxiii: 55, 56. Let us
now pass to another part of the subject. The third question:


WAS THE SEVENTH-DAY SABBATH EVER CHANGED? IF SO, WHEN, AND FOR WHAT
REASON?

Here we come to a question which has more or less engaged the attention
of the whole christian world, and the greater portion of those who
believe in a crucified Saviour say that this change took place, and is
dated from his resurrection. Some say subsequently, while a minority
insist upon it that there is no proof for the change. Now to obtain the
truth and nothing but the truth on this important subject, I propose to
present, or quote from standard authors on both sides of the question,
and try the whole by the standard of divine truth. 1st. Buck's
Theological Dictionary, to which no doubt thousands of ministers and
laymen appeal to sustain their argument for the change, says: "Under the
christian dispensation the Sabbath is _altered_ from the _seventh_ to
the _first day_ of the week." The arguments for the change, are these:
1st. "The _seventh_ day was observed by the Jewish church in memory of
the rest of God; so the _first_ day of the week has always been observed
by the christian church in memory of _Christ's resurrection_. 2d. Christ
made repeated visits to his disciples on that day. 3d. It is called the
Lord's day. Rev. i: 10. 4th. On this day the Apostles were assembled,
when the Holy Ghost came down so visibly upon them to qualify them for
the conversion of the world. 5th. On this day we find Paul at Troas when
the disciples came together to break bread. 6th. The directions the
Apostles gave to Christians plainly alludes to their assembling on that
day. 7th. Pliny bears witness of the first day of the week being kept as
a festival in honor of the resurrection of Christ."

"Numerous have been the days appointed by man for religious services,
but these are not binding because of _human_ institution. Not so the
Sabbath. It is of _divine_ institution, so it is to be kept holy unto
the Lord."

Doct. Dodridge, whose ability and piety has seldom or rarely been
disputed, comments on some of the above articles thus: (Commentary p.
606.) "Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in
store, as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I
come." 1 Cor. xvi: 2. "Show that it was to be put into a [28]common
stock. The argument drawn from hence for the religious observance of the
first day of the week in these primitive churches of Corinth and Galacia
is too _obvious_ to need any further illustration, and yet too important
to be passed by in entire silence." Again, p. 904, "I was in the spirit
on the Lord's day," &c. Rev. i: 10. "It is so very unnatural and
contrary to the use of the word in all other authors to interpret this
of the Jewish Sabbath, as Mr. Baxter justly argues at large, that I
cannot but conclude with him and the generality of Christian writers on
this subject, that this text _strongly_ infers the extraordinary regard
paid to the first day of the week in the Apostle's time as a day
solemnly consecrated to Christ in memory of his resurrection from the
dead." There is much more, but these are his strong arguments. I shall
quote some more from the Commentaries by and by. I wish to place by the
side of these arguments one from the British Quarterly Theological
Review and Ecclesiastical Recorder, of Jan. 1830, which I extract from
'the _Institution of the Sabbath day_,' by Wm. Logan Fisher, of
Philadelphia, a book in which there is much valuable information on this
subject, though I disagree with the writer, because his whole labor is
to abolish the Sabbath; yet he gives much light on this subject, from
which I take the liberty to make some quotations.

But to the Quarterly Review of 1830: "It is said that the observance of
the seventh day Sabbath is transferred in the Christian church to the
first day of the week. We ask by what authority, and are very much
mistaken if an examination of all the texts of the New Testament, in
which the first day of the week or Lord's day is mentioned, does not
prove that there is no divine or Apostolic precept enjoining its
observance, nor any certain evidence from scripture that it was, in
fact, so observed in the times of the Apostles. Accordingly we search
the scriptures in vain, either for an Apostolic precept, appointing the
first day of the week to be observed in the place of the Jewish Sabbath,
or for any unequivocal proof that the first christians so observed
it--there are only three or, at most four places of scripture, in which
the first day of the week is mentioned. The next passage is in Acts xx:
7. 'Upon the first day of the week when the disciples came together to
break bread, Paul preached unto them.' All that St. Luke here tells us
plainly is, that on a particular occasion the christians of Troas met
together on the first day of the week to celebrate the Eucharist and to
hear Paul preach. This is the only place in [29]scripture, in which the
first day of the week is in any way connected with any acts of public
worship, and he who would certainly infer from this _solitary instance_
that the first day of every week was consecrated by the Apostles to
religious purposes, must be far gone in the art of drawing universal
conclusion from particular premises."

On page 178, Mr. Fisher says, "I have examined several different
translations of the scriptures, both from the Hebrew and the Septuagint,
with notes and anotations more extensive than the texts; have traced as
far as my leisure would permit, various ecclesiastical histories, some
of them voluminous and of ancient date; have paid considerable attention
to the writings of the earliest authors in the christian era, and to
rare works, old and of difficult access, which treat upon this subject;
I have read with care many of the publications of sectarians to sustain
the institution; I have omitted nothing within my reach, and I have
found not one shred of argument, or authority of any kind, that may not
be deemed of partial and sectarian character, to support the institution
of the first day of the week as a day of peculiar holiness. But, in the
place of argument, I have found opinions without number--volumes filled
with idle words that have no truth in them. In the want of texts of
scripture, I have found perversions; in the want of truth, false
statements. I have seen it stated that Justin Marter in his apology,
speaks of Sunday as a holy day; that Eusebius, bishop of Cesarea, who
lived in the fourth century, establishes the fact of the transfer of the
_seventh_ to the first day, by Christ himself. These things are _not
true_. These authors say no such thing. I have seen other early authors
referred to as establishing the same point, but they are equally false."

Here then is the testimony of four authors, two for the change and two
against it, from the old and new world. No truth seeking, unbiased mind
can hesitate for a moment on which side to decide, after comparing them
with the inspired word.

Doctor JENKS of Boston, author of the Comprehensive Commentary,
(purporting to comprehend _all_ other commentators on the bible,) after
quoting author after author, on this subject, ventures forth with _his_
unsupported opinion in these words: "Here is a Christian Sabbath
observed by the disciples and _owned_ by _our Lord_. The visit Christ
made to his disciples was on the first day of the week, and the first
day of the week is the only day of the week or month or year ever
mentioned by numbers in all the New [30]Testament, and that is several
times spoken of as a day _religiously_ observed." Where? Echo answers,
where!

HEMAN HUMPHREY, President of Amherst College, from whose book I have
already made some quotations, after devoting some thirty-four pages to
the establishment and perpetuation of the seventh day Sabbath, comes to
his fourth question, viz. 'Has the day been changed?' Singular as this
question may appear by the side of what he had already written to
establish and perpetuate the seventh day Sabbath from the seventh day of
creation down to the resurrection of the just, but as every man feels
that it his privilege to justify and explain, when precept and practice
does not agree--so is it with President Humphrey, he can now shape the
scriptures to suit every one that has followed in the wake of Pope
Gregory for 1225 years. He says, "The fourth commandment is so expressed
as to admit of a change in the day,"--thus striking vitally every
argument he had before presented. Hear him--he says the seventh day is
the Sabbath; "it was so at that time, (in the beginning) and for many
ages after, but it is not said, that it always _shall be_--it is the
_Sabbath_ day which we are to remember; and so at the close, it is the
_Sabbath_ which was hallowed and blessed and not the _seventh_ day. The
Sabbath then, the holy rest itself, is one thing. The day on which we
are to rest is another." I ask, in the name of common sense, how we
should know how or when to keep the Sabbath if it did not matter which
day. If the President could not see the sanctification of the seventh
day in the decalogue what did he mean by quoting Gen. ii: 3, so often,
where it says "_God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it._"

Again, he says "Redemption is a greater work than creation, hence the
change." Fifthly, God early consecrated the Christian Sabbath by a most
remarkable outpouring of his spirit at the day of Pentecost. And that
Jesus has left us his own example by not saying a syllable after his
resurrection about keeping the _Jewish Sabbath_. He also quotes the four
passages about Jesus and his disciples keeping the first day of the
week. Here, he says, the inference to our minds is _irresistible_--for
keeping the first day of the week instead of the _seventh_. And further
says, "it might be proved by innumerable quotations from the writings of
the Apostolic Fathers," &c. All this may be very true in itself, but it
all falls to the ground for the want of one single precept from the
bible. If Redemption, because it was greater than Creation, and the
remarkable display of God's power at the [31]Pentecost, and Christ
never saying any thing about the _Jewish Sabbath_ after his resurrection
are such _strong_ proofs that the perpetual seventh day Sabbath was
changed to the first day at that time, and must be believed because
learned men say so, what shall we do with the sixth day, on which our
blessed Saviour expired on the cross; darkness for three hours had
covered the earth, and the vail of the Temple was rent from top to the
bottom, and there was such an earthquake throughout vast creation that
we have only to open our eyes and look at the rent rocks for a clear and
perfect demonstration that this whole globe was shaken from centre to
circumference, and the graves of the dead were opened. Matt. xxvii: 50,
53. You may answer me that Popery has honored that day by calling it
good Friday, and the next first day following Easter Sunday, &c., but
after all, nothing short of bible argument will satisfy the earnest
inquirer after truth. The President had already shown that the _Jewish_
Sabbath was abolished at Christ's death. What reason then had he to
believe that the Saviour would speak of it afterwards. So also the
Pentecost had been a type from the giving the law at Sinai to be kept
annually for about 1500 years, consequently it would be solemnized on
every day of the week, at each revolving year, as is the case with the
4th of July: three years ago it was on the fourth day and now it comes
on the seventh day of the week. Further, see Peter standing amidst the
amazed multitude, giving the scripture reason for this miraculous
display of God's power. He does not give the most distant hint that this
was, or was to be, the day of the week for worship, or the true Sabbath,
neither do any of the Apostles then, or afterwards, for when they kept
this day the next year, it must have been the second day of the week. We
must have better evidence than what has been adduced, to believe this
was the Sabbath, for according to the type, seven Sabbaths were to be
complete, (and there was no other way given them to come to the right
day,) from the day they kept the first, or from the resurrection. Here
then is proof positive that the Sabbath in this year was the day before
the Pentecost. See Luke xxiii: 55, 56. If President H. is right, then
was there two Sabbaths to be kept in succession in one week. Where is
the precept? No where! Well, says the inquirer, I want to see the bible
proof for this '_Christian Sabbath observed by the disciples, and owned
by our Lord_.' W. Jenks. Here it will be necessary for us to understand,
first how God has computed time. In Gen. i. we read, "And [32]God said
let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, to divide the day
from the night, and let them be for signs and for seasons and for days
and years." 14 v. 16 v. says, "the greater light to rule the day,"--from
sunrise to sunset. Now there are many modes invented for computing time.
We say our day begins at 12 o'clock at night; seamen begin theirs twelve
hours sooner, at noon; the Jews commence their days at 6 o'clock in the
evening, between the two extremes. Are we _all_ right? No! Who shall
settle this question? God! Very well: He called the light day, and the
darkness he called night, and the evening and the morning were the first
day. Gen. i: 5. Then the twenty-four hour day commenced at 6 o'clock in
the evening. How is that, says one? Because you cannot regulate the day
and night to have what the Saviour calls twelve hours in the day,
without establishing the time from the centre of the earth, the equator,
where, at the beginning of the sacred year, the sun rises and sets at 6
o'clock. At _this_ time, while the sun is at the summer solstice, the
inhabitants of the north pole have no night, while at this same time at
the south it is about all night, therefore the inhabitants of the earth
have no other right time to commence their twenty-four hour day, than
beginning at 6 o'clock in the evening. God said to Moses '_from even,
unto even, shall you celebrate your Sabbath_.' Then of course the next
day must begin where the Sabbath ended. History shows that the Jews
obeyed and commenced their days at 6 o'clock in the evening. Now then we
will try to investigate the main argument by which these authors, and
thousands of others say the Sabbath was changed. The first is in John
xx: 19, "Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week
when the doors where shut where the disciples were assembled _for fear
of the Jews_ (mark it) came Jesus and stood in their midst, and said
peace be unto you." Here we understand this to be the same day of the
resurrection. On that same day he travelled with the two disciples to
Emans, sixty furlongs (7-1/2 miles), and they constrained him to abide
with them, for it was toward evening and the _day was far spent_. Luke
xxiv: 29. After this the disciples travelled the 7-1/2 miles back to
Jerusalem and soon after they found the disciples, the Saviour, as above
stated, was in their midst. Now it cannot be disputed but what this was
the evening after the resurrection, for Jesus rose in the morning, some
ten or eleven hours after the first day had commenced. Then the evening
of the first day was passing away, and therefore the evening brought to
view in [33]the text was the close of the first day or the commencing
of the second. McKnight's translation says, "in the evening of that
day." Purver's translation says, "the evening of that day on the first
after the Sabbath." Further, wherever the phrase first day of the week,
occurs in the New Testament, the word day is in _italics_, showing that
it is not the original; but supplied by translators. Again, it is
asserted that Jesus met with his disciples the next first day. See 26v:
"And _after_ eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with
them, then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and
said peace be unto you." Dr. Adam Clark in referring to this 26v, says:
"It seems likely that this was precisely on that day se'night on which
Christ had appeared to them before; and from this we may learn that this
was the weekly meeting of the Apostles." Now it appears to me that a
little child, with the simple rules of addition and subtraction, could
have refuted this man. I feel astonished that men who profess to be
ambassadors for God do not expose such downright perversion of
scripture, but it may look clear to those who want to have it so. Not
many months since, in conversation with the Second Advent lecturer in
New Bedford, I brought up this subject. He told me I did not understand
it. See here, says he. I can make it plain, counting his fingers thus:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday,
Sunday--does'nt that make eight days after? and because I would not
concede, he parted from me as one that was obstinate and self-willed.
Afterwards musing on the subject, I said, this must be the way then to
understand it: _Count Sunday Twice._ If any of them were to be paid for
eight days labor, they would detect the error in a moment if their
employer should attempt to put the first and last days together, and
offer them pay but for seven. Eight days _after_ the evening of the
first day would stand thus: The second day of the week would certainly
be the first of the eight. Then to count eight days of twenty-four hours
_after_, we must begin at the close of the evening of the first, and
count to the close of the evening of the second day; to where the Jews
(by God's command) commenced their third day. But suppose we calculate
it by our mode of keeping time. Our Lord appears to his disciples the
first time at the close of Sunday evening. Now count eight days _after_,
(with your fingers or anything else,) and it will bring you to Monday
evening. Now I ask if this looks like Sunday, the first day of the week?


[34]Father Miller also gives his reasons for the change, in his lecture
on the great Sabbath: "One is Christ's resurrection and his often
meeting with his disciples _afterwards_ on that day. This, with the
example of the Apostles, is strong evidence that the proper creation
Sabbath to man, came on the first day of the week." His proof is this:
"Adam must have rested on the first day of his life, and thus you will
see that to Adam it was the first day of the week, for it would not be
reasonable to suppose that Adam began to reckon time before he was
created." He certainly could not be able to work six days before the
first Sabbath. And thus with the second Adam; the first day of the week
he arose and lived. And we find by the _bible_ and by history, that the
first day of the week "_was ever afterwards observed as a day of
worship_." Now I say there is no more truth in these assertions, than
there is in those I have already quoted. There is not one passage in the
bible to show that Christ met with his disciples on the first day of the
week after the day of his resurrection, nor that the first day of the
week was _ever afterwards_ observed as a day of worship; save only in
one instance, and that shall be noticed in its place. And it seems to me
if Adam could not reckon time only from his creation then by the same
rule no other man could reckon time before his birth, and by this
showing Christ could not reckon his time until after his resurrection.
It is painful to me to expose the errors of one whom I have so long
venerated, and still love for the flood of light he has given the world
in respect to the Second Advent of our Saviour; but God's word must be
vindicated if we have to cut off a right arm, "there is nothing true but
truth!" I pray God to forgive him in joining the great multitude of
Advent believers, to sound the retreat back beyond the _tarrying_ time,
just when the virgins had gained a glorious victory over the world, the
flesh, and the devil! Go back from this to the slumbering quarters now;
nothing but treachery to our Master's cause ever dictated such a course!
I never can be made to believe that our glorious Commander designed that
we should leave our sacrifices smoking on the altar of God, in the midst
of the enemies' land, but rather that we should be pushing onward from
victory to victory, until we are established in the Capital of _His_
kingdom. Would it have been expedient or a mark of courage in General
Taylor, after he had conquered the Mexican army on the 9th May last, to
have retreated back to the capital of the U. States, to place himself
and army on the _broad platform_ of liberty, and [35]commence to travel
the ground over again for the purpose of pursuing and overcoming his
vanquished foe? No! Every person of common sense knows that such a
course would have overwhelmed him and all his followers with unutterable
disgrace, no matter how unrighteous the contest. Not so with this, for
our cause is one of the most glorious, tho' it be the most trying that
ever the sun shone upon since God placed it in the heavens. Onward and
victory, then, are our watchwords, and no retreating back to, or beyond
the cry at _Midnight_! But to the subject. Did our Saviour ever meet
with his disciples on the first day of the week after the evening of the
day of his resurrection? The xxi. ch. John says "they went a fishing,
and while there Jesus appeared unto them." In the 14th v. he says, "This
is now the third time that Jesus shewed himself to his disciples after
that he was risen from the dead." Now turn to 1 Cor. xv: 4-7: Paul's
testimony is, 'that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve, after
that of above five hundred brethren at once, and then of James, then of
all the Apostles.' These are all that are specified, up to his going
into heaven. Now pray tell me if you can, where these men got their
information respecting the frequent meetings on the first day of the
week. The bible says no such thing. But let us pursue the subject and
look at the third text, "Upon the first day of the week let every one of
you lay by him in _store_, as God has prospered him, that there be no
gatherings when I come." Now please turn back to Dr. Dodridge's
authority, he says the argument is too obvious to need any illustration,
that the money was put into common stock, and that this was the
religious observance of the first day of the week. Now whoever will read
the first six verses of this chapter, and compare them with Rom. xv:
26-33, will see that Paul's design was to collect some money for the
poor saints at Jerusalem, and their laying it by them in store until he
came that way; for it plainly implies that they were at home, for no one
could understand that you had money lying by you in store, if it was in
common stock or in other hands. Again, see Acts xviii: 4, 11. Paul
preaching every Sabbath day, at this very time, for eighteen months, to
these very same Corinthians, bids them farewell, to go up to the feast
at Jerusalem, 21 v. By reading to xxi. ch. 17 v. you have his history
until he arrives there. Now I ask, if Dr. Dodridge's clear illustration
can or will be relied on, when Luke clearly teaches that Paul's _manner_
was, and that he did always preach to them on the Sabbath, which, of
course, [36]was the Seventh day, and not the first day of the week.
Fourth text, John says: I was in the spirit on the Lord's day. Here Dr.
D. concludes with the generality of christian writers on this subject
that this strongly infers the extraordinary regard paid to the first day
of the week, as solemnly consecrated to Christ, &c. If the scripture any
where called this the Lord's day, there might be some reason to believe
their statements, but the seventh day Sabbath is called the Lord's day.
See Exod. xx: 10.

Mr. Fisher, in speaking of the late Harrisburg convention of 1844-45,
says, "The most spirited debate that occurred at the assembly was to fix
a proper name for the first day of the week, whether it should be called
_Sabbath_, the _Christian_ Sabbath or _Lord's_ day. The reason for this
dispute was, that there was no authority for calling the first day of
the week by either one of these names. To pretend that that command was
fixed and unchangeable, and yet to alter it to please the fancy of man,
is in itself ridiculous. It is hardly possible in the nature of man,
that a class of society should be receiving pay for their services and
not be influenced thereby:--in the nature of things they will avoid such
doctrines as are repugnant to them that give them bread."

Now we come to the fifth and last, and only one spoken of in all the New
Testament, for a meeting on the first day of the week. Luke says, "Upon
the first day of the week when the disciples came together to break
bread, Paul preached unto them, _ready to depart on the morrow_: and
continued his speech until midnight." Acts xx: 7. Now by following the
scripture mode of computing time, from 6 o'clock in the evening to 6
o'clock in the morning, as has been shown, Paul to commence on the
beginning of the first day would begin on what we call Saturday evening
at 6 o'clock, and preach till midnight. After that he restores to life
the young man, then breaks bread and talked till the break of day, which
would be Sunday morning. Then he commenced his journey for Jerusalem and
travelled and sailed all day Sunday, the first day of the week, and two
other days in succession. xx: 11-15. Now it seems to me, if Paul did
teach or keep the first day of the week for the Sabbath or a holy day,
he violated the sanctity of it to all intents and purposes, without
giving one single reason for it; all the proof presented here is a night
meeting. Please see the quotation from the British Quarterly Review. But
let us look at it the way in which _we_ compute time: I think it will be
fair to premise, that about midnight was the middle of [37]Paul's
meeting; at any rate there is but one midnight to a twenty-four hour
day. We say that Sunday, the first day of the week, does not commence
until 12 o'clock Saturday night. Then it is very clear, if he is
preaching on the first day till midnight, according to our reckoning it
must be on Sunday night, and his celebrating the Lord's supper after
midnight would make it that he broke bread on _Monday, the second day_,
and that the day time on Sunday is not included, unless he had continued
his speech through the day till midnight. Now the text says that on the
first day of the week they came together to break bread. To _prove that
they did break bread on that day_, we must take the mode in which the
Jews computed time, and allow the first day of the week to begin at 6
o'clock on Saturday evening, and to follow Paul's example, pay no regard
to the first day, after daylight, but to travel, &c. If _our_ mode of
time is taken, they broke bread on the second day, and that would
destroy the meaning of the text. Here then, in this text, is the _only_
argument that can be adduced in the scriptures of divine truth, for a
_change of the perpetual seventh day_ Sabbath of the Lord our God to the
first day of the week.

Now I'll venture the assertion, that there is no law or commandment
recorded in the bible, that God has held so sacred among men, as the
keeping of His Sabbath. Where then, I ask, is the living man that dare
stand before God and declare that here is the change for the church of
God to keep the first instead of the seventh day of the week for the
Sabbath. If it could be proved that Paul preached here all of the first
day, the only inference that could be drawn, would be, to break bread on
that day!

There is one more point worthy of our attention, that is, the teaching
and example of Jesus. I have been told by one that is looked up to as a
strong believer in the second coming of the Lord this fall, that Jesus
broke the Sabbath. Jesus says, I have kept my Father's commandments. It
is said that he 'broke the Sabbath,' because he allowed his disciples to
pluck the corn and eat it on that day, and the Pharisees condemned them.
He says, "If ye had known what this meaneth, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the _guiltless_." Then they were
not _guilty_. See Deut. xxiii: 25. He immediately cites them to David
and his men, shewing that it was lawful and right when hungry, even to
eat the shoe bread that belonged only to the priests, and told them that
he was Lord of the Sabbath day. Here he shows too, that he was with his
[38]disciples passing to the synagogue to teach; they ask him if it was
lawful to heal on the Sabbath day. He asks them if they had a sheep fall
into the ditch on the Sabbath, if they would not haul him out? How much
better then is a man than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on
the Sabbath days; and immediately healed the man with a withered hand.
Matt. xii: 1-13. On another Sabbath day, while he was teaching, he
healed a woman that had been bound of satan eighteen years, and when the
ruler of the synagogue began to find fault, he called him a hypocrite,
and said "doth not each one of you on the Sabbath day loose his ox or
his ass from the stall and lead him away to watering; and all his
adversaries were _ashamed_." Luke xiii: 10-17. The xiv. chapter of Luke
is quoted to prove that he broke the Sabbath because he went into the
Pharisees house with many others on the Sabbath day to eat bread. Here
he saw a man with the dropsy and he asked them if it was lawful to heal
on the Sabbath day. 'And they held their peace and he took him and
healed him,' and asked them 'which of them having an ox or an ass fall
into the pit, would not straitway pull him out on the Sabbath day; and
they could not answer him again.' 1-6 v. And 'he continued to teach
them, by showing them when they made a feast to call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, the blind, and then they should be blessed.' Read the
chapter, and you will readily see that he took this occasion, as the
most befitting, to teach them by parables, what their duty was at
weddings and feasts, in the same manner as he taught them in their
synagogues.

There is still another passage, and I believe the only one, to which
reference has been made, (except where he opened the eyes of a man that
was born blind,) for proof that he broke the Sabbath. It is recorded in
John v: 5-17. Here Jesus found a man that had been sick thirty-eight
years, by the pool of Bethesda, 'he saith unto him rise, take up thy bed
and walk,--therefore did they persecute Jesus and sought to slay him,
because he had done these things on the Sabbath day.' 16 v. 'But Jesus
answered them, my Father worketh hitherto and I work.' If they did not
work every hour and moment of time, it would be impossible for man to
exist: Here undoubtedly he had reference to these and other acts of
necessity and mercy; but the great sin for which professors in this
enlightened age charge the Saviour with in this transaction, is, in
directing the man to take up his bed, contrary to law. It is clear the
people [39]were forbidden to carry burthens on the Sabbath day, as in
Jer. xvii: 21, 22, but by reading the 24th v. in connection with Neh.
xiii: 15-22, we learn that this prohibition related to what was lawful
for them to do on the other six days of the week, viz. merchandise and
trading. See proof, Neh. x: 31: also unlawful, as in Amos viii: 5. We
need not, nor we cannot misunderstand the fourth commandment, taken in
connection with the other nine, they were simple and pure written by the
finger of God; but in the days of our Saviour it had become heavily
laden with Jewish traditions, hence when Jesus appeals to them whether
it is lawful to do good and to heal on the Sabbath days, their mouths
are closed because they cannot contradict him from the law nor the
prophets. The Saviour no where interferes with them in their most rigid
observance of the day; but when they find fault with him for performing
his miracles of mercy on that day, he tells them they have broken the
law; and in another place, "If a man on the Sabbath day receive
circumcision without breaking the law of Moses, are ye angry at me
because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath day?" He then
says, "Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
judgment." vii: 23, 24. Did he break the Sabbath? Now the law requires
that the beasts shall rest; but what is the practice of many of those
who are the most strict in keeping Sunday for the Sabbath. Sick, or
well, ministers or laymen, do they not ride back and forth to meeting?
Again, is it right and lawful to carry forth our dead on the Sabbath? or
carry the communion service back and forth. The Apostle says, 'believe
and be baptized.' Suppose this should be on the Sabbath and we were some
distance from the water, would any one interfere with us if we carried
our change of apparel with us and back again, or have we in so doing
transgressed the law; if we have, it is high time we made a full stop.
Jesus undoubtedly had good reasons for directing the sick man to take up
his bed and walk, but I cannot learn that he justified any one else in
carrying their bed on the Sabbath, unless in a case of necessity and
mercy, such as he cited them to, as watering their cattle, and pulling
them out of the ditch, and eating when hungry, and being healed when
sick. Be it also remembered that when the Sanhedrim tried him they did
not condemn him, as in the other cases cited; so in this, they failed
for want of scripture testimony. He was the Lord of the Sabbath, and the
law of ceremonies were now about [40]to cease forever, the ten
commandments with the keeping of the Sabbath therefore were to be
stripped of these ceremonies and all of their traditions, and left as
pure to be written on the hearts of the Gentiles as when first written
on tables of stone, therefore Jesus taught that it was right to do good
on the Sabbath day, and whoever follows his example and teaching will
keep the seventh day Sabbath holy and acceptable to God. They will also
judge righteous judgement, and not according to appearance.

There is but one Christian Sabbath named, or established in the bible,
and that individual, whoever he is, that undertakes to abolish or change
it, is the _real Sabbath breaker_. Remember that the keeping the
commandments is the only safe guide through the gates into the city.

My friends and neighbors, and especially my family, know that I have for
more than twenty years, strictly endeavored to keep the first day of the
week for the Sabbath, and I can say that I did it in all good conscience
before God, on the ocean, and in foreign countries as well as my own,
until about sixteen months since I read an article published in the Hope
of Israel, by a worthy brother, T. M. Preble, of Nashua, which when I
read and compared with the bible, convinced me that there never had been
any change. Therefore the seventh day was the Sabbath, and God required
me as well as him to keep it holy. Many things now troubled my mind as
to how I could make this great change, family, friends, and brethren
and, but this one passage of Scripture was, and always will be as clear
as a sunbeam. "_What is that to thee: follow thou me._" In a few days my
mind was made up to begin to keep the fourth commandment, and I bless
God for the clear light he has shed upon my mind in answer to prayer and
a thorough examination of the scriptures on this great subject. Contrary
views did, after a little, shake my position some, but I feel now that
there is no argument nor sophistry that can becloud my mind again this
side of the gates of the Holy City. Brother Marsh, who no doubt thinks,
and perhaps thousands besides, that his paper is what it purports to be,
THE VOICE OF TRUTH, takes the ground with the infidel that there is no
Sabbath. Brother S. S. Snow, of New York, late editor of the Jubilee
Standard, publishes to the world that he is the Elijah, preceding the
advent of our Saviour, restoring all things: (the seventh day Sabbath
must be one of the all things,) and yet he takes the same ground with
Br. Marsh, that the Sabbath [41]is forever abolished. As the seventh
day Sabbath is a real prophecy, a picture (and not a shadow like the
Jewish Sabbaths,) of the thing typified which is to come, I cannot see
how those who believe in the change or abolition of the type, can have
any confidence to look to God for the great antetype, the Sabbath of
rest, to come to them.

Brother J. B. Cook has written a short piece in his excellent paper, the
ADVENT TESTIMONY. It was pointed and good, but too short; and as brother
Preble's Tract now before me, did not embrace the arguments which have
been presented since he published it, it appeared to me that something
was called for in this time of falling back from this great subject. I
therefore present this book, hoping at least, that it will help to
strengthen and save all honest souls seeking after truth.

A WORD RESPECTING THE HISTORY. At the close of the first century a
controversy arose, whether both days should be kept or only one, which
continued until the reign of Constantine the Great. By his laws, made in
A. D. 321, it was decreed for the future that Sunday should be kept a
day of rest in all the cities and towns; but he allowed the country
people to follow husbandry. History further informs us that Constantine
murdered his two sisters husbands and son, and his own familiar friend,
that same year, and the year before boiled his wife in a cauldron of
oil.--The controversy still continued down to A. D. 603, when Pope
Gregory passed a law abolishing the seventh day Sabbath, and
establishing the first day of the week. See Baronius Councils, 603.
Barnfield's Eng. page 116, states that the Parliament of England met on
Sundays till the time of Richard II. The first law of England made for
keeping of Sunday, was in the time of Edward IV. about 1470. As these
two books are not within my reach, I have extracted from T. M. Preble's
tract on the Sabbath. Mr. Fisher says, it was Dr. Bound one of the rigid
puritans, who applied the name _Sabbath_ to the first day of the week,
about the year 1795. "The word Sunday is not found in the bible," it
derived its name from the heathen nations of the North, because the day
was dedicated to the sun. Neither is the Sabbath applied to the first
day any more than it is to the sixth day of the week. While Daniel
beheld the little horn, (popery) he said, among other things, he would
_think_ to change times and laws. Now this could not mean of men,
because it ever has been the prerogative of absolute rulers like
himself, to change [42]manmade laws. Then to make the prophecy
harmonize with the scripture, he must have meant times and laws
established by God, because he might think and pass decrees as he has
done, but he, nor all the universe could ever change God's times and
laws. Jesus says that "times and seasons were in the power of the
father." The Sabbath is the most important law which God ever
instituted. "How long refuse ye to keep my commandments, and my laws,
see for that the Lord hath given you the Sabbath." Exod. xvi: 28, 29.
Then it's clear from the history, that this is in part what Daniel
meant. Now the second advent believers have professed all confidence in
his visions: why then doubt this. Whoever feels disposed to defend and
sustain the decrees of that "blasphemous" power, and especially Pope
Gregory and the great Constantine, the murderer, shown to be the _moral_
reformer in this work of changing the Sabbath, are welcome to their
principles and feelings. I detest these acts, in common with all others
which have emanated from these ten and one horned powers. The
Revelations show us clearly that they were originated by the devil. If
you say this history is not true then you are bound to refute it. If you
cannot, you are as much in duty bound to believe it as any other
history, even, that George Washington died in 1799! If the bible
argument, and testimony from history are to be relied on as evidence,
then it is as clear as a sunbeam that the seventh day Sabbath is a
perpetual sign, and is as binding upon man as it ever was. But we are
told we must keep the first day of the week for the Sabbath as an
ordinance to commemorate the resurrection of Jesus. I for one had rather
believe Paul. See Rom. vi: 3-5; Gal. iii: 27; Col. ii: 12.

A word more respecting time. See 31st page. Here I have shown that the
sun in the centre, regulates all time for the earth--fifty-two weeks to
the year, one hundred and sixty-eight hours to the week, the seventh of
which is twenty-four hours. Jesus says there are but twelve hours in the
day, (from sunrise to sunset.) Then twelve hours night to make a
twenty-four hour day, you see, must always begin at a certain period of
time. No matter then whether the sun sets with us at eight in summer or
4 o'clk in winter. Now by this, and this is the scripture rule, days and
weeks can, and most probably are, kept at the North and South polar
regions. What an absurdity to believe that God does exonerate our
fathers and brothers from [43]keeping his Sabbath while they are in
these polar regions, fishing for seals and whales, should it be with
them either all day or all night. If they have lost their reckoning of
days and weeks, because there was, or was not any sun six months of the
time, how could they learn what day of the week it was when they see the
sun setting at 6 o'clock on the equator, if bound home from the South?
By referring to Luke, xxiii ch. 55, 56, and xxiv: 1, we see that the
people in Palestine had kept the days and weeks right from the creation;
since which time, astronomers teach us that not even fifteen minutes
have been lost. God does not require us to be any more exact in keeping
time, than what we may or have learned from the above rules, but I am
told there is a difference in time of twenty-four hours to the mariner
that circumnavigates the globe. That, being true, is known to them, but
it alters no time on the earth or sea.

But, says one, I should like to keep the Sabbath in _time_, just as
Jesus did. Then you must live in Palestine, where their day begins seven
hours earlier than ours; and yet it is at 6 o'clock in the evening the
same period, though not the same by the sun, in which we begin our day.
Let me illustrate: our earth, something in the form of an orange, is
whirling over every twenty-four hours. It measures three hundred and
sixty degrees, or about twenty-one thousand six hundred miles round, in
the manner you would pass a string round an orange. Now divide this
three hundred and sixty degrees by the twenty-four hour day, and the
result is fifteen degrees, or nine hundred miles. Then every fifteen
degrees we travel or sail eastward, the sun rises and sets one hour
earlier in the period of the twenty-four hours: therefore those who live
in Palestine, one hundred and seven degrees east of us, begins and
closes the day seven hours earlier, so in proportion all the way round
the globe, the sun always stationary! Then the Sabbath begins precisely
at 6 o'clock on Friday evening, every where on this globe, and ends at
the same period on what we call Saturday evening. God says 'every thing
on its day,' 'from even unto even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath;' 'the
evening and the morning was the first day.' He is an exact time keeper!
I say then, in the name of all that is holy, heavenly and true, and as
immortality is above all price, let us see to it that we are found
fearing God and keeping his COMMANDMENTS, for this, we are taught, 'is
the whole duty of man.' The proof is positive that the seventh day
Sabbath is included in the commandments.

[44]Bro. Marsh says, "Keeping the Sabbath is embraced in this covenant.
Deut. v: 1-6, made with the children of Israel at Horeb. It was not made
with their Fathers (the Patriarchs) but with us, even us, who are all of
US HERE ALIVE THIS DAY. v. 3. This testimony first _negative_, he made
it not with our Fathers, and then _positive_ with _us_, is conclusive.
Not a single proof can be presented from either the old or new
testament, that it was instituted for any other people or nation." Now
it is clear and positive that if the Sabbath is not binding on any other
people than the Jews, by the same rule not one of the commandments is
binding on any other people, who dare take such infidel ground? Was not
the second covenant written on the hearts of the Gentile, even the law
of Commandments? which Paul says 'is Holy, just and good.' Thirty years
after the crucifixion he directs the Ephesians to the keeping the fifth
commandment, that they may live long on the _earth_ not the land of
Canaan. vi: 2, 3. Did not God say that Abraham kept his commandments,
statutes, and laws? This embraced the Sabbath for circumcision, and the
Sabbath were then the only laws, or statutes, or commandments written.
The fourth commandment was given two thousand years before Abraham was
born! Is not the stranger and all within their gates included in the
covenant to keep the Sabbath? See Exod. xx: 10. And did not God require
them to keep THE Sabbath before he made this covenant with them in
Horeb? See Exod. xvi: 27-30. Does not Isaiah say that God will bless the
_man_, and the _son_ of _man_, and the _sons_ of the _stranger_, that
keep THE Sabbath? These certainly mean the Gentiles. lvi: 2-3, 6-7.
Also, in the lviii. ch. 13, 14, the promise is to all that keep the
Sabbath. To what people did _the_ Sabbath belong at the destruction of
Jerusalem, nearly forty years after the crucifixion? Matt. xxiv: 20. The
Gentiles certainly were embraced in the covenant by this time! Why was
it Paul's manner always to preach on the seventh day Sabbath to Jews and
Gentiles?

By what authority do you call the seventh day Sabbath, the Jewish
Sabbath? The bible says it is the Sabbath of the _Lord our God_! And
Jesus said that he was the 'Lord of the Sabbath day.' He moreover told
the Jews that the Sabbath was made for MAN! Where do you draw the
distinguishing line, to show which is and which is not MAN between the
_natural seed of Abraham_ and the Gentiles? "Is he the God of the Jews
only? Is he not also of the [45]Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also!"
Then Paul says 'there is no difference,' and that 'there is no respect
of persons with God.' Is it not clear, then, that the Sabbath was made
for Adam and his posterity, the whole family of _man_? How very fearful
you are that God's people should keep the bible Sabbath! You say, 'let
us be cautious, lest we disinherit ourselves by seeking the inheritance
under the wrong covenant.' Your meaning is, not to seek to keep the
Sabbath covenant, but the one made to Abraham. If you can tell us what
precept there is in the Abrahamic covenant that we must now keep to be
_saved_, that is not embraced in the one given at Mount Sinai, then we
will endeavor to keep that too, with the Sabbath of the Lord our God. If
the Sabbath, as you say, is abolished, why do you, JOSEPH MARSH,
continue to call the first day of the week the Sabbath. See V. T., 15th
July. If you profess to utter the VOICE OF TRUTH from the bible, do be
consistent, and also willing that _other papers_, besides yours and the
Advent Herald, should give the present truth to the flock of God. I say
let it go with lightning speed, every way, as does the political news by
the electric telegraph. If the whole law and the prophets hang on the
commandments, and by keeping them we enter into life, how will you, or
I, enter in if we do not 'keep the commandments.' See Exod. xvi: 28-30.
Jesus says, "therefore whosoever shall break one of these least
commandments and shall teach men so, shall be called the least in the
kingdom," &c. "Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole
duty of man." Amen!

In the xxxi. ch. of Exod., God says, "Wherefore the children of ISRAEL
shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their
generations for a _perpetual_ covenant; it is a _sign_ between me and
the children of ISRAEL _forever_." 16, 17 v. _Who are the true
Israelites?_ Answer, God's people. Hear Paul: "Is he the God of the Jews
only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also; from
uncircumcision through _faith_." Rom. iii: 29, 30. God gave his
re-enacted commandment or covenant to the natural Jew in B. C. 1491.
They broke this covenant, as he told Moses they would, for which God
partially destroyed and dispersed them; God then brought in a new
covenant which continued the sign of the Sabbath, which was confirmed by
Jesus and his Apostle about 1525 years from the first. See Heb. viii: 8,
10, 13; Rom. ii: 13. Their breaking the first covenant never could
[46]destroy the commandments of God. Therefore this new, or second
covenant, made with the house of ISRAEL, Heb. viii: 10 v. (not the
natural Jew only,) is indelibly written upon the heart. Now every child
takes the name of his parents. Let us see what the angel Gabriel says to
Mary concerning her son: "The Lord God will give him the throne of David
_his_ Father, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob forever." Luke
i: 31, 33.

Now the prophecy: "There shall come a star out of _Jacob_ and a sceptre
shall rise out of _Israel_." Num. Now 1735 years before Jesus was born,
God changed Jacob's name to _Israel_, because he prevailed with him.
This then is the family name for all who overcome, or prevail. God gave
this name to his spiritual child, namely, _Israel_. Then Jesus will
'reign over the house of _Israel_ forever.' This must include all that
are saved in the everlasting kingdom. Further, Joseph was the natural
son of Jacob or _Israel_. In his prophetic view and dying testimony to
his children, he says, Joseph is a fruitful bough, from _thence is the
shepherd_ the stone of _Israel_. Gen. xlix: 22-34. Then this Shepherd
(Jesus) is a descendant, and is of the house of _Israel_. Does he not
say that he is the Shepherd of the Sheep,--what, of the Jews only? No,
but also of the Gentile, 'for the promise is not through the law (of
ceremonies) but thro' the righteousness of _faith_.' Rom. iv: 13. Micah
says, 'They shall smite the Judge of _Israel_, that IS to BE the RULER
in ISRAEL. v: 1, 2. Now Jesus never was a _Judge_ nor _Ruler_ in
_Israel_. This, then, is a prophecy in the future, that he will judge,
and be the Ruler over the whole house of _Israel_. All the family, both
natural Jew and Gentile, will assume the family name, the _whole Israel_
of God. The angel Gabriel's message, then, is clear; David is the Father
of Jesus, according to the flesh, and Jacob, or rather Israel his
Father, and Jesus reigns over the house of Israel forever. Paul says,
'He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly.' Rom. ii. 'There is no difference between the Jew and the
Greek, (or Gentile) for they are not all _Israel_ which are of _Israel_,
neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all children.'
Why? Because the children of the promise, of Isaac (is the true seed.)
ix. and x. ch. To the Gallatinns he says, 'Now to Abraham (the
Grandfather of Israel) and his seed were the promises made; not to many,
but as of one and to thy seed, which is CHRIST--then says, there is
neither Jew nor Greek--but one in Christ Jesus, and if [47]ye be Christ
then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise.' iii.
'And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the ISRAEL of God.' vi. This, then, is the name of the
whole family in heaven; Christ is God's only Son and lawful heir; none
but the true seed can be joint heirs with Christ in the covenant made
with Abraham. Ezekiel's prophecy in xxxvii. chapter, God says 'he will
bring up out of their _graves_ the WHOLE HOUSE OF ISRAEL,' 'and I'll put
my spirit in you and ye shall _live_.' 12-14. If God here means any
other than the spiritual _Israel_, then Universalism is true--for the
_whole_ house of natural Israel did not die in faith; if the wicked Jews
are to be raised and live before God, then will _all_ the wicked! For
God is no respecter of persons: 'And the heathen shall know that I the
Lord do sanctify _Israel_ when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of
them forever more.' 28 v. Here, then, we prove, that the dead and living
saints are the whole _Israel_ of God, and the Covenant and Sign is
binding on them into the gates of the holy city. Rev. xx: 14.




[48]RECAPITULATION


Page 3. _When was the Sabbath instituted?_ Here we have endeavored to
show when, and how it continued until its re-enactment on Mount Sinai.

Page 9. _Has the Sabbath been abolished since the seventh day of
creation? If so, when, and where is the proof?_ Here we believe we have
adduced incontestible proof from the scriptures; from the two separate
codes of laws given, viz: the first on tables of stone, called by God
prophets, Jesus, and his Apostle. 3. The commandments of God. 2d code,
the Book of Moses, as written from the mouth of God, the book of
ceremonies, combining ecclesiastical and civil law, which Paul shows was
nailed to the cross with all _their Sabbaths_ as _carnal commandments_,
because their feasts commenced and ended with a Sabbath. See Lev. xxiii.

Please read from 16th page onward, how Jesus and the Apostle make the
distinction.

Page 27. _Was the seventh day Sabbath ever changed? If so, when, and for
what reason?_ Here we find, by examining the proofs set forth by those
who favor and insist upon the change, that there is not one passage of
scripture in the bible to sustain it, but to the contrary, that Jesus
kept it and gave directions about it at the destruction of Jerusalem.
Paul also, and other Apostles taught how we were to keep the
commandments.

     Page 42. 4th, The History which is uncontroverted.
              5th, The time when the Sabbath commences.
              6th, Who are true Israel.




Transcriber's Notes


Page numbers from the original have been retained and enclosed in []
square brackets.  Page 2 was blank in the original.

This is an old text. As such, spelling is often inconsistent. Spelling
has been left as in the original with one exception. The following
typographical error has been corrected:

     page 30: so is[original has ts] it with President Humphrey

The following puntuation corrections have been made to the text.

     page 1: but the keeping the commandments of God."[ending
     quotation mark missing in scan]

     page 4: my _commandments_, my _statutes_ and my
     _laws_."[ending quotation mark missing in scan]

     page 6: children of Israel _forever_."[ending quotation mark
     missing in scan]

     page 10: [quotation mark missing in original]"For it seemed
     good

     page 11: school of Tyranus.[original has extraneous quotation
     mark]

     page 14: third part of a shekel"[quotation mark missing in
     original] (to pay for) "the burnt _offerings_

     page 16: children of Israel in Mount Sinai;"[quotation mark
     missing in original]

     page 20: not under the _law_ but under grace.[period missing
     in original]"

     page 21: the commandment is charity,"[quotation mark missing
     in original]

     page 22: "Touch not, taste not, handle not.[original has
     comma]"

     page 22: a better hope did."[quotation mark missing in
     original]

     page 30: argument he had before presented.[period missing in
     original]

     page 30: "[quotation mark missing in original]it was so at
     that time

     page 30: "[quotation mark missing in original]it might be
     proved

     page 34: before he was created."[quotation mark missing in
     original]

     page 38: Luke xiii: 10-17.[original has comma]

     page 41: the ADVENT TESTIMONY.[original has comma]

     page 42: [original has extraneous quotation mark]Jesus says
     there are but twelve hours

     page 44: [original has extraneous quotation mark]This
     testimony first _negative_

     page 45: under the wrong covenant.'[quotation mark missing in
     original]

     page 46: nor _Ruler_ in _Israel_.[period missing in original]

     page 46: ix.[original has comma] and x. ch.

     page 46: Rom. ii.[original has Rom,ii.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seventh Day Sabbath, a Perpetual
Sign, from the Beginning to the Entering into the Gates of the Holy City, According to the Commandment, by Joseph Bates

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEVENTH DAY SABBATH ***

***** This file should be named 22098.txt or 22098.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/0/9/22098/

Produced by Cally Soukup, Heiko Evermann, Lisa Reigel, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
