The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Goody-Naughty Book, by Sarah Cory Rippey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Goody-Naughty Book

Author: Sarah Cory Rippey

Illustrator: Blanche Fisher Wright

Release Date: August 1, 2007 [EBook #22197]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOODY-NAUGHTY BOOK ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note: This book was printed with two stories, back to back.
Reading from the front cover, it is "The Goody Side," where children are
well-behaved and polite. Reading from the back cover forward is "The
Naughty Side," where children behave quite differently. The stories are
presented sequentially in this text. Page numbering is independent in
each story.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE GOODY-NAUGHTY BOOK

THE GOODY SIDE

By
SARAH CORY RIPPEY

With illustrations by
BLANCHE FISHER WRIGHT

RAND McNALLY & COMPANY
CHICAGO--NEW YORK

Copyright, 1913, By Rand McNally & Company
All rights reserved

Edition of 1927

Made in U. S. A.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE CONTENTS
                                       PAGE

HONOR BRIGHT, PRESIDENT                   9

ROSE-RED AND RUTHIE                      11

THE TREE GAME                            14

BILLY BOY'S MAGIC KEY                    16

POLLY'S NEW APRIL FOOL                   18

THE THREE B'S                            23

TEDDY'S HELPERS                          26

THE RED-LETTER DAY                       30

-----------------------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration: Honor Bright faithfully fed all his pets]

HONOR BRIGHT, PRESIDENT


When Honor Bright went to live in the country the very first thing he
asked for was some real live geese, to join the chickens, and the pussy,
and the rabbits already on the farm.

"Will you remember to feed them every day, son, if I get you a pair?"
asked his father.

"Yes, papa," said the little boy. "Honor bright!"

When he promised "Honor bright," he always kept his word. And he said
"Honor bright" so many times a day that finally Honor Bright became his
name.

"Quack, quack!" cried Mr. and Mrs. Goose the day Honor Bright's father
brought them home. "What a fine place!"

"Isn't it!" said Mother Hen.

"And just wait till you know Honor Bright!"

"Just wait!" echoed the Rabbit Gray family, and Mr. T. Cat.

Honor Bright was as good as his word, and the geese grew fatter, and
fatter, and fatter.

"Good morning, Mr. T. Cat," cried Mr. and Mrs. Goose early one morning.
"Had your breakfast?"

"Of course," answered Mr. T. Cat; "Honor Bright always feeds me the very
first thing."

"You must be mistaken!" cried Mr. and Mrs, Goose. "Honor Bright always
feeds us first."

"But Honor Bright gives my children their breakfast _very_ early!"
cackled Mother Hen.

"Well," squeaked Father Rabbit Gray, "we've all _had_ breakfast; and
that's the main thing. Now, let's make Honor Bright president, because
he's so good. That's the way people do, you know."

Just then Honor Bright came out. "Hail, President Honor Bright!" they
all cried.

Honor Bright thought they said, "I love you." And really, it meant the
same thing.




[Illustration: Every day Rose-Red cut fresh flowers and arranged them
for the house]

ROSE-RED AND RUTHIE


It was Rose Mary's mother who named her Rose-Red. Rose-Ready, it was at
first, because Rose Mary was always ready to help. Then it became just
Rose-Red, for short.

Rose-Red had much of the sweetness of her name flower, and few of the
thorns. That is why, when Ruthie slapped her, Rose-Red didn't slap back.
But she came home crying.

Rose-Red's mamma gathered her up in her arms and comforted her.
"Ruthie's probably sorry now, dear," she said. "Perhaps she will tell
you so by and by. Will my little girl be Rose-Ready, if she does?"

"Rose-Ready for what, mamma?" Rose-Red sat up and dried her eyes.

"Rose-Ready-to-Forgive."

Rose-Red nodded. "I think I'll gather the posies now," was all she said.

Every day Rose-Red cut fresh flowers in the garden and arranged them for
the house. It was the one thing in all the world she liked best to do.
The roses she always left till the last--"for dessert," she explained.

[Illustration: Rose-Red's mamma gathered her up in her arms and
comforted her]

"Roses, dear," she said, as she tucked them one by one into their
special bowl, "what would you do if your best friend slapped you?"

Just then a thorn pricked Rose-Red's finger. "You'd prick her, would
you?" Rose-Red laughed. "That's because you are only a rose and don't
know any better. It wouldn't be nice for a little girl to prick. I _do_
know something better!"

Rose-Red chose six of the finest roses and carefully clipped off all
their thorns. Then she ran to the gate between her yard and Ruthie's,
and slipped them into a covered box beside it. This box was Rose-Red's
and Ruthie's post office. Nearly every day something went into it from
one little girl to the other.

Four o'clock was mail time. Postman Rose-Red hid behind a bush and
watched.

Presently Postman Ruthie came down the path. She opened the box and took
out the fragrant "letter." Then she laid something inside, drew down the
cover, and ran back.

It was Postman Rose-Red's turn now to open the box. Her letter was a
_real_ one. It said, "I'm sorry."

Rose-Ready-to-Forgive flew through the gate.

"Ruthie! Ruthie!" she called.

And then Rose-Red kissed Ruthie, and Ruthie kissed Rose-Red. And that
was the last of Ruthie-Ready-to-Slap.




THE TREE GAME


When Margaret and Benjy were getting over the measles their mamma
invented a new game to amuse them.

"You might play you are trees," she suggested.

"I'm a pine tree!" cried Margaret.

"So'm I," agreed Benjy.

"Pine trees sing, you know, Benjy," Margaret went on, "so we must sing,
too." And the two struck up a lively tune.

Too-dle-dee, too-dle-dee, doo-o-o! It was not the pine trees, however,
that sang it.

"Oh, an organ man!" "Oh, a monkey!" And both little pine trees raced to
the window.

The organ man smiled. "Dance, Tessa, dance!" he cried to his little
girl, grinding away with all his might.

And then how Tessa's little brown legs did flash back and forth, and in
and out! And what funny tricks the wee monkey did!

[Illustration: How Tessa's little brown legs did flash back and forth]

When the music stopped Jocko scrambled up to the window and politely
presented a cup to the trees. "Pennies, please," the funny, wizzened
little face seemed to beg.

The pine trees brought their banks and shook the pennies out, one by
one, into the cup. Then the biggest pine tree thought of something.
"Wait a minute," she cried, and disappeared. When she came back she
carried two plump bananas.

"Here," she said, handing them out through the window.

Tessa smiled her thanks politely, but Jocko just fell to munching
greedily.

The pine trees hung out of the window and watched Tessa and her father
and Jocko as they went off down the street. Finally the biggest pine
tree turned to the littlest pine tree.

"I'm not a pine tree any longer, Benjy," she announced. "I'd rather be
the kind that _gives_ something. I'm a banana tree now."

"So'm I," echoed Benjy.




BILLY BOY'S MAGIC KEY


Billy Boy had a magic key. He carried it in his face. There was a secret
about this key--it always opened doors into pleasant things. His mamma
had taught him that.

Billy Boy was playing in the yard one day when his mamma came to the
door. "Billy Boy, Billy Boy!" she called. "I want you to do some errands
for me!"

When Billy Boy hurried up to the steps his mamma handed him two baskets.

"One is to carry the groceries I've ordered, Billy Boy," she said; "and
there's a cake for Mrs. Thomas in the other. You can leave it on the way
to the store."

Billy Boy's face clouded. "I--I'd rather not go there, mamma," he said.
"Mrs. Thomas is so cross. That's what the boys say."

"That's because they tease her cat, Billy Boy. Remember about the key,
and you'll be all right."

[Illustration: Chief Hughie thought it would be fun to shoot at
something that moved]

[Illustration: She plunged her hand deep down in her pocket and drew
out a bright new nickel]

Billy Boy picked up his baskets and marched off. Pretty soon, thump,
thump, thump! went Mrs. Thomas's brass knocker.

The door flew open. "No," said Mrs. Thomas's loud voice, "I don't
want--" Then she stopped. Billy Boy was using his magic key.

"I'm Mrs. Sheldon's little boy," explained Billy Boy, pulling off his
cap. "Mamma sent you a cake."

Mrs. Thomas just could not resist that key. "Thank you, child," she
said, smiling, and lifting out the cake. "Wait a minute," as Billy
started down the steps.

She plunged her hand deep down in her pocket and drew out a bright new
nickel. "Here," she said, "buy some candy."

The nickel was clutched tightly in Billy Boy's hand when he reached
home. "Look what she gave me!" he cried. "And she wasn't a bit cross. It
must have been 'count of the key."

And the magic key? Why, it was Billy Boy's own sunny smile, to be sure.




POLLY'S NEW APRIL FOOL


"You're losing your hair ribbon, Polly," remarked the twins as their
sister sat down to breakfast one first of April morning.

Polly hastily felt of her head.

"April fool! April fool! April fool!" shrieked the twins joyously,
pounding on the table.

Polly glared at them. It was raining, and Polly, who hated rain, never
could take a joke on a rainy day.

"You're a pair of very rude boys," she said. "Nobody but horrid, rough
boys like you would ever think April Fool's any fun!" And she sulked
through her breakfast without another word.

But Helen was different. Helen liked rain. Moreover, she didn't in the
least mind being fooled, and she laughed just as hard as anybody when
she put salt on her mush instead of sugar.

[Illustration: She fell to work with a will, rolling and folding]

When she went upstairs to put their room in order, however, the room
she and Polly shared, the steady drip, drip, drip of the rain made her
remember Polly's unhappiness, and it troubled her.

A robin, singing his rain song in the tree outside, cocked his head
saucily as Helen went to the window.

"Help her-r-r! Cheer her-r-r! Help her-r-r! Cheer her-r-r!" sang Mr.
Redbreast over and over again as he swung on the dripping branches.

"That's a good idea, Mr. Redbreast," Helen answered. "I'm sure she needs
it. But how shall I do it?"

Mr. Redbreast winked wisely. "You'll find a way--a way--a way!" he
trilled.

Helen spanked a pillow and stood it in its place on the bed. "Thank you,
Mr. Redbreast," she answered politely. "I'll try."

Mr. Redbreast gave his tail a pleased little shake and flew away,
leaving Helen to spank the other pillow and to wonder what she could do
to "help her-r-r, cheer her-r-r."

A blue ribbon was hanging out of the top bureau drawer. "The very
thing!" cried Helen. "I'll straighten out her drawer. It's always in a
muss!" And she fell to work with a will, rolling, and folding, and
arranging things in neat little piles.

The baby stood watching her. "There! What do you suppose she'll think of
that, Buddy?" she asked, as she gave the last pile a happy pat. Then a
new idea popped into her head. She flew downstairs, took a sheet of
writing paper out of the desk, and printed something on it in big black
letters. Then, running back to her room, she laid the paper on the rows
of nice neat piles and carefully closed the drawer.

"I hope she won't mind," she said with a twinkling little smile as she
pulled Buddy up on her lap for a story.

The story was only half finished when Polly burst in. "What do you
think, Helen!" she cried, tossing her hat and coat in an untidy heap on
the bed. "I'm invited to a party! What shall I wear?"

[Illustration: "Help her-r-r! Cheer her-r-r!" sang Mr. Redbreast]

She ran to the bureau and pulled open the top drawer with a jerk. Within
lay Helen's paper. Polly picked it up. "April fool!" she read aloud. She
looked into the drawer, then at Helen, her face brightening into a
sudden smile with her surprise.

"Helen, you're a dear!" she cried. "And I'm just a silly, cross old
bear! This is just the loveliest April fool that ever was. I didn't
suppose folks could play _nice_ April fool jokes."

Just then the sun came out from behind a cloud and peeped through the
window. Helen pointed to it. "Another nice April fool for you, Polly."

But Polly wasn't listening. She stood quietly thinking for a moment,
then she picked up her hat, shook out her coat, and started toward the
closet.

"April fool!" she said with a laugh, as she hung them inside. "That's
another joke on you, Miss Polly Untidy Crosspatch. A few more April
fools might turn you into neat Miss Polly Polite. It's about time you
turned over a new leaf."

"I think I hear it rustling," said Helen, listening.

"Hear-r-r! Hear-r-r! Hear-r-r!" chirped Mr. Redbreast joyously from the
tree.




[Illustration: He started for the house with an armful of wood]

THE THREE B's


The Three B's Club had only one rule--each member was to try every day
to be all three of the B's.

Usually it was quite easy to be one B. Often it was not so very
difficult to be two B's. But to be three B's was many times very, very
hard indeed.

The Saturday Ned Brown's father gave him the new catching glove was one
of those times. Ned wanted to go out and try the glove. Just as he was
starting, however, Mrs. Brown called him.

"Ned," she said, "the wood box is empty!"

Ned knew what that meant, but he remembered B Number Two in time to keep
from frowning.

"All right," he called back cheerily, and went out, whistling, to the
barn.

Thwack! went the ax into the wood. Ned was strong, and every blow told.
His mother, hearing the chopping, smiled to herself. She knew about the
B's.

"Whew!" said Ned presently, stopping for breath. "This is being B Number
One, all right. Two B's in one morning aren't so bad!"

"Hi, Ned!" came over the fence as he started for the house with an
armful of wood. "Why don't you come over? You said you had a new glove."

"Have," answered Ned as two other members of the Three B's climbed into
sight. "Wait a minute."

He dumped his wood into the box in the kitchen, and then ran proudly
back with the precious glove. "Here it is."

The boys felt of it, pinched it, tried it on. "It's a dandy. Come on and
catch!" they urged.

"Can't just yet. You can use it till I come." And Ned returned to his
work, while the boys ran off with the glove.

The Three B's met at Ned's house that afternoon. The club always
reported once a week on their success as B's.

[Illustration: Mrs. Brown was just coming in with a pitcher of lemonade.]

"I don't have any chance to be B Number Three," complained Ned, when his
turn came to talk.

Mrs. Brown was just coming in with a pitcher of lemonade. "I know
better, Ned," she said. "How about chopping wood when you wanted to play
ball? That made all three B's this morning--Busy, Bright, and Brave."

"And I know another B Number Three, too," cried Ned Baker. "How about
loaning us your catching glove when you hadn't used it yourself?"

Ned smiled shyly, and B Number Two was written all over his face as he
slowly sipped his lemonade.




TEDDY'S HELPERS


Christmas was near, and there were only a few pennies in Teddy's apple
bank.

"I'm afraid I won't have money enough to buy them, mummie," said Teddy
wistfully. "Won't you--" His eyes looked the question his lips wanted to
ask.

"No, Teddy," said his mother. "For then it would be my present instead
of yours."

"But Arthur's hands get so cold carrying the clothes!" Teddy's eyes fell
to his own hands, which were always snug and warm in their red mittens.
The washerwoman's little boy had no mittens.

"Earn some money, Teddy," suggested his mother.

Teddy's face fell. "How can I?" he said.

"Keep your eyes open and do the thing they tell you to do."

"All right," answered Teddy. "I'll try."

[Illustration: How the snow did fly as he dug and scraped and shoveled!]

At that moment Father Sun, who had been peeping through the window,
slipped behind a cloud.

"Children," he said to the little clouds, "there's a boy down below who
wants to earn money to buy mittens for a boy who hasn't any. I want you
to help him."

"We will, Father Sun," cried the little clouds. Then the sky began to
grow so dark that the earth people looked up and said, "I do believe
it's going to snow!" And it did.

Soon the air was filled with great fluffy, whirling flakes, tumbling
eagerly down to help Teddy.

"Not so close!" cried the first flake as the others came down on top of
him. "We'll make it too hard for Teddy if we pack tight together."

"That's so!" cried the others. And so they settled very, very gently.

All night the snowflakes fell. In the morning Father Sun poked his head
out from behind a cloud.

"My, my! How fine the earth looks!" he exclaimed. "I think that's about
enough, children." And Father Sun smiled so broadly that the earth
people said, "How dazzling the sun is!" and squinted, and rubbed their
eyes.

When the last flake had settled in its place, Teddy buttoned on his
leggings to go out.

"Are you keeping your eyes open this morning, Teddy?" asked his mother.

Teddy laughed. "Of course," he said. "I couldn't see if--" Then he
stopped abruptly. "It _is_ a way, isn't it, mummie!" he cried.

"Yes," she said. "I think I hear twenty-five cents dropping into the
apple. I will give you that much if you will shovel a path to the gate."

"Goody!" cried Teddy. Then he hunted up the snow shovel and fell to
work.

"Teddy! Teddy!" Teddy looked up. The old lady across the way was
standing in her door. "I'll give you a quarter if you'll clean my walk."

"All right!" Teddy shouted back. And then how the snow did fly as he dug
and scraped and shoveled!

"My, my!" said Father Sun. "What an industrious boy!" And he smiled
till Teddy grew quite warm, and the busy hands in the red mittens were
never once cold.

When the day was over, four bright quarters lay snugly in the apple
bank.

The day before Christmas Teddy emptied the bank and went shopping. And
that night, when the washerwoman's boy came for the clothes, on top of
the basket lay, not mittens, but a pair of thick gloves lined with wool.

Father Sun was so happy about it that he smiled all Christmas Day. And
so did Arthur. And so--more brightly than either--did Teddy.




THE RED-LETTER DAY


"What's a red-letter day, Nora?" asked Betty, coming into the kitchen
where Nora was doing the Saturday baking.

"It's a day when something 'specially nice happens," answered Nora.
"Why?"

"Mamma just said it would be a red-letter day if she got _all_ her
mending done by night. I wish," added Betty wistfully, "that I could
make it a red-letter day for her!"

"You can!" cried Nora. "I'll show you how to make a cake, and then she
won't have to make it. She can have the time to mend."

"Goody, goody!" cried Betty, when her mamma said she might try.

"I didn't tell her about the red-letter part," she explained, as she and
Nora measured and beat and stirred. "That will make it another kind of
red-letter day--S for S'prise."

The cake came out of the oven light and flaky and beautiful.

[Illustration: "I didn't tell her about the red-letter part," she
explained, as she beat and stirred]

"Wouldn't it be nice," sighed Betty, "if it could _only_ have a red S
right in the middle?"

"It can," said Nora. "Make it of those tiny red candies of yours. You'll
have to work fast before the icing dries."

When the S was finished it was pretty crooked, even for an S. But there
was no doubt at all about what it was.

When dinner was on the table Betty brought in the cake and set it before
her mother.

"Well, well, well!" cried Mrs. Arnold. "What a fine little cook I have!
But what is the S for, Betty?"

"It stands for Saturday, mamma," said Betty. And then she told all about
the red-letter plan.

"It was a dear plan," said her mother. "And I did finish the mending.
And now I'll tell my little girl something else. S stands for Saturday,
but it stands for another word, too--it stands for my Sunshine," she
finished, giving Betty a loving kiss.

[Illustration: TURN OVER]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE GOODY-NAUGHTY BOOK

THE NAUGHTY SIDE

By
SARAH CORY RIPPEY

With illustrations by
BLANCHE FISHER WRIGHT

RAND McNALLY & COMPANY
CHICAGO--NEW YORK

Copyright, 1913, By Rand McNally & Company

All rights reserved

Edition of 1927

Made in U.S.A.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE CONTENTS
                                       PAGE

"WILLIE WON'T"                            9

MOLLIE AND THE POUTS                     11

INDIAN HUGHIE                            14

"I FORGOT"                               16

HOW SAMMY WAS CURED                      18

THE GOING-TO CLUB                        23

WHEN P'RAPSY SAID "YES"                  26

WHAT HAPPENED TO WAGGLES                 30

-----------------------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration: "S-s-s-t!" spit pussy, scurrying to the top of the pump]

"WILLIE WON'T"


It was baking day at Willie Wright's house. Willie was on hand, as
usual, to scrape the dish and tease for raisins.

Suddenly Jennie the cook threw up her hands. "Oh, dear," she cried, "I
forgot to order baking powder! Willie, will you--"

Bang! went the door, and off ran Willie down the path, with Laddie at
his heels.

"I won't go to the store!" he grumbled.

"Wil-lie!" called Jennie from the house.

"Won't, won't, won't!" Willie screamed.

The next-door pussy was sunning herself in the Wrights' yard.

"Sic 'em, Laddie!" cried Willie.

"Wow-wow!" barked Laddie joyously.

"S-s-s-t!" spit pussy, scurrying to the top of the pump.

"Wil-lie-e-e!"

Willie dropped down beside the fence, out of Jennie's sight. "She c'n go
herself," he said.

Laddie cuddled down beside him. It was warm in the sun, and the locusts
were droning drowsily in the grass.

"Oo-ff! Oo-ff! Oo-ff!" snored Laddie.

Willie nodded--and nodded--and nodded.

"Ho-ho!" came a voice over the fence. "Willie Won't! That's a funny
name!"

"Funny!" retorted another voice. "It's ugly. Willie Will would be far
nicer."

"Nobody named Willie Will would ever set a dog on a cat," came a third
voice.

"No," said a fourth, "nor run off and hide when there are errands to
do."

And then the four began to sing--

    "Willie Won't's a horrid boy!
       No one will like him till
    He helps when people want him to
       And turns to Willie Will."

Willie jumped to his feet and looked around. The neighbors' sunflowers
nodded solemnly over the fence.

"Willie Will," they seemed to urge.

Willie started for the house. "Willie Will," he echoed, as he went up
the path.




[Illustration: She sat on the couch and sulked because she could not
go out to play with Little Sister]

MOLLIE AND THE POUTS


Until the Pouts got to work on Mollie she was a very pretty little girl.
But when she sat on the couch and sulked, and sulked, and sulked because
she could not go out to play with Little Sister, the Pouts turned her
into a very ugly little girl indeed.

"Ouch! You hurt!" cried a little voice, just as a Pout drew Mollie's
mouth down at the corners.

Mollie started. She had forgotten that she was holding Dear Doll Dainty
by the arm, and she let go of her in her surprise.

"Well!" cried Dear Doll Dainty. "It's a wonder that fall didn't break my
head. Why didn't you lay me nicely on the couch? My, what a sour face!"

With that, Dear Doll Dainty stepped up to her own special trunk, which
stood open in the center of the floor, and put on her hat and slipped
into her coat.

"Wh-what are you going to do?" asked Mollie, staring.

"Going away, of course. I don't care to belong to a little girl with the
Pouts."

Dear Doll Dainty walked to the door.

"Wait a minute, Dear Doll Dainty," squeaked the rabbits that were
capering around the top of the wall; "we're coming too." And with a
great scurry, down slid the bunnies. "We're tired of trying to make a
cross little girl happy."

"So are we," added the roses on the curtains sweetly, as they let
themselves down by their thorns and walked to the door on their stems.

"And we." The pillows Mollie's impatient little fists had punched
dropped to the floor and started off.

The trunk slammed down its lid and followed the pillows, the bureau
followed the trunk, the book Mollie had thrown on the floor followed the
bureau.

"Pardon me," said a deep voice, "but I am tired of being sat on and
having heels dug into me!" Up went the couch. Bump! went Mollie on the
floor.

The couch walked clumsily to the door. It couldn't get through.

"Tee-hee-hee!" giggled Mollie. The Pouts took to their heels.
"Tee-hee--"

Mollie stopped laughing and looked around in amazement. Everything in
the room was just as it ought to be, except that she and Dear Doll
Dainty were both on the floor.

But Mollie thought the rabbits winked at her as she laid Dear Doll
Dainty gently on the couch and put the book in its place on the table.




INDIAN HUGHIE


Hughie had always wanted to be an Indian. One day he told his mamma
about it.

"Well," she said, "why not _be_ an Indian?"

Hughie looked down at his little blue suit and his low shoes. "I can't
be an Indian," he said. "I haven't any bow and arrow 'r--'r anything
Indians have. And anyway, little boys can't be Indians."

"Oh, yes, they can," said his mamma. "Indians are strong and brave. Any
little boy can be that. How do you do, Chief Hughie?" she added, with a
low bow.

Hughie drew himself up until he was at least an inch taller. "Heap--heap
strong and brave, thank you," he said gravely.

That very day Hughie's mamma bought him a bow and arrow. Then Hughie
felt himself a real Indian indeed.

But Chief Hughie grew tired of shooting at a mark with his new bow and
arrow.

It would be much more fun, he thought, to shoot at something that
moved.

Just as he thought that, a bird flew up from the snowball bush. Chief
Hughie hastily slipped an arrow into his bow. Bing! it went, toward the
bird.

"Hughie!"

Hughie turned around. "Chief Hughie," he corrected, politely.

"No," said his mamma, "_not_ Chief Hughie. Squaw Hughie! Chiefs are
strong and brave. Chief Hughie would never shoot at a dear little bird.
Only a cowardly Indian, a squaw Indian, would do that."

She came down the path and took away Hughie's bow and arrow.

"Squaws don't carry weapons," she said.

Hughie threw himself down on his stomach and screamed with anger.

"Squaws cry," said his mamma.

She walked back to the house, leaving Hughie sitting on the grass. He
was wondering how long it would take for a squaw to become a chief once
more.




"I FORGOT"


Inside of little Jean there lived a naughty imp. His name was "I
Forgot." One time this imp made Jean do a very wicked thing.

Jean owned a canary, named Goldie because of his golden feathers.
Whenever Jean came into the room where his cage hung, Goldie would pour
out a flood of song.

But one morning when Jean came in there was no flood of song from the
yellow throat. The tiny singer lay still on the bottom of his cage. Jean
slipped in her hand in alarm and drew out her little pet.

"Mamma, mamma," she cried, "something's the matter with Goldie!"

The imp "I Forgot" laughed as he heard her, but Jean's mamma did not
laugh. She knew about "I Forgot," and she laid her hand tenderly on
Goldie's little body, all thin under the fluff of feathers.

[Illustration: Jean slipped her hand into the cage and drew out
Goldie]

"Goldie has starved to death, Jean," she said sadly. "Why didn't you
feed him?"

"I f-forgot!" sobbed the little girl.

"Forgot! Poor Goldie!" Jean's mamma stroked the golden feathers. "It's
too bad, Jean, that you couldn't remember to do that one small thing for
Goldie when he did so much for you, with his songs and his cheer."

Jean's tears fell fast. Her mamma looked thoughtfully at the bird. "We
can do nothing more for Goldie," she said at last, "but I have thought
of a way you can help other birds for his sake, Jean."

Jean wiped her eyes. "How?" she asked.

Jean felt happier when her mamma had explained the way to her.

And if you should pass Jean's house some morning before breakfast, you
could see the way for yourself. For every day Jean scatters crumbs and
grain on the lawn for the birds and puts fresh water in their drinking
bowl.

"For Goldie's sake," she whispers to herself, as the birds fly down for
their breakfast.

As for the naughty imp "I Forgot," he is fast turning into the lovely
fairy "I Remember."




HOW SAMMY WAS CURED


Sammy was a pretty good boy in some ways, but in one way he was a very
naughty boy indeed. He never got up when he was called.

"Ye-aw-w-w!" he would yawn. "Uh-huh!" And with that he would roll over
and go fast asleep again.

This always happened at least three times every morning. Often it
happened more times. Then when everybody was out of patience and
breakfast was nearly over, Sammy would come creeping down, digging his
fists into his eyes and still yawning "Ye-aw-w-w!"

One morning Sammy's father had just called him the second time, and
Sammy had grunted "Ye-aw-w-w!" and turned over for another nap, when the
door opened softly.

[Illustration: Sammy didn't see the little man with twinkling eyes and
queer clothes who entered the room]

Creep, creep, creep, came quiet steps. But Sammy didn't see the little
man with twinkling eyes and queer clothes enter the room. He didn't know
that the little man lifted him out of bed, slipped him quickly into a
sack, and swung him over his shoulder. Sammy was too fast asleep to know
anything.

"Crickety, flickety, fle-flo-fli!" cried the little man. And away they
flew, straight through the window!

And still Sammy slept. He didn't know he was not in his own bed till the
little man slipped him out of the sack and gave him a shake.

[Illustration: "You're the little boy that never gets up when he's
called"]

"Ye-aw-w-w!" muttered Sammy sleepily.

"So you are Sammy Sleepyhead!" a loud voice interrupted him. Sammy woke
up so quickly that he bit his tongue. "I know you. You're the little boy
that never gets up when he's called."

Sammy looked about him in surprise. He was in a room filled with the
queerest little men he had ever seen, men with funny clothes and twinkly
eyes; while right in front of him on a throne sat a very splendid
person. Sammy knew by his robes and his crown that this splendid person
must be a king.

Sammy had never before seen a real king. He opened his mouth in awe.

The king thought Sammy was going to yawn.

"No yawning here!" he cried, giving Sammy a sharp little rap with his
scepter. "This is the Land of the Wide-Awakes. We always wake up the
sleepy people."

And then, just because he knew he mustn't, Sammy yawned. "Ye-aw-w-w!" he
said, so loud that it frightened him, and he clapped his hand quickly
over his mouth.

But the king had heard him.

"Sleepy Cure Number One, men!" he cried.

The men in the funny clothes at once formed in two lines, facing each
other and twinkling more than ever.

"Sammy Sleepyhead, step forward between the lines," commanded the king
sternly.

Sammy saw each queer little man pull a small paddle from his pocket. His
knees were shaking with fear, but he dared not disobey.

"Run!" ordered the king.

Sammy started. Spat! went the first paddle. "Ouch!" screamed Sammy.

"Faster!" cried the king.

Spat! Spat! Spat! went the paddles as he ran. "Ouch! Ouch! Ouch!"
screamed Sammy.

"Done!" cried the king, as Sammy, breathless and crying, reached the end
of the lines.

"Awake? Cured?" inquired the king.

"Uh--uh--uh-huh!" hiccoughed Sammy, wiping his eyes with the sleeve of
his nightie.

"No, you're not," cried the king. "Only sleepyheads say 'Uh-huh.' Cure
Number Two!"

Poor Sammy stood, scared and crying, while the little men, grinning
broadly now, brought big sponges dripping with water.

"Squeeze!" cried the king.

Squash! went the first sponge, right over Sammy's head.

"Ugh!" screamed Sammy as the ice-cold water poured down his back. "Ugh!
Ugh!"

The next little man stepped up, lifted his sponge, started to squeeze
it, then changed his mind.

"Crickety, flickety, fle-flo-fli!" he cried instead.

The next thing Sammy knew, he was standing in his own bathtub, wet and
shivering. His father stood beside him, holding a big dipper.

"Ugh! Ugh! Ugh!" gasped Sammy, while the water dripped from his yellow
head.

"I'm sorry, Sammy," said his father, handing him a towel. "But we can't
have any more of this nonsense about getting up. This will happen every
time you have to be called more than once. Dry yourself now, and hurry
into your clothes."

Sammy gulped and nodded. He couldn't think of anything to say just then.
But he did as his father told him to, and never once dug his fists into
his eyes or said "Ye-aw-w-w."

The next day he joined the Wide-Awakes. Sammy Sleepyhead was cured.




[Illustration: Mary Jane came back with her pail full of water]

THE GOING-TO CLUB


The Going-To Club had only one member. Bobby Brant was that member. In
fact, Bobby was the club.

It was his mother who named him the Going-To Club. It always took at
least two askings to get Bobby to do anything. Sometimes it took three
or four. Bobby was always "going to."

This club always met when there was something Bobby wanted particularly
to do; and it met most often in the spring, when the boys were out
flying their kites. In the spring nobody could get Bobby to do anything.

One spring Bobby had a very fine new kite that he and his father had
made together. They named it the Skylark, because they thought it would
fly higher than any of the other kites. But something was wrong. Instead
of sailing up gracefully, as it should, the first time Bobby tried to
fly it, the Skylark pitched about so violently that Bobby had to wind
it in.

Just then he heard Mary Jane calling, "Bobby, will you get me some
water?"

"All right," cried Bobby. "I wonder what ails it," he added, as he
turned the kite about.

"Bob-by-y!"

"I'm going to," answered the Going-To Club impatiently, and straightway
forgot all about it.

Pretty soon Mary Jane came down the path with the water pail. Mary Jane
had little brothers. Perhaps she could tell what was the matter.

"Mary Jane," said Bobby, "my kite won't fly straight. Will you help me
fix it?"

A naughty twinkle came into Mary Jane's eyes. "All right, Bobby," she
said, and went on to the well.

"Will you?" urged Bobby, as she came back with her pail full.

"I'm going to, Bobby."

Bobby followed Mary Jane to the house.

"Mary Jane----"

Mary Jane set down the pail and went on with her washing. "I'm going
to," she promised.

Rub-a-dub! Rub-a-dub! Rub-a-dub! went the clothes.

"Mary Jane----"

And this time Mary Jane dried her hands and picked up the kite.

[Illustration: Mary Jane dried, her hands and picked up the kite]

"Tail's too long," she said. "And, by the way, Bobby," she added with a
laugh, "what do you think about the Going-To Club _now_?"

Bobby grinned and hung his head.




WHEN P'RAPSY SAID "YES"


P'rapsy Perrin was never quite certain about things. She always said
"P'raps" instead of "Yes," or "No." That's how she came to be called
P'rapsy.

But there was one thing P'rapsy _was_ certain about--she loved to go
barefoot; and just as soon as the first warm spring day came, P'rapsy
teased to take off her shoes and stockings.

But Mrs. Perrin only laughed. "You'll catch cold, P'rapsy. And you know
what you have to take when you get sick."

P'rapsy thought of the big white bottle on the bathroom shelf, and
stopped teasing. But she didn't forget.

That afternoon Mrs. Perrin went out to make some calls.

"Be a good girl, P'rapsy," she said as she left the house.

[Illustration: "You'll take cold," finally ventured the biggest little
girl]

"Yessum," promised P'rapsy. But she must have added "P'raps" inside; for
she ran straight to the back yard and called to the two little girls
next door.

"Yoo-hoo!" she cried. "Come on over and go wading."

A pool of water had been left in the hollow of the yard by the heavy
spring rains. "Dare you!" it seemed to twinkle up at P'rapsy.

"Oo-o-o, I dassent!" cried the biggest little girl, carefully smoothing
down her stiff, clean dress.

"Oo-o-o, I dassent!" echoed the littlest little girl.

P'rapsy eyed them scornfully as she took off her shoes and stockings and
splashed into the pool.

"'Fraid cats!" she jeered. "'Fraid cats! 'Fraid cats! 'Fraid cats!"

The little girls watched P'rapsy in scared silence.

"You'll take cold," finally ventured the biggest little girl.

"P'raps I will," retorted P'rapsy.

"You're getting wet," said the littlest little girl.

P'rapsy only sniffed. But it wasn't so very much fun, after all. P'rapsy
kept hearing, "Be a good girl, P'rapsy." "Yessum."

When she had proved that she, at least, was not a 'fraid cat, P'rapsy
splashed out.

"You needn't tell," she cried over her shoulder, as her bare feet
twinkled back to the house.

That night Mrs. Perrin heard strange sounds in P'rapsy's room:
"Ker-choo! Ker-choo! Ker-choo!" She went to the door. P'rapsy was
sitting up in bed.

"I'b dot sick, babba," she explained. "I'b just--ker-choo!"

Mrs. Perrin left the room. When she returned she carried a big white
bottle and a spoon.

"Do, do, do!" screamed P'rapsy, as her mother poured out the thick,
slippery oil. "I'b dot----"

What she was "dot" was lost in a gurgle and a splutter as the oil slid
down her throat.

[Illustration: When she returned she carried a big white bottle and a
spoon]

P'rapsy was not happy. She drew the blankets up around her, and buried
her head among the pillows.

"P'rapsy," said her mother when the dose was down, "you've disobeyed me.
Are you sorry?"

"P-p-pr--yes!" sobbed P'rapsy under the bedclothes.




WHAT HAPPENED TO WAGGLES


Waggles was Jimmie's chum. He was never cross, and he loved Jimmie. And
Jimmie loved Waggles, but sometimes Jimmie _was_ cross. It was when he
was cross that he tied the can to Waggles's tail.

Waggles thought it was a new game, but at his first jump the can bounced
up and struck him.

This frightened Waggles, and he tried to run away from the horrid,
bouncing Thing. But the faster he ran the harder the Thing bounced, and
the oftener it struck him. Waggles became wild with fright, and he
gasped for breath as he raced along.

Suddenly he heard a voice that he loved: "Waggles! Waggles! Waggles!"

Waggles stopped running, and dropped, exhausted, at the feet of Jimmie's
father.

"Poor Waggles!" said Mr. Brown tenderly as he cut the string. "I didn't
suppose there was a boy in this town mean enough to do a thing like
that."

[Illustration: Waggles thought it was a new game]

Waggles licked his hand and looked up at him gratefully. But Waggles
was too much of a gentleman to tell on Jimmie, even if he could have
spoken.

When Mr. Brown went home Waggles trotted along beside him.

"Jimmie," asked Mr. Brown that evening, "who tied that can to Waggles's
tail?"

Jimmie said nothing, but his face grew red.

"Very well," said his father. "A boy who could treat a dog like that,
doesn't deserve to have one. I shall give Waggles away."

Jimmie was very unhappy. He cried himself to sleep that night. But next
morning who should come bounding in but Waggles! He jumped, and barked,
and said "I forgive you" in every doggie way that he knew.

Jimmie hugged Waggles, and looked wistfully at his father.

"Well, Jimmie," said Mr. Brown, "since Waggles has forgiven you, I think
I shall have to forgive you, too. Waggles may stay."

[Illustration: TURN OVER]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Goody-Naughty Book, by Sarah Cory Rippey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOODY-NAUGHTY BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 22197.txt or 22197.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/1/9/22197/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
